WATERSPIDER

I 

That morning, as he carefully 
shaved his head until it glistened, Aaron Tozzo pondered a vision too unfortunate to be endured.He saw in his mind fifteen convicts 
from Nachbaren Slager, each man 
only one inch high, in a ship the size 
of a child’s balloon. The ship, traveling at almost the speed of light, continued. on forever, with the men 
aboard neither knowing nor caring 
what became of them. 

The worst part of the vision was 
just that in all probability it was 
true.

He dried his head, rubbed oil into 
his skin, then touched the button 
within his throat. When contact with 
the Bureau switchboard had been 
established, Tozzo said, “I admit we 
can do nothing to get those fifteen 
men back, but at least we can refuse to send any more.” 

His comment, recorded by the 
switchboard, was passed on to his 
co-workers. They all agreed; he listened to their voices chiming in as 
he put on his smock, slippers and 
overcoat. Obviously, the flight had 
been an error; even the public knew 
that now. But — 

“But we’re going on,” Edwin Fermeti, Tozzo’s superior, said above 
the clamor. “We’ve already got the 
volunteers.” 

“Also from Nachbaren Slager?” 
Tozzo asked. Naturally the prisoners 
there would volunteer; their lifespan at the camp was no more than 
five or six years. And if this flight 
to Proxima were successful, the men 
aboard would obtain their freedom. 
They would not have to return to 
any of the five inhabited planets 
within the Sol System. 

“Where does it matter where they 
originate?” Fermeti said smoothly. 

Tozzo said, “Our effort should be 
directed toward improving the U.S. 
Department of Penology, instead of 
trying to reach other stars.” He had 
a sudden urge to resign his position 
with the Emigration Bureau and go 
into politics as a reform candidate. 

Later, as he sat at the breakfast table, his wife patted him sympathetically on the arm. “Aaron, you haven’t 
been able to solve it yet, have you?” 

“No,” he admitted shortly. “And 
now I don’t even care.” He did not 
tell her about the other ship loads 
of convicts which had fruitlessly been 
expended; it was forbidden to discuss that with anyone not employed 
by a department of the Government. 

“Could they be re-entering on their 
own?” 

“No. Because mass was lost here, 
in the Sol System. To re-enter they 
have to obtain equal mass back, to 
replace it. That’s the whole point.” 
Exasperated, he sipped his tea and 
ignored her. Women, he thought. Attractive but not bright. “They need 
mass back,” he repeated. “Which 
would be fine if they were making 
a round trip, I suppose. But this is? 
an attempt to colonize; it’s not a 
guided tour that returns to its point 
of origin.” 

“How long does it take them to 
reach Proxima?” Leonore asked. “All 
reduced like that, to an inch high.” 

“About four years.” 

Her eyes grew large. “That’s 
marvelous.” 

Grumbling at her, Tozzo pushed 
his chair back from the table and 
rose. I wish they’d take her, he said 
to himself, since she imagines it’s 
so marvelous. But Leonore would be 
too smart to volunteer. 

Leonore said softly, “Then I was 
right. The Bureau has sent people. 
You as much as admitted it just 
now.” 

Flushing, Tozzo said, “Don’t tell 
anybody; none of your female friends 
especially. Or it’s my job.” He glared 
at her. 

On that hostile note, he set off for 
the Bureau. 

A s Tozzo unlocked his office door, 
Edwin Fermeti hailed him. 
“You think Donald Nils is somewhere on a planet circling Proxima 
at this very moment?” Nils was a 
notorious murderer who had volunteered for one of the Bureau’s 
flights. “I wonder — maybe he’s carrying around a lump of sugar five 
times his size.” 

“Not really very funny,” Tozzo 
said. 

Fermeti shrugged. “Just hoping 
to relieve the pessimism. I think 
we’re all getting discouraged.” He 
followed Tozzo into his office. “Maybe we should volunteer ourselves 
for the next flight.” It sounded almost as if he meant it, and Tozzo 
glanced quickly at him. “Joke,” Fermeti said. 

“One more flight,” Tozzo said, 
“and if it fails, I resign.” 

“I’ll tell you something,” Fermeti 
said. “We have a new tack.” Now 
Tozzo’s co-worker Craig Gilly had 
come sauntering up. To the two men, 
Fermeti said, “We’re going to try using pre-cogs in obtaining our formula 
for re-entry.” His eyes flickered as 
he saw their reaction. 

Astonished, Gilly said, “But all 
the pre-cogs are dead. Destroyed by 
Presidential order twenty years ago.” 

Tozzo, impressed, said, “He’s going to dip back into the past to obtain a pre-cog. Isn’t that right, Fermeti?” 

“We will, yes,” his superior said, 
nodding. “Back to the golden age 
of pre-cognition. The twentieth 
century.” 

For a moment Tozzo was puzzled. And then he remembered. 

During the first half of the twentieth century so many pre-cogs — 
people with the ability to read the 
future — had come into existence 
that an organized guild had been 
formed with branches in Los Angeles, New York, San Francisco and 
Pennsylvania. This group of precogs, all knowing one another, had 
put out a number of periodicals 
which had flourished for several decades. Boldly and openly, the members of the pre-cog guild had proclaimed in their writings their knowledge of the future. And yet — as a 
whole, their society had paid littk 
attention to them. 


Tozzo said slowly, “Let me get 
this straight. You mean you’re going to make use of the Department of 
Archaeology’s time-dredges to scoop 
up a famous pre-cog of the past?” 
Nodding, Fermeti said, “And bring 
him here to help us, yes.” 

“But how can he help us? He 
would have no knowledge of our future, only of his own.” 

Fermeti said, “The Library of 
Congress has already given us access to its virtually complete collection of pre-cog journals of the twentieth century.” He smiled crookedly 
at Tozzo and Gilly, obviously enjoying the situation. “It’s my hope — 
and my expectation — that among this 
great body of writings we will find 
an article specifically dealing with 
our re-entry problem. The chances, 
statistically speaking, are quite good 
. they wrote about innumerable 
topics of future civilization, as you 
know.” 

After a pause, Gilly said, “Very 
clever. I think your idea may solve 
our problem. Speed-of-light travel 
to other star systems may yet become 
a possibility.” 

Sourly, Tozzo said, “Hopefully, 
before we run out of convicts.” But 
he, too, liked his superior’s idea. 
And, in addition, he looked forward 
to seeing face to face one of the 
famous twentieth century pre-cogs. 
Theirs had been one brief, glorious 
period — sadly, long since ended. 

Or not so brief, if one dated it as 
starting with Jonathan Swift, rather 
than with H. G. Wells. Swift had 
written of the two moons of Mars 
and their unusual orbital characteristics years before telescopes had 
proved their existence. And so today there was a tendency in the textbooks to include him. 

II 

I t took the computers at the Library of Congress only a short 
while to scan the brittle, yellowed 
volumes, article by article, and to select the sole contribution dealing with 
deprivation of mass and restoration 
as the modus operandi of interstellar space travel. Einstein’s formula 
that as an object increased its velocity its mass increased proportionally had been so fully accepted, so 
completely unquestioned, that no one 
in the twentieth century had paid any 
attention to the particular article, 
which had been put in print in August of 1955 in a pre-cog journal 
called If. 

In Fermeti’s office, Tozzo sat beside his superior as the two of them 
pored over the photographic reproduction of the journal. The article 
was titled Night Flight, and it ran 
only a few thousand words. Both 
men read it avidly, neither speaking 
until they had finished. 

“Well?” Fermeti said, when they 
had come to the end. 

Tozzo said, “No doubt of it. 
That’s our Project, all right. A lot 
is garbled; for instance he calls the 
Emigration Bureau ‘Outward, Incorporated,’ and believes it to be a 
private commercial firm.” He referred to the text. “It’s really uncanny, though. You’re obviously this 
character, Edmond Fletcher; the 
names are similar but still a little off, 
as is everything else. And I’m Alison 


Torelli.” He shook his head admiringly. “Those pre-cogs . having a 
mental image of the future that was 
always askew and yet in the main — n 
“In the main correct,” Fermeti 
finished. “Yes, I agree. This Night 
Flight article definitely deals with 
us and the Bureau’s Project . herein called Waterspider, because it has 
to be done in one great leap. Good 
lord, that would have been a perfect name, had we thought of it. 
Maybe we can still call it that.” 
Tozzo said slowly, “But the precog who wrote Night Flight ... in 
no place does he actually give the 
formula for mass-restoration or even 
for mass-deprivation. He just simply 
says that ‘we have it.’ ” Taking the 
reproduction of the journal, he read 
aloud from the article: 

Difficulty in restoring mass to 
the ship and its passengers at the 
termination of the flight had 
proved a stumbling block for 
Torelli and his team of researchers and yet they had at last 
proved successful. After the 
fateful implosion of the Sea 
Scout, the initial ship to — 

“And that’s all,” Tozzo said. “So 
what good does it do us? Yes, this 
pre-cog experienced our present situation a hundred years ago — but he 
left out the technical details ” 

There was silence. 

At last Fermeti said thoughtfully, 
“That doesn’t mean he didn’t know 
the technical data. We know today 
that the others in his guild were very 
often trained scientists.” He examined the biographical report. “Yes, 
while not actually using his pre-cog 
ability he worked as a chicken-fat 
analyst for the University of California.” 

“Do you still intend to use the 
time-dredge to bring him up to 
the present?” 

Fermeti nodded. “I only wish the 
dredge worked both ways. If it 
could be used with the future, not 
..the past, we could avoid having to 
jeopardize the safety of this precog — ” He glanced down at the article. “This Poul Anderson.” 

Chilled, Tozzo said, “What hazard 
is there?” 

“We may not be able to return 
him to his own time. Or — ” Fermeti 
paused. “We might lose part of him 
along the way, wind up with only 
half of him. The dredge has bisected 
many objects before.” 

“And this man isn’t a convict at 
Nachbaren Slager,” Tozzo said. “So 
you don’t have that rationale to fall 
back on.” 

Fermeti said suddenly, “We’ll do it 
properly. We’ll reduce the jeopardy 
by sending a team of men back to 
that time, back to 1954. They can 
apprehend this Poul Anderson and 
see that all of him gets into the 
time-dredge, not merely the top half 
or the left side.” 

So it had been decided. The Department of Archaeology’s timedredge would go back to the world 
of 1954 and pick up the pre-cog 
Poul Anderson; there was nothing 
further to discuss. 

Research conducted by the U. S. 

Department of Archaeology 
showed that in September of 1954 


Poul Anderson had been living hi 
Berkeley, California, on Grove Street. 
In that month he had attended a 
top-level meeting of pre-cogs from 
all over the United States at the Sir 
Francis Drake Hotel in San Francisco. It was probable that there, 
in that meeting, basic policy for 
the next year had been worked out, 
with Anderson, and other experts, 
participating. 

“It’s really very simple,” Fermeti 
explained to Tozzo and Gilly. “A 
pair of men will go back. They will 
be provided with forged identification showing them to be part of 
the nation-wide pre-cog organization . squares of cellophane-enclosed paper which are pinned to 
the coat lapel. Naturally, they will 
be wearing twentieth century garments. They will locate Poul Anderson, single him out and draw 
him off to one side.” 

“And tell him what?” Tozzo said 
skeptically. 

“That they represent an unlicensed 
amateur pre-cog organization in 
Battlecreek, Michigan, and that they 
have constructed an amusing vehicle built to resemble a time-travel 
dredge of the future. They will ask 
Mr. Anderson, who was actually 
quite famous in his time, to pose by 
their humbug dredge, and then they 
will ask for a shot of him within. 
Our research shows that according to 
his contemporaries, Anderson was 
mild and easy-going and also that at 
these yearly top-strategy assemblies 
he often became convivial enough to 
enter into the mood of optimism 
generated by his fellow pre-cogs.” 

Tozzo said, “You mean he sniffed 
what they called ‘airplane dope?* 
He was a ‘glue-sniffer?* ” 

With a faint smile, Fermeti said, 
“Hardly. That was a mania among 
adolescents and did not become 
widespread in fact until a decade 
later. No, I am speaking about imbibing alcohol.” 

“I see,” Tozzo said, nodding. 
Fermeti continued, “In the area 
of difficulties, we must cope with the 
fact that at this top-secret session, 
Anderson brought along his wife 
Karen, dressed as a Maid of Venus 
in gleaming breast-cups, short skirt 
and helmet, and that he also brought 
their new-born daughter Astrid. Anderson himself did not wear any disguise for purposes of concealing his 
identity. He had no anxieties, being a 
quite stable person, as were most 
twentieth century pre-cogs. 

“However, during the discussion 
periods between formal sessions, the 
pre-cogs, minus their wives, circulating about, playing poker and arguing, some of them it is said stoning one another — ” 

“Stoning?” 

“Or, as it was put, becoming 
stoned. In any case, they gathered 
in small groups in the antechambers 
of the hotel, and it is at such an occasion that we expect to nab him. 
In the general hubbub his disappearance would not be noted. We 
would expect to return him to that 
exact time, or at least no more than 
a few hours later or earlier . preferably not earlier because two Poul 
Andersons at the meeting might 
prove awkward.** 

Tozzo, impressed, said, “Sounds 
foolproof.** 

“I’m glad you like it,” Fermeti said 
tartly, “because you will be one of 
the team sent.** 

Pleased, Tozzo said, “Then I had 
better get started learning the details of life in the mid twentieth century.** He picked up another issue 
of If. This one, May of 1971, had 
interested him as soon as he had 
seen it. Of course, this issue would 
not be known yet to the people of 
1954 . but eventually they would 
see it. And once having seen it 
they would never forget it . 

Ray Bradbury’s first textbook to be 
serialized, he realized as he examined 
the journal. The Fisher of Men , it 
was called, and in it the great Los 
Angeles pre-cog had anticipated the 
ghastly Gutmanist political revolution which was to sweep the inner 
planets. Bradbury had warned 
against Gutman, but the warning 
had gone — of course — unheeded. 
Now Gutman was dead and the fanatical supporters had dwindled to 
the status of random terrorists. But 
had the world listened to Bradbury — 
“Why the frown?** Fermeti asked 
him. “Don’t you want to go?” 
“Yes,** Tozzo said thoughtfully. 
“But it’s a terrible responsibility. 
These are no ordinary men.** 

“That is certainly the truth,’* Fermeti said, nodding. 

Ill 

T wenty-four hours later, Aaron 
Tozzo stood surveying himself 
in his mid twentieth century clothing 
and wondering if Anderson would 
be deceived, if he actually could be 
duped into entering the dredge. 

The costume certainly was perfection itself. Tozzo had even been 
equipped with the customary waistlength beard and handlebar mustache so 'popular circa 1950 in the 
United States. And he wore a wig. 

Wigs, as everyone knew, had at 
that time swept the United States as 
the fashion note par excellence; men 
and women both had worn huge powdered perukes of bright colors, reds 
and greens and blues and of course 
dignified grays. It was one of the 
most amusing occurrences of the 
twentieth century. 

Tozzo’s wig, a bright red, pleased 
him. Authentic, it had come from 
the Los Angeles Museum of Cultural 
History, and the curator had vouched for it being a man’s, not a woman’s. So the fewest possible chances 
of detection were being taken. Little 
risk existed that they would be detected as members of another, future culture entirely. 

And yet Tozzo was still uneasy. 

However, the plan had been arranged; now it was time to go. With 
Gilly, the other member selected, 
Tozzo entered the time-dredge and 
seated himself at the controls. The 
Department of Archaeology had provided a full instruction manual, 
which lay open before him. As soon 
as Gilly had locked the hatch, Tozzo 
took the bull by the horns (a twentieth century expression) and started 
up the dredge. 

Dials registered. They were spinning backward into time, back to 
1954 and the San Francisco Precog Congress. 

Beside him, Gilly practiced mid 
twentieth century phrases from a reference volume. “Diz muz be da 
blace ...” Gilly cleared his throat. 
“Kilroy was here,” he murmured. 
“Wha* hoppen? Like man, let’s cut 
out; this ball’s a drag.” He shook his 
"head. “I can’t grasp the exact sense 
of these phrases,” he apologized to 
Tozzo. “Twenty-three skidoo.” 

Now a red light glowed; the dredge 
was about to conclude its journey. 
A moment later its turbines halted. 

They had come to rest on the 
sidewalk outside the Sir Francis 
Drake Hotel in downtown San Francisco. 

On all sides, people in quaint 
archaic costumes dragged along on 
foot. And, Tozzo saw, there were no 
monorails; all the visible traffic was 
surface-bound. What a congestion, 
he thought, as he watched the automobiles and buses moving inch by 
inch along the packed streets. An 
official in blue waved traffic ahead 
as best he could, but the entire enterprise, Tozzo could see, was an 
abysmal failure. 

“Time for phase two,” Gilly said. 
But he, too, was gaping at the stalled 
surface vehicles. “Good grief,” he 
said, “look at the incredibly short 
skirts of the women; why, the knees 
are virtually exposed. Why don’t the 
women die of whisk virus?” 

“I don’t know,” Tozzo said, “but 
I do know we’ve got to get into the 
Sir Francis Drake Hotel.” 

Carefully, they opened the port 
of the time-dredge and stepped out. 
And then Tozzo realized something. 
There had been an -error. Already. 

The men of this decade were cleanshaven. 

“Gilly,” he said rapidly, “we’ve 
got to shed our beards and mustaches.” In an instant he had pulled 
Gilly’s off, leaving his bare face 
exposed. But the wig; that was correct. All the men visible wore headdress of some type; Tozzo saw few 
if any bald men. The women, too 
had luxurious wigs ... or were they 
wigs? Could they perhaps be natural 
hair? 

In any case, both he and Gilly now 
would pass. Into the Sir Francis 
Drake, he said to himself, leading 
Gilly along. 

T hey darted lithely across the sidewalk — it was amazing how 
slowly the people of this time-period 
walked — and into the inexpressibly 
old-fashioned lobby of the hotel. 
Like a museum, Tozzo thought as he 
glanced about him. I wish we could 
linger . but they could not. 

“How’s our identification?” Gilly 
said nervously. “Is it passing inspection?” The business with the facehair had upset him. 

On each of their lapels they carried the expertly made false identification. It worked. Presently they 
found themselves ascending by a 
lift, or rather elevator, to the correct floor. 

The elevator let them off in a 
crowded foyer. Men, all clean-shaven, with wigs or natural hair, stood 
in small clusters everywhere, laughing and talking. And a number of attractive women, some of them in garments called leotards, which were 
skin-tight, loitered about smilingly. 
Even though the styles of the times 
required their breasts to be covered, 
they were a sight to see. 

Sotto voce, Gilly said, “I am 
stunned. In this room are some of 
the—” 

“I know,” Tozzo murmured. Their 
Project could wait, at least a little 
while. Here was an unbelievably 
golden opportunity to see these precogs, actually to talk to them and 
listen to them . 

Here came a tall, handsome man 
in a dark suit that sparkled with tiny 
specks of some unnatural material, 
some variety of synthetic. The man 
wore glasses and his hair, everything 
about him, had a tanned, dark look. 
The name on his identification . 
Tozzo peered. 

The tall, good-looking man was A. 
E. Van Vogt. 

“Say,” another individual, perhaps 
a pre-cog enthusiast, was saying to 
Van Vogt, stopping him. “I read 
both versions of your World of Null 
A and I still didn’t quite get that 
about it being him; you know, at 
the end. Could you explain that part 
to me? And also when they started 
into the tree and then just — ” 

Van Vogt halted. A soft smile appeared on his face and he said, 
“Well, I’ll tell you a secret. I start 
out with a plot and then the plot 
sort of folds up. So then I have to 
have another plot to finish the rest 
of the story.” 

Going over to listen, Tozzo felt 
something magnetic about Van Vogt. 
He was so tall, so spiritual. Yes, Tozzo said to himself; that was the word, 
a healing spirituality. There was a 
quality of innate goodness which emanated from him. 

All at once Van Vogt said, “There 
goes a man with my pants.” And, 
without a further word to die enthusiast, stalked off and disappeared into the crowd. 

Tozzo’s head swam. To actually 
have seen and heard A. E. Van 
Vogt— 

“Look,” Gilly was saying, plucking at his sleeve. “That enormous, 
genial-looking man seated over there; 
that’s Howard Browne, who edited 
the pre-cog journal Amazing at this 
time-period.” 

“I have to catch a plane,” Howard Browne was saying to anyone 
who would listen to him. He glanced 
about him in worried anxiety, despite his almost physical geniality. 

“I wonder,” Gilly said, “if Doctor 
Asimov is here.” 

'll[7’e can ask, Tozzo decided. He 
* * made his way over to one of 
the young women wearing a blonde 
wig and green leotards. “WHERE IS 
DOCTOR ASIMOV?” he asked 
clearly in the argot of the times. 

“Who’s to know?” the girl said. 

“Is he here, miss?” 

“Naw,” the girl said. 

Gilly again plucked at Tozzo’s 
sleeve. “We must find Poul Anderson, remember? Enjoyable as it is to 
talk to this girl — ” 

“I’m inquiring about Asimov,” 
Tozzo said brusquely. After all, Isaac 
Asimov had been founder of the entire twenty-first century positronic robot industry. How could he not be 
here? 

A burly outdoorish man strode by 
them, and Tozzo saw that this was 
Jack Vance. Vance, he decided, 
looked more like a big game hunter 
than anything else ... we must be
aware of him, Tozzo decided. If we
got into any altercation Vance could 
take care of us easily. 

He noticed now that Gilly was 
talking to the blonde-wigged girl 
in the green leotards. “MURRAY 
LEINSTER?” Gilly was asking. “The 
man whose paper on parallel time is 
still at the very forefront of theoretical studies; isn’t he — ” 

“I dunno,” the girl said, in a 
bored tone of voice. 

A group had gathered about a figure opposite them; the central person whom everybody was 
listening to was saying, “ . all 
right, if like Howard Browne you 
prefer air travel, fine. But I say 
it’s risky. I don’t fly. In fact even 
riding in a car is dangerous. I generally lie down in the back.” The 
man wore a short-cropped wig and a 
bow tie; he had a round, pleasant 
face but his eyes were intense. 

It was Ray Bradbury, and Tozzo 
started toward him at once. 

“Stop!” Gilly whispered angrily. 
“Remember what we came for.” 

And, past Bradbury, seated at the 
bar, Tozzo saw an older, care-weathered man in a brown suit wearing 
small glasses and sipping a drink. 
He recognized the man from drawings in early Gernsback publications; it was the fabulously unique 
pre-cog from the New Mexico region, Jack Williamson. 

“I thought Legion of Time was the 
finest novel-length science-fiction 
work I ever read,” an individual, evidently another pre-cog enthusiast, 
was saying to Jack Williamson, and 
Williamson was nodding in pleasure. 
“That was originally going to be 
a short story,” Williamson said. “But 
it grew. Yes, I liked that one, too.” 
Meanwhile Gilly had wandered 
on, into an adjoining room. He 
found at a tabic, two women and a 
man in deep conversation. One of the 
women, dark-haired and handsome, 
with bare shoulders, was — according 
to her identification plate — Evelyn 
Paige. The taller women he discovered was the renowned Margaret St. 
Clair, and Gilly at once said: 

“Mrs. St. Clair, your article entitled The Scarlet Hexapod in the 
September 1959 If was one of the 
finest — ” And then he broke off. 

Because Margaret St. Clair had 
not written that yet. Knew in fact 
nothing about it. Flushing with nervousness, Gilly backed away. 

“Sorry,” he murmured. “Excuse 
me; I became confused.” 

Raising an eyebrow, Margaret St. 
Clair said, “In the September 1959 
issue, you say? What are you, a man 
from the future?” 

“Droll,” Evelyn Paige said, “but 
let’s continue.” She gave Gilly a 
hard stare from her black eyes. “Now 
Bob, as I understand what you’re 
saying — ” She addressed the man 
opposite her, and Gilly saw now to 
his delight that the dire-looking 
cadaverous individual was none other 
than Robert Bloch. 

Gilly said, “Mr. Bloch, your article in Galaxy : Sabbatical , was — ” 
“You’ve got the wrong person, my 
friend,” Robert Bloch said. “I never 
wrote any piece entitled Sabbatical” 
Good lord, Gilly realized. I did it 
again; Sabbatical is another work 
which has not been written yet. I 
had better get away from here. 

He moved back toward Tozzo 
. and found him standing rigidly. 

Tozzo said, “I’ve found Anderson.” 

At once, Gilly turned, also rigid. 

B oth of them had carefully studied 
the pictures provided by the 
Library of Congress. There stood the 
famous pre-cog, tall and slender and 
straight, even a trifle thin, with curly 
hair — or wig — and glasses, a warm 
glint of friendliness in his eyes. He 
held a whiskey glass in one hand, 
and he was discoursing with several 
other pre-cogs. Obviously he was enjoying himself. 

“Um, uhh, let’s see,” Anderson 
was saying, as Tozzo and' Gilly 
came quietly up to join the group. 
“Pardon?” Anderson cupped his ear 
to catch what one of the other precogs was saying. “Oh, uh, yup, that’s 
right.” Anderson nodded. “Yup, 
Tony, uh, I agree with you one 
hundred per cent.” 

The other pre-cog, Tozzo realized, 
was the superb Tony Boucher, whose 
pre-cognition of the religious revival 
of the next century had been almost 
supernatural. The word-by-word description of the Miracle in the Cave 
involving the robot . Tozzo gazed 
at Boucher with awe, and then he 
turned back to Anderson. 

“Poul,” another pre-cog said. “I’ll 
tell you how the Italians intended 
to get the British to leave if they 
did invade in 1943. The British 
would stay at hotels, the best, naturally. The Italians would overcharge them.” 

”Oh, yes, yes,” Anderson said, 
nodding and smiling, his eyes twinkking. “And the British, being gentlemen, would say nothing — ” 

“But they’d leave the next day,” 
the other pre-cog finished, and all 
in the group laughed, except for 
Gilly and Tozzo. 

“Mr. Anderson,” Tozzo said 
tensely, “we’re from an amateur 
pre-cog organization at Battlecreek, 
Michigan and we would like to 
photograph you beside our model 
of a time-dredge.” 

“Pardon?” Anderson said, cupping his ear. 

Tozzo repeated what he had said, 
trying to be audible above the background racket. At last Anderson 
seemed to understand. 

“Oh, um, well, where is it?” Anderson asked obligingly. 

“Downstairs on the sidewalk,” 
Gilly said. “It was too heavy to 
bring up.” 

“Well, uh, if it won’t take too awfully long,” Anderson said, “which 
I doubt it will.” He excused himself 
from the group and followed after 
them as they started toward the 
elevator. 

“It’s steam-engine building time,” 
a heavy-set man called to them as 
they passed. “Time to build steam 
engines, Poul.” 

“We’re going downstairs,” Tozzo 
said nervously. 

“Walk downstairs on your heads,” 
the pre-cog said. He waved goodby goodnaturedly, as the elevatpr 
came and the three of them entered 
it. 

“Kris is jolly today,” Anderson 
said. 

“And how,” Gilly said, using one 
of his phrases. 


“Is Bob Heinlem here?” Anderson asked Tozzo as they descended. 
“I understand he and Mildred Clingerman went off somewhere to talk 
about cats and nobody has seen them 
come back.” 

“That’s the way the ball bounces,” 
Gilly said, trying out another twentU 
eth century phrase. 

Anderson cupped his ear, smiled 
hesitantly, but said nothing. 

At last, they emerged on the sidewalk. At the sight of their timedredge, Anderson blinked in astonishment. 

“I’ll be gosh darned,” he said, approaching it. “That’s certainly imposing. Sure, I’d, uh, be happy to 
pose beside it.” He drew his lean, 
angular body erect, smiling that 
warm, almost tender smile that Tozzo 
had noticed before. “Uh, how’s this?” 
Anderson inquired, a little timidly. 

With an authentic twentieth century camera taken from the Smithsonian, Gilly snapped a picture. 
“Now inside,” he requested, and 
glanced at Tozzo. 

“Why, uh, certainly,” Poul Anderson said, and stepped up the stairs and 
into the dredge. “Gosh, Karen would, 
uh, like this,” he said as he disappeared inside. “I wish to heck she’d 
come along.” 

Tozzo followed swiftly. Gilly slammed the hatch shut, and, at the control board, Tozzo with the instruction manual in hand punched buttons. 

The turbines hummed, but Anderson did not seem to hear them; 
he was engrossed in staring at the 
controls, his eyes wide. 

“Gosh,” he said. 

The time-dredge passed back to 
the present, with Anderson still lost 
in his scrutiny of the controls. 

IV 

F ermeti met them. “Mr. Anderson/’ he said, “this is an incredible honor.” He held out his 
hand, but now Anderson was peering through the open hatch past 
him, at the city beyond; he did not 
notice the offered hand. 

“Say,” Anderson said, his face 
twitching. “Um, what’s, uh, this?” 
He was staring at the monorail 
system primarily, Tozzo decided. 
And this was odd, because at least 
in Seattle there had been monorails 
back in Anderson’s time ... or had 
there been? Had that come later? In 
any case, Anderson now wore a massively perplexed expression. 

“Individual cars,” Tozzo said, 
standing close beside him. “Your 
monorails had only group cars. Later on, after your time, it was made 
possible for each citizen’s house to 
have a monorail outlet; the individual 
brought his car out of its garage and 
onto the rail-terminal, from which 
point he joined the collective structure. Do you see?” 

But Anderson remained perplexed; 
his expression in fact had deepened. 

“Um,” he said, “what do you 
mean ‘my time’? Am I dead?” He 
looked morose now. “I thought it 
would be more along the lines of 
Valhalla, with Vikings and such. Not 
futuristic.” 

“You’re not dead, Mr. Anderson,” Fermeti said. “What you’re 
facing is the culture-syndrome of the 

mid twenty-first century. I must tell 
you, sir, that you’ve been napped. 
But you will be returned; I give you 
both my personal and official word.” 
Anderson’s jaw dropped, but he 
said nothing; he continued to stare. 

Donald Nils, notorious murderer, 
sat at the single table in the 
reference room of the Emigration 
Bureau’s interstellar speed-of-light 
ship and computed that he was, in 
Earth figures, an inch high: Bitterly, 
he cursed. “It’s cruel and unusual 
punishment,” he grated aloud. “It’s 
against the Constitution.” And then 
he remembered that he had volunteered, in order to get out of Nachbaren Slager. That goddam hole, 
he said to himself. Anyhow, I’m out 
of there. 

And, he said to himself, even if 
I’m only an inch high I’ve still made 
myself captain of this lousy ship, 
and if it ever gets to Proxima I’ll 
be captain of the entire lousy Proxima System. I didn’t study with Gutman himself for nothing. And if 
that don’t beat Nachbaren Slager, 
I don’t know what does . 

His second-in-command, Pete 
Bailly, stuck his head into the reference room. “Hey, Nils, I have been 
looking over the micro-repro of this 
particular old pre-cog journal 
Astounding like you told me, this 
Venus Equilateral article about matter transmission, and I mean even 
though I was the top vid repairman 
in New York City that don’t mean 
I can build one of these things.” He 
glared at Nils. “That’s asking a lot.” 
Nils said tightly, “We’ve got to 
get back to Earth.” 

“You’re out of luck,” Bailly told 
him. “Better settle for Prox.” 

Furiously, Nils swept the microreproductions from the table, onto 
the floor of the ship. “That damn 
Bureau of Emigration! They tricked 
us!” 

Bailly shrugged. “Anyhow we got 
plenty to eat and a good reference 
library and 3-D movies every night.” 

“By the time we get to Prox,” 
Nils snarled, “we’ll have seen every 
movie — ” He calculated. “Two thousand times.” 

“Well, then don’t watch. Or we 
can run them backwards. How’s 
your research coming?” 

“I got going the micro of an article in Space Science Fiction ” Nils 
said thoughtfully, “called The Variable Man . It tells about faster-than-light transmission. You disappear
and then reappear. Some guy named 
Cole is going to perfect it, according 
to the old-time pre-cog who wrote 
it.” He brooded about that. “If we 
could build a faster-than-light ship 
we could return to Earth. We could 
take over.” 

“That’s crazy talk,” Bailly said. 

Nils regarded him. “I’m in command.” 

“Then,” Bailly said, “we got a 
nut in command. There’s no returning to Terra; we better build our 
lives on Proxima’s planets and forget forever about our home. Thank 
God we got women aboard. My God, 
even if we did get back . what 
could one-inch high people accomplish? We’d be jeered at.” 

“Nobody jeers at me,” Nils said 
quiedy. 

But he knew Eailly was right. 

They’d be lucky if they could re* 
search the micros of the old pre-cog 
journals in the ship’s reference room 
and develop for themselves a way of 
landing safely on Proxima’s planets 
. even that was asking a lot. 

We’ll succeed, Nils said to himself. As long as everyone obeys me, 
does exactly as I tell them, with 
no dumb questions. 

Bending, he activated the spool 
of the December 1962 //. There 
was an article in it that particularly 
interested him . and he had four 
years ahead of him in which to read, 
understand, and finally apply it. 

F ermeti said, “Surely your pre-cog 
ability helped prepare you for 
this, Mr. Anderson.” His voice faltereded with nervous strain, despite 
his efforts to control it. 

“How about taking me back 
now?” Anderson said. He sounded 
almost calm. 

Fermeti, after shooting a swift 
glance at Tozzo and Gilly, said to 
Anderson, “We have . a technical 
problem, you see. That’s why we 
brought here to our own time-continuum. You see — ” 

“I think you had better, um, take 
me back,” Anderson broke in. “Karen’ll get worried.” He craned his 
neck, peering in all directions. “I 
knew it would be somewhat on this 
order,” he murmured. His face 
twitched. “Not too different from 
what I expected . what’s that tall 
thing over there? Looks like what 
the old blimps used to catch onto.” 
“That.” Tozzo said, “is a prayer 
tower.” 

“Our problem,” Fermeti said patiently, “is dealt with in your article 
Night Flight in the August 1955 
If. We’ve been able to deprive an 
interstellar vehicle of its mass, but 
so far restoration of mass has — ” 

“Uh, oh, yes,” Anderson said, in 
a preoccupied way. “I’m working on 
that yarn right now. Should have 
that off to Scott in another couple of 
weeks.” He explained, “My agent.” 

Fermeti considered a moment and 
then said, “Can you give us the formula for mass-restoration, Mr. Anderson?” 

“Um,” Poul Anderson said slowly, “Yes, I guess that would be the 
correct term. Mass-restoration . 
I could go along with that.” He nodded. “I haven’t worked out any formula; I didn’t want to make the yam 
too technical. I guess I could make 
one up, if that’s what they wanted.” 
He was silent, then, apparently having withdrawn into a world of his 
own; the three men waited, but Anderson said nothing more. 

“Your pre-cog ability,” Fermeti 
said. 

“Pardon?” Anderson said, cupping 
his ear. “Pre-cog?” He smiled shyly. 
“Oh, uh, I wouldn’t go so far as to 
say that. I know John believes in all 
that, but I can’t say as I consider 
a few experiments at Duke University as proof.” 

Fermeti stared at Anderson a long 
time. “Take the first article in the 
January 1953 Galaxy” he said 
quietly. “The Defenders . about 
the people living, beneath the surface and the robots up above, pretending to fight the war but actually 
not, actually faking the reports so 
interestingly that the people — ” 

“I read that,” Poul Anderson 
agreed. “Very good, I thought, except for the ending. I didn’t care 
too much for the ending. 

Fermeti said, “You understand, 
don’t you, that those exact conditions came to pass in 1996, during 
World War Three? That by means of 
the article we were able to penetrate 
the deception carried on by our surface robots? That virtually every 
word of that article was exactly prophetic — ” 

“Phil Dick wrote that,” Anderson 
said. “ The Defenders .” 

“Do you know him?” Tozzo inquired. 

“Met him yesterday at the Convention,” Anderson said. “For the 
first time. Very nervous fellow, was 
almost afraid to come in.” 

Fermeti said, “Am I to understand that none of you are aware 
that you are pre-cogs?” His voice 
shook, completely out of control 
now. 

ii'VJSTell,” Anderson said slowly, 
" * “some sf writers believe in 
it. I think Alf Van Vogt does.” He 
smiled at Fermeti. 

“But don’t you understand?” Fermeti demanded. “You described us 
in an article — you accurately described our Bureau and its interstellar Project!” 

After a pause, Anderson murmured, “Gosh, I’ll be darned. No, I 
didn’t know that. Um, thanks a lot 
for telling me.” 

Turning to Tozzo, Fermeti said, 
“Obviously we’ll have to. recast our 
entire concept of the mid twentieth 
century.” He looked weary. 

Tozzc said, ‘Tor our purposes 
their ignorance doesn’t matter. Because the pre-cognitive ability was 
there anyhow, whether they recognized it or not.” That, to him, was 
perfectly clear. 

Anderson, meanwhile, had wandered off a little and stood now inspecting the display window of a 
nearby gift store. “Interesting brica-brac in there. I ought to pick up 
something for Karen while I’m here. 
Would it be all right — ” He turned 
questioningly to Fermeti. “Could I 
step in there for a moment and look 
around?” 

“Yes, yes,” Fermeti said irritably. 

Poul Anderson disappeared inside 
the gift shop, leaving the three of 
them to argue the meaning of their 
discovery. 

“What we’ve got tc do,” Fermeti 
said, “is sit him down in the situation familiar to him: before a typewriter. We must persuade him to 
compose an article on deprivation of 
mass and its subsequent restoration. 
Whether he himself takes the article 
to be factual or not has no bearing; 
it still will be. The Smithsonian must 
have a workable twentieth century 
typewriter and 8% by 11 white sheets 
of paper. Do you agree?” 

Tozzo, meditating, said, “I’ll tell 
you what I think. It was a cardinal 
error to permit him to go into that 
gift shop.” 

“Why is that?” Fermeti inquired. 

“I see his point,” Gilly said excitedly. “We’ll never see Anderson 
again; he’s skipped out on us through 
the pretext of gift-shopping for his 
wife.” 

Ashen-faced, Fermeti turned and 
raced into the gift shop. Tozzo and 
Gilly followed. 

The store was empty. Anderson 
had eluded them; he was gone. 

A s he loped silently out the back 
door of the gift shop, Poul Anderson thought to himself, I don’t 
believe they’ll get me. At least not 
right away. 

I’ve got too much to do while 
I’m here, he realized. What an opportunity! When I’m an old man I 
can tell Astrid’s children about this. 

Thinking of his daughter Astrid 
reminded him of one very simple 
fact, however. Eventually he had to 
go back to 1954. Because of Karen 
and the baby. No matter what he 
found here — for him it was temporary. 

But meanwhile . first I’ll go to 
the library, any library, he decided. 
And get a good look at history books 
that’ll tell me what took place in 
the intervening years between 1954 
and now. 

I’d like to know, he said to himself, 
about the Cold War, how the U. S. 
and Russia come out. And — space 
explorations. I’ll bet they put a man 
on Luna by 1975. Certainly, they’re 
exploring space now; heck, they 
even have a time-dredge so they must 
have that. 

Ahead Poul Anderson saw a doorway. It was open and without hesitation he plunged into it. Another 
shop of some kind, but this one 
larger than the gift shop. 

“Yes sir,” a voice said, and a 
bald-headed man — they all seemed 
to be bald-headed here — approached him. The man glanced at Anderson’s hair, his clothes . however the clerk was polite; he made 
no comment. “May I help you?” he 
asked. 

“Urn,” Anderson said, stalling. 
What did this place sell, anyhow? 
He glanced around. Gleaming electronic objects of some sort. But what 
did they do? 

The clerk said, “Haven’t you been 
nuzzled lately, sir?” 

“What’s that?” Anderson said. 
Nuzzled? 

“The new spring nuzzlers have 
arrived, you know,” the clerk said, 
moving toward the gleaming spherical machine nearest him. “Yes,” he 
said to Poul, “you do strike me as 
very, very faintly introve — no 
offense meant, sir, I mean, 
it’s legal to be introved.” The 
clerk chuckled. “For instance, your 
rather odd clothing . made it yourself, I take it? I must say, sir, to make 
your own clothing is highly introve. 
Did you weave it?” The clerk grimaced as if tasting something bad. 

“No,” Poul said, “as a matter of 
fact it’s my best suit.” 

“Heh, heh,” the clerk said. ‘I share 
the joke, sir; quite witty. But what 
about your head? You haven't shaved 
your head in weeks” 

“Nope,” Anderson admitted. 
“Well, maybe I do need a nuzzler.” 
Evidently everyone in this century 
had one; like a TV set in his own 
time, it was a necessity, in order for 
one to be part of the culture. 

“How many in your family?” the 
clerk said. Bringing out a measuring 
tape, he measured the length of 
Poul’s sleeve. 

“Three,” Poul answered, baffled. 


“How old is the youngest?” 

“Just born,” Poul said. 

The clerk’s face lost all its color. 
“Get out of here,” he said quietly. 
“Before I call for the polpol/” 
“Um, what’s that? Pardon?” Poul 
said, cupping his ear and trying to 
hear, not certain he had understood. 

“You’re a criminal,” the clerk 
mumbled. “You ought to be in Nachbaren Slager.” 

“Well, thanks anyhow,” Poul said, 
and backed out of the store, onto 
the sidewalk; his last glimpse was of 
the clerk still staring at him. 

U A re you a foreigner?” a voice 
f* asked, a woman’s voice. At 
the curb she had halted her vehicle. 
It looked to Poul like a bed; in fact, 
he realized, it was a bed. The woman regarded him with astute calm, 
her eyes dark and intense. Although 
her glistening shaved head somewhat 
upset him, he could see that she was 
attractive. 

“I’m from another culture,” Poul 
said, finding himself unable to keep 
his eyes from her figure. Did all 
the women dress like this here in 
this society? Bare shoulders, he could 
understand. But not — 

And the bed. The combination of 
the two was too much for him. What 
kind of business was she in, anyhow? And in public. What a society 
this was . morals had changed 
since his own time. 

“I’m looking for the library,” 
Poul said, not coming too close to 
the vehicle which was a bed with 
motor and wheels, a tiller for steering. 

The woman said, “The library is 
one bight from here.” 

“Um,” Poul said, “what’s a 
‘bight?’ ” 

“Obviously, you’re wanging me,” 
the woman said. All visible parts of 
her flushed a dark red. “It’s not funny. Any more than your disgustingly 
hairy head is. Really, both your 
wanging and your head are not amusing, at least not to me.” And yet she 
did not go on; she remained where 
she was, regarding him somberly. 
“Perhaps you need help,” she decided. “Perhaps I should pity you. 
You know of course that the polpol could pick you up any time they 
want.” 

Poul said, “Could I, um, buy you 
a cup of coffee somewhere and we 
could talk? I’m really anxious to find 
the library.” 

“I’ll go with you,” the woman 
agreed. “Although I have no idea 
what ‘coffee’ is. If you touch me 
I’ll nilp at once.” 

“Don’t do that,” Poul said, “it’s 
unnecessary; all I want to do is look 
up some historical material.” And 
then it occurred to him that he could 
make good use of any technical 
data he could get his hands on. 

What one volume might he smuggle back to 1954 which would be of 
great value? He racked his brains. 
An almanac. A dictionary ... a 
school text on science which surveyed all the fields for laymen; yes, 
that would do it. A seventh grade 
text or a high school text. He could 
rip the covers off, throw them away, 
put the pages inside his coat. 

Poul said, “Where’s a school? The 
closest school.” He felt the urgency 

of it, now. He had no doubt that they 
were after him, close behind. 

“What is a ‘school?* ” the woman 
asked. 

“Where your children go,” Poul 
said. 

The woman said quietly, “You 
poor sick man.” 

V 

F or a time Tozzo and Fermeti and 
Gilly stood in silence. And then 
Tozzo said in a carefully controlled 
voice. “You know what’s going to 
happen to him, of course. Polpol will 
pick him up and mono-express him 
to Nachbaren Slager. Because of his 
appearance. He may even be there 
already.” 

Fermeti sprinted at once for the 
nearest vidphone. “I’m going to contact the authorities at Nachbaren 
Slager. I’ll talk to Potter; we can 
trust him, I think.” 

Presently Major Potter’s heavy, 
dark features formed on the vidscreen. “Oh, hello, Fermeti. You 
want more convicts, do you?” He 
chuckled. “You use them up even 
faster than we do.” 

Behind Potter, Fermeti caught a 
glimpse of the open recreation area 
of the giant internment camp. Criminals, both political and nonpol, could 
be seen roaming about, stretching 
their legs, some of them playing 
dull, pointless games which, he knew, 
went on and on, sometimes for 
months, each time they were out of 
their work-cells. 

“What we want,” Fermeti said, “is 
to prevent an individual being 
brought to you at all.” He described 
Poul Anderson. “If he’s monoed 
there, call me at once. And don’t 
harm him. You understand? We want 
him back safe.” 

“Sure,” Potter said easily. “Just 
a minute; I’ll have a scan put on our 
new admissions.” He touched a button to his right and a 315-R computer came on; Fermeti heard its 
low hum. Potter touched buttons and 
then said, “This’ll pick him out if 
he’s monoed here. Our admissionscircuit is prepared to . reject him.” 

“No sign yet?” Fermeti asked 
tensely. 

“Nope,” Potter said, and purposefully yawned. 

Fermeti broke the connection. 

“Now what?” Tozzo said. “We 
could possibly trace him by means 
of a Ganymedean sniffer-sponge.” 
They were a repellent life form, 
though; if one managed to find its 
quarry it fastened at once to its 
blood system leech-wise. “Or do it 
mechanically,” he added. “With a 
detec beam. We have a print of Anderson’s EEG pattern, don’t we? But 
that would really bring in the polpol.” The detec beam by law belonged only to the polpol; after all, it was 
the artifact which had, at last, tracked down Gutman himself. 

Fermeti said bluntly, “I’m for 
broadcasting a planet-wide Type II 
alert. That’ll activate the citizenry, 
the average informer. They’ll know 
there’s an automatic reward for any 
Type II found.” 

“But he could be manhandled that 
way,” Gilly pointed out. “By a mob. 
Let’s think this through.” 


After a pause Tozzo said, “How 
about trying it from a purely cerebral standpoint? If you had been 
transported from the mid twentieth 
century to our continuum, what 
would you want to do? Where would 
you go?" 

Quietly, Fermeti said, “To the 
nearest spaceport, of course. To buy 
a ticket to Mars or the outplanets — 
routine in our age but utterly out of 
the question at mid twentieth century.” 

They looked at one another. 

“But Anderson doesn’t know 
where the spaceport is,” Gilly said. 
“It’ll take him valuable time to orient himself. We can go there directly by express subsurface mono.” 

A moment later the three Bureau 
of Emigration men were on their 
way. 

“A fascinating situation,” Gilly 
said, as they rode along, jiggling up 
and down, facing one another in the 
monorail first-class compartment. 
“We totally misjudged the mid twentieth century mind; it should be a lesson to us. Once we’ve regained possession of Anderson we should make 
further inquiries. For instance, the 
Poltergeist Effect. What was their 
interpretation of it? And table-tapping — did they recognize it for what 
it was? Or did they merely consign 
it to the realm of the so-called ‘occult’ and let it go at that?” 

“Anderson may hold the clue to 
these questions and many others,” 
Fermeti said. “But our central problem remains the same. We must induce him to complete the mass-restoration formula in precise mathe^ 
matical terms, rather than vague, poetic allusions.” 

Thoughtfully, Tozzo said, “He’s a 
brilliant man, that Anderson. Look 
at the ease by which he eluded us.” 
“Yes,” Fermeti agreed. “We 
mustn’t underestimate him. We did 
that, and it’s rebounded.” His face 
was grim. 

H urrying up the almost-deserted 
sidestreet, Poul Anderson wondered why the woman had regarded 
him as sick. And the mention of 
children had set off the clerk in the 
store, too. Was birth illegal now? Or 
was it regarded as sex had been once, 
as something too private to speak of 
in public? 

In any case, he realized, if I plan 
to stay here I’ve got to shave my 
head. And, if possible, acquire different clothing. 

There must be barbershops. And, 
he thought, the coins in my pockets; 
they’re probably worth a lot to collectors. 

He glanced about, hopefully. But 
all he saw were tall, luminous plastic and metal buildings which made 
up the city, structures in which incomprehensible transactions took 
place. They were as alien to him as — 
Alien, he thought, and the word 
lodged chokingly in his mind. Because 
— something had oozed from a doorway ahead of him. And now his way 
was blocked — deliberately, it seemed 
— by a slime mold, dark yellow in 
color, as large as a human being, 
palpitating visibly on the sidewalk. 
After a pause the slime mold undulated toward him at a regular, slow 
rate. A human evolutionary development? Poul Anderson wondered, 
recoiling from it. Good lord . and 
then he realized what he was seeing. 

This era had space travel. He was 
seeing a creature from another planet. 

“Um,” Poul said, to the enormous 
mass of slime mold, “can I bother 
you a second to ask a question?” 

The slime mold ceased to undulate forward. And in Poul’s brain a 
thought formed which was not his 
own. “I catch your query. In answer: I arrived yesterday from Callisto. But I also catch a number of 
unusual and highly interesting 
thoughts in addition . you are a 
time traveler from the past.” The 
tone of the creature’s emanations 
was one of considerate, polite 
amusement — and interest. 

“Yes,” Poul said. “From 1954.” 
“And you wish to find a barbershop, a library and a school. All at 
once, in the precious time remaining 
before they capture you.” The slime 
mold seemed solicitous. “What can 
I do to help you? I could absorb you, 
but it would be a permanent symbiosis, and you would not like that. 
You are thinking of your wife and 
child. Allow me to inform you as to 
the problem regarding your unfortunate mention of children. Terrans 
of this period are experiencing a 
mandatory moratorium on childbirth, 
because of the almost infinite sporting of the previous decades. There 
was a war, you see. Between Gutman’s fanatical followers and the 
more liberal legions of General McKinley. The latter won.” 

Poul said, “Where should I go? I’m 
confused.” His head throbbed and he 
felt tired. Too much had happened. 

Just a short while ago he had been 
standing with Tony Boucher in the 
Sir Francis Drake Hotel, drinking 
and chatting . and now this. Facing this great slime mold from Callisto. It was difficult — to say the 
least — to make such an adjustment. 

T he slime mold was transmitting 
to him. “I am accepted here 
while you, their ancestor, are regarded as odd. Ironic. To me, you 
look quite like them, except for your 
curly brown hair and of course your 
silly clothing. ,, The creature from 
Callisto pondered. “My friend, the 
polpol are the political police, and 
they search for deviants, followers 
of the defeated Gutman, who are 
terrorists now, and hated. Many of 
these followers are drawn from the 
potentially criminal classes. That is, 
the non-conformists, the so-called 
introves. Individuals who set their 
own subjective value-system up in 
place of the objective system in 
vogus. It is a matter of life and 
death to the Terrans, since Gutman 
almost won.” 

“I’m going to hide,” Poul den 
cided. 

“But where? You can’t really. Not 
unless you wish to go underground 
and join the Gutmanites, the criminal class of bomb-throwers . and 
you won’t want to do that. Let us 
stroll together, and if anyone challenges you, I will say you’re my servant. You have manual extensors 
and I have not. And I have, by a 
quirk, decided to dress you oddly 
and to have you retain your headhair. The responsibility then becomes 
mine. It is actually not unusual for 


higher out-world organisms to employ Terran help.” 

“Thanks,” Poul said tautly, as the 
slime mold resumed its slow forward 
motion along the sidewalk. “But 
there are things I want to do — ” 

“I am on my way to the zoo,” the 
slime mold continued. 

An unkind thought came to Poul. 

“Please,” the slime mold said. 
“Your anachronistic twentieth century humor is not appreciated. I am 
not an inhabitant of the zoo; it is 
for life forms of low mental order 
such as Martian glebs and trawns. 
Since the initiation of interplanetary travel, zoos have become the 
center of — ” 

Poul said, “Could you lead me to 
the space terminal?” He tried to 
make his request sound casual. 

“You take a dreadful risk,” the 
slime mold said, “in going to any 
public place. The polpol watch constantly.” 

“I still want to go.” If he could 
board an interplanetary ship, if he 
could leave Earth, see other worlds — 

But they would erase his memory; all at once he realized that, in 
a rush of horror. I’ve got to make 
notes , he told himself. At once! 

“Do, um, you have a pencil?” he 
asked the slime mold. “Oh, wait; I 
have one. Pardon me.” Obviously the 
slime mold didn’t. 

On a piece of paper from his 
coat pocket — it was convention material of some sort — he wrote hurriedly, in brief, disjointed phrases, 
what had happened to him, what he 
had seen in the twenty-first century. 
Then he quickly stuck the paper 
back in his pocket. 

“A wise move,” the slime mold 
said. “And now to the spaceport, if 
you will accompany me at my slow 
pace. And, as we go, I will give 
you details of Terra’s history from 
your period on.” The slime mold 
moved down the sidewalk. Poul accompanied it eagerly; after all, what 
choice did he have? “The Soviet Union. That was tragic. Their war with 
Red China in 1983 which finally involved Israel and France . regrettable, but it did solve the problem 
of what to do with France — a most 
difficult nation to deal with in the 
latter half of the twentieth century.” 
On his piece of paper Poul jotted 
that down, too. 

“After France had been defeated 
— ” The slime mold went on, as Poul 
scratched against time. 

F ermeti said, “We must glin, if 
we’re to catch Anderson before 
he boards a ship.” And by “glin” he 
did not mean glinning a little; he 
meant a full search with the cooperation of the polpol. He hated to 
bring them in, and yet their help 
now seemed vital. Too much time 
had passed and Anderson had not 
yet been found. 

The spaceport lay ahead, a great 
disk miles in diameter, with no vertical obstructions. In the center was 
the Burned Spot, seared by years of 
tail-exhausts from landing and departing ships. Fermeti liked the 
spaceport, because here the denseness 
of the close-packed buildings of the 
city abruptly ceased. Here was openness, such as he recalled from childhood ... if one dared to think openly of childhood. 


The terminal building was set 
hundreds of feet beneath the rexeroid layer built to protect the waiting people in case of an accident 
above. Fermeti reached the entrance 
of the descent ramp, then halted impatiently to wait for Tozzo and Gilly 
to catch up with him. 

“I’ll nilp,” Tozzo said, but without enthusiasm. And he broke the 
band on his wrist with a single decisive motion. 

The polpol ship hovered overhead 
at once. 

“We’re from the Emigration Bureau,” Fermeti explained to the polpol lieutenant. He outlined their 
Project, described — reluctantly — 
their bringing Poul Anderson from 
his time-period to their own. 

“Hair on head,” the polpol lieutenant noted. “Quaint duds. Okay, 
Mr. Fermeti; we’ll glin until we 
find him.” He nodded, and his small 
ship shot off. 

“They’re efficient,” Tozzo admitted. 

“But not likeable,” Fermeti said, 
finishing Tozzo’s thought. 

“They make me uncomfortable,” 
Tozzo agreed. “But I suppose they’re 
supposed to.” 

The three of them stepped onto the 
descent ramp — and dropped at 
breathtaking speed to level one below. Fermeti shut his eyes, wincing 
at the loss of weight. It was almost 
as bad as takeoff itself. Why did everything have to be so rapid, these 
days? It certainly was not like the 
previous decade, when things had 
gone leisurely. 

They stepped from the ramp, 
shook themselves, and were approached instantly by the building’s 
polpol chief. 

“We have a report on your man,” 
the gray-uniformed officer told 
them. 

“He hasn't taken off?” Fermeti 
said. “Thank God.” He looked 
around. 

“Over there,” the officer said, 
pointing. 

At a magazine rack, Poul Anderson was looking intently at the dis>play. 

It took only a moment for the three 
Emigration Bureau officials to surround him. 

“Oh, uh, hello,” Anderson said. 
“While I was waiting for my ship 
I thought I’d take a look and see 
what’s still in print.” 

Fermeti said, “Anderson, we require your unique abilities. I’m sorry, 
but we’re taking you back to the 
Bureau.” 

All at once Anderson was gone. 
Soundlessly, he had ducked away; 
they saw his tall, angular form become smaller as he raced for the 
gate to the field proper. 

Reluctantly, Fermeti reached 
within his coat and brought out a 
sleep-gun. “There’s no other choice,” 
he murmured, and squeezed. 

The racing figure tumbled, rolled. 
Fermeti put the sleep-gun away and 
in a toneless voice said, “He’ll recover. A skinned knee, nothing 
worse.” He glanced at Gilly and 
Tozzo. “Recover at the Bureau, I 
mean.” 

Together, the three of them advanced toward the prone figure on 
the floor of the spaceport waiting 
room. 

CCyLTou may return to your own 
I time-continuum,” Fermeti 
said quietly, “when you’ve given us 
the mass-restoration formula.” He 
nodded, and a Bureau workman approached, carrying the ancient Royal portable typewriter. 

Seated in the chair across from 
Fermeti in the Bureau’s inner business office, Poul Anderson said, “I 
don’t use a portable.” 

“You must cooperate,” Fermeti 
informed him. “We have the scientific know-how to restore you to 
Karen; remember Karen and remember your newly-born daughter at the 
Congress in San Francisco’s Sir Francis Drake Hotel. Without full cooperation from you, Anderson, there 
will be no cooperation from the Bureau. Surely, with your pre-cog ability you can see that.” 

After a pause Anderson said, 
“Um, I can’t work unless I have a 
pot of fresh coffee brewing around 
me at all times, somewhere.” 
Curtly, Fermeti signaled. “We’ll 
obtain coffee beans for you,” he declared. “But the brewing is up to 
you. We’ll also supply a pot from 
the Smithsonian collection and there 
our responsibility ends.” 

Taking hold of the carriage of the 
typewriter, Anderson began to inspect it. “Red and back ribbon,” 
he said. “I always use black. But 
I guess I can make do.” He seemed 
a trifle sullen. Inserting a sheet of 
paper, he began to type. At the top of 
the page appeared the words: 
NIGHT FLIGHT 
— Poul Anderson 
“You say If bought it?” he asked 
Fermeti. 

“Yes,” Fermeti replied tensely. 

Anderson typed: 

Difficulties at Outward, Incorporated had begun to nettle Edmond Fletcher. For one thing, an 
entire ship had disappeared, and 
although the individuals aboard 
were not personally known to him 
he felt a twinge of responsibility. 
Now, as he lathered himself with 
hormone-impregnated soap 

“He starts at the beginning,” Fermeti said bitingly. “Well, if there’s 
no alternative we’ll simply have to 
bear with him.” Musingly, he murmured, “I wonder how long it takes 
. I wonder how fast he writes. As 
a pre-cog he can see what’s coming 
next; it should help him to do it 
in a hurry.” Or was that just wishful thinking? 

“Have the coffee beans arrived 
yet?” Anderson asked, glancing up. 

“Any time now,” Fermeti said. 

“I hope some of the beans are Colombian,” Anderson said. 

L ong before the beans arrived the 
article was done. 

Rising stiffly, uncoiling his lengthy 
limbs, Poul Anderson said, “I think 
you have what you want, there. The 
mass restoration formula is on typescript page 20.” 

Eagerly, Fermeti turned the pages. 
Yes, there it was; peering over his 
shoulder, Tozzo saw the paragraph: 

If the ship followed a trajectory 
which would carry it into the star 
Proxima, it would, he realized, regain its mass through a process of 


leeching solar energy from the 
great star-furnace itself. Yes, it 
was Proxima itself which held the 
key to Torelli’s problem, and now, 
after all this time, it had been 
solved. The simple formula revolved in his brain. 

And, Tozzo saw, there lay the formula. As the article said, the mass 
would be regained from solar energy converted into matter, the ultimate source of power in the universe. The answer had stared them in 
the face all this time! 

Their long struggle was over. 

“And now,” Poul Anderson asked, 
“I’m free to go back to my own 
time?” 

Fermeti said simply, “Yes.” 

“Wait,” Tozzo said to his superior. 
“There’s evidently something you 
don’t understand.” It was a section 
which he had read in the instruction 
manual attached to the time-dredge. 
He drew Fermeti to one side, where 
Anderson could not hear. “He can’t 
be sent back to his own time with 
the knowledge he has now.” 

“What knowledge?” Fermeti inquired. 

“That — well. I’m not certain. 
Something to do with our society, 
here. What I’m trying to tell you is 
this: the first rule of time travel, according to the manual, is don’t 
change the past. In this situation just 
bringing Anderson here has changed 
the past merely by exposing him to 
our society.” 

Pondering, Fermeti said, “You 
may be correct. While he was in that 
gift shop he may have picked up 
some object which, taken back to 
his own time, might revolutionize 
their technology.” 

“Or at the magazine rack at the 
spaceport,” Tozzo said. “Or on his 
trip between those two points. And 
— even the knowledge that he and 
his colleagues are pre-cogs." 

“You’re right,” Fermeti said. “The 
memory of this trip must be wiped 
from his brain.” He turned and 
walked slowly back to Poul Anderson. “Look here,” he addressed him. 
“I’m sorry to tell you this, but everything that’s happened to you must 
be wiped from your brain.” 

After a pause, Anderson said, 
“That’s a shame. Sorry to hear that.” 
He looked downcast. “But I’m not 
surprised,” he murmured. He seemed 
philosophical about the whole affair. “It’s generally handled this 
way.” 

Tozzo asked, “Where can this alteration of the memory cells of his 
brain be accomplished?” 

“At the Department of Penology,” 
Fermeti said. “Through the same 
channels we obtained the convicts.” 
Pointing his sleep-gun at Poul Anderson he said, “Come along with 
us. I regret this . but it has to 
be done.” 

VI 

A t the Department of Penology, 
painless electroshock removed 
from Poul Anderson’s brain the precise cells in which his most recent 
memories were stored. Then, in a 
semi-conscious state, he was carried 
back into the time-dredge. A moment later he was on his trip back 
to the year 1954, to his own society 


and time. To the Sir Francis Drake 
Hotel in downtown San Francisco, 
California and his waiting wife and 
child. 

When the time-dredge returned 
empty, Tozzo, Gilly and Fermeti 
breathed a sigh of relief and broke 
open a bottle of hundred-year-old 
Scotch which Fermeti had been saving. The mission had been successfully accomplished; now they could 
turn their attention back to the 
Project. 

“Where’s the manuscript that he 
wrote?” Fermeti said, putting down 
his glass to look all around his office. 

There was no manuscript to be 
found. And, Tozzo noticed, the antique Royal portable typewriter 
which they had brought from the 
Smithsonian — it was gone, too. But 
why? 

Suddenly chill fear traveled up 
him. He understood. 

“Good lord,” he said thickly. He 
put down his glass. “Somebody get 
a copy of the journal with his article in it. At once.” 

Fermeti said, “What is it, Aaron? 
Explain.” 

“When we removed his memory 
of what had happened we made it 
impossible for him to write the anticle for the journal,” Tozzo said. 
“He must have based Night Flight 
on his experience with us, here.” 
Snatching up the August 1955 copy 
of If he turned to the table-of-contents page. 

No article by Poul Anderson was 
listed. Instead, on page 78, he saw 
Philip K. Dick’s The Mold of Yancy 
listed instead. 

They had changed the past after 
all. And now the formula for their 
Project was gone — gone entirely. 

“We shouldn’t have tampered,” 
Tozzo said in a hoarse voice. “We 
should never have brought him out of 
the past.” He drank a little more of 
the century-old Scotch, his hands 
shaking. 

“Brought who?” Gilly said, with a 
puzzled look. 

“Don’t you remember?” Tozzo 
stared at him, incredulous. 

“What’s this discussion about?” 
Fermeti said impatiently. “And what 
are you two doing in my office? You 
both should be busy at work.” He 
saw the bottle of Scotch and blanched. “How’d that get open?” 

His hands trembling, Tozzo turned the pages of the journal over and 
over again. Already, the memory was 
growing diffuse in his mind; he 
struggled in vain to hold onto it. They 
had brought someone from the past, 
a pre-cog, wasn’t it? But who? A 
name, still in his mind but dimming 
with each passing moment . Anderson or Anderton* something like 
that. And in connection with the Bureau’s interstellar mass-deprivation 
Project. 

Or was it? 

Puzzled, Tozzo shook his head and 
said in bewilderment, “I have some 
peculiar wprds in my mind. Night 
Flight. Do either of you happen to 
know what it refers to?” 

“ Night Flight ” Fermeti echoed. 
“No, it means nothing to me. I wonder, though — it certainly would be 
an effective name for our Project.” 

“Yes,” Gilly agreed. “That must 
be what it refers to.” 


“But our Project is called Waterspider , isn’t it?” Tozzo said. At least 
he thought it was. He blinked, trying 
to focus his faculties. 

“The truth of the matter,” Fermeti said, “is that we’ve never titled 
it.” Brusquely, he added, “But I 
agree with you; that’s an even better 
name for it. Waterspider . Yes, I like 
that.” 

The door of the office opened and 
there stood a uniformed, bonded 
messenger. “From the Smithsonian,” 
he informed them. “You requested 
this.” He produced a parcel, which 
he laid on Fermeti’s desk. 

“I don’t remember ordering anything from the Smithsonian,” Fermeti said. Opening it cautiously he 
found a can of roasted, ground coffee beans, still vacuum packed, over 
a century old. 

The three men looked at one another blankly. 

“Strange,” Torelli murmured. 
“There must be some mistake.” 

“Well,” Fletcher said, “in any 
case, back to Project Waterspider 

Nodding, Torelli and Gilman turned in the direction of their own office on the first floor of Outward, 
Incorporated, the commercial firm at 
which they worked and the project 
on which they had labored, with so 
many heartaches and setbacks, for 
so long. 

A t the Science Fiction Convention 
at the Sir Francis Drake Hotel, 
Poul Anderson looked around him 
in bewilderment. Where had he 
been? Why had he gone out of the 
building? And it was an hour later; 
Tony Boucher and Jim Gunn had 
left for dinner by now, and he saw 
no sign of his wife Karen and the 
baby, either. 

The last he remembered was two 
fans from Battlecreek who wanted 
him to look at a display outside on 
the sidewalk. Perhaps he had gone 
to see that. In any case, he had no 
memory of the interval. 

Anderson groped about in his coat 
pocket for his pipe, hoping to calm 
his oddly jittery nerves — and found, 
not his pipe, but instead a folded 
piece of paper. 

“Got anything for our auction, 
Poul?” a member of the Convention 
committee asked, halting beside him. 
“The auction is just about to start 
— we have to hurry.” 

Still looking at the paper from his 
pocket, Poul murmured, “Urn, you 
mean something here with me?” 

“Like a typescript of some published story, the original manuscript 
or earlier versions or notes. You 
know.” He paused, waiting. 

“I seem to have some notes in my 
pocket,” Poul said, still glancing 


over them. They were in his handwriting but he didn't remember having made them. A time-travel story, 
from the look of them. Must have 
been from those Bourbons and water, he decided, and not enough to 
eat. “Here,” he said uncertainly, “it 
isn’t much but I guess you can auction these.” He took one final glance 
at them. “Notes for a story about a 
political figure called Gutman and 
a kidnapping in time. Intelligent slime 
mold, too, I notice.” On impulse, he 
handed them over. 

“Thanks, the man said, and 
hurried on toward the other room, 
where the auction was being held. 

“I bid ten dollars,” Howard 
Browne called, smiling broadly. 
“Then I have to catch a bus to the 
airport.” The door closed after him. 

Karen, with Astrid, appeared beside Poul. “Want to go into the auction?” she asked her husband. “Buy 
an original Finlay?” 

“Urn, sure,” Poul Anderson said, 
and with his wife and child walked 
slowly after Howard Browne. END 
