To JORSLEM 

by ROBERT SILVERBERG 

Illustrated by GAUGHAN 

In the holy city of Jorslem 
lay the one hope of Renewal. 

But there was no end of duty 
for a Watcher who had failed. 

I 

y^vur world was truly tKeirs, now. 
^ All the way across Eyropj 
I could see that, as I made my 
Pilgrimage toward holy Jorslem. 
Thie invaders had taken every


thing, and we belonged to them 
as beasts in a barnyard belong 
to the farmer. 

They were everywhere. Some 
were sightseers, others were administrators; all had the look of 
masters. They walked with cool 
confidence, as if telling us tiiat 
the will had drawn favor from 
us and conferred it upon them. 
They were not cruel to us, and 
yet they drained us of vitality by 
their mere presence among us. 
Our guilds became nothing. Our 
elaborate society was again without structure, as it had been in 
the chaos at the end of the Second 
Cycle. Our sun, our moons, our 
museums of ancient relics, our 
ruins of former cycles, our cities, 
our palaces, our future, our present and our past had all undergone a transfer of title. 

At night the blaze of the stars 
mocked us. All the universe looked down on our shame. 

The cold wind of winter told 
us that for our sins our freedom 
had been lost. The bright heat of 
summer told us that for our pride 
we had been humbled. 

Through a changed world we 
moved, stripped of our past 
selves. I who was once of the 
Watchers who roved the stars 
four times each day now had lost 
that pleasure, for there was no 
more Watching to do. I had passed from that guild to join the 
Rememberers, but only for a 
while; and now, bound for Jorslem, I found cool comfort in the 
Hope that as a Pilgrim I might 
gain redemption and renewal in 
that holy city. My traveling companion — the former Rememberer Olmayne — and I repeated 
each night the rituals of our Pilgrimage: 

“We yield to the Will.” 

“We yield to the Will.” 

“In all things great and small.” 
“In all things great and small.” 
“And ask forgiveness.” 

“And ask forgiveness.” 

“For sins actual and potential.” 
“For sins actual and potential.” 
“And pray for understanding 
and repose.” 

“And pray for understanding 
and repose.” 

“Through all our days until redemption comes.” 

“Through all our days until redemption comes.” 

Thus we spoke the words. Saying them, we clutched the cool 
polished spheres of starstone, icy 
as frostflowers, that all Pilgrims 
carry, and made communion with 
the Will. And so we journeyed 
Jorslemward in this world that 
no longer was owned by man. 

II 

T t was at the Talyan approach to 
Land Bridge that Olmayne 
first used her cruelty on me. 
Olmayne was cruel by first nature; and yet we had been Pilgrims together for many months, 
traveling from Perris eastward 
over the mountains and down the 
length of Talya to the bridge, 
and she had kept her claws 
sheathed. Until this place. 

The occasion was our halting 
for a company of invaders coming north from Afreek. There were 
perhaps twenty of them, tall and 
harsh-faced. They rode in a 
gleaming covered vehicle, long 
and narrow, with thick sandcolored treads and small windows. We could see the vehicle 
from far away, raising a cloud 
of dust as it neared us. 

This was a hot time of year. 
The sky itself was the color of 
sand, and it was streaked with 
folded sheets of heat-radiation, 
glowing and terrible energy 
streams of turquoise and gold. 

Perhap fifty of us stood 1 beside 
the road, with the land of Talya 
at our backs and the continent of 
Afreek before us. We were a varied group: some Pilgrims, like 
Olmayne and myself, making the 
trek toward the holy city of 
Jorslem, but also I counted in 
the band five former Watchers — 
shorn of their profession, as I Had 
been, by the conquest of Earth — 
and also several indexers, a Sentinel, a pair of Communicants, a 
Scribe and even a few Changelings. We gathered in a straggling 
assembly, awarding the road by 
default to the invaders. 

Land Bridge is not wide, and 
the road will not allow many to 
use it at any time. Yet in normal 
times the flow of traffic had always gone in both directions at 
once. Here today, we feared to 
gallant ine. 

1 We have long brooded about a 
, real fantasy publishing program, 
nudged along by, among other 
I things, Jim Blish's enthusiasm for 
I Cabell. Now, since our privately 
expanding universe permits two 
' s.f.-cum-fantasy titles each month, 

| plus an honest-to-God, no-holdsbarred adult fantasy, we can in" dulge a long-cherished dream. (In 
| order to avoid a tedious argument 
about definition of terms, let's not 
* have one. An argument’ that is. A 
| modest sample of the creative 
, thinking we do here at Ballantine 
’ — it allows more time for reading.) 

And such delicious reading: Wil| liam Morris, Lord Dunsany, George 
l MacDonald, (you'll love George — 
i if you have not already encoun\ tered him — a sort of Bunyanesque 
" Kafka), Hannes Bok, Clark Ashton 
^ Smith and many more. And of 
course Cabell. We'll be doing 
I them all in the months to come, 
i starting with Fletcher Pratt's THE 
? BLUE STAR. 

f The series is being edited by Lin 
i Carter, who will be doing Introducf tions for each volume. His own 
| book, TOLKIEN: A Look Behind 
r "The Lord of the Rings," comes out 
I in March, at 95c, and is aptly de[ scribed on the cover as "A Joyous 

Exploration of Tolkien's Sources." And indeed, it is obvious 
that nothing delights Lin more than 
puttering about among heroic sagas, epics, Sumerian tablets, Norse 
runes, and the like. Fortunately for 
all, he makes his delight infectious. 

With elves dogging every footstep, and 
faery coming out our ears, it is rather 
difficult to get back to the stern reality 
of science fiction. So let's not, for a bit. 
Among others titles which this nongeneration-gap publisher is doing are Alan 
Watts' PSYCHOTHERAPY EAST AMD WEST 
and Laing's POLITICS OF EXPERIENCE. 
Later we'll be doing an original on the 
meaning of MARCUSE — the German guru, 
(flowerkraut?) . O God. Back to immediacies. 

We would really like you to know 
about a perfectly delightful collecttion of shorts from Miriam Allen 
deFord, titled XENOGENESIS, on 
the general theme of reproduction 
among extraterrestrials, and James 
White's stories, THE ALIENS AMONG US. Jim is the English writer 
(Scot, really) who writes as well 
about aliens as our own Hal Clement. Both books are March, both 
75c each. All these titles, and many 
others, can be most rapidly obtained by ordering direct from our 
stockroom — send money and a list 
of what you want to Ballantine, 
Dept. GCS, 36 West 20th Street, 
New York, N.Y. Or better, send 
for a catalog so that you can make 
up a really long list. Spend money. 
Remember, the population bomb 
keeps ticking — or, as Paul Ehrlich 
says, as long as you've booked 
passage on the Titantic, you might 
as well go first class. BB 
go forward while invaders were 
this close, and so we remained 
clustered timidly, watching our 
conquerors approach. 

One of the Changelings moved 
toward me. He was small of stature for that breed, but wide 
through the shoulders; his skin 
seemed much too tight for his 
frame; his eyes were large and 
green-rimmed, his hair grew in 
thick, widely-spaced pedestallike clumps, and his nose was 
barely perceptible, so that his 
nostrils appeared to sprout from 
his upper lip. Despite this, he was 
less grotesque than most Changelings appear. His expression was 
solemn, but with a hint of bizarre 
playfulness lurking somewhere. 

He said in a voice that was little more than a feathery whisper, ‘‘Do you think we’ll be delayed long, Pilgrim?” 

In former times one did not 
address a Pilgrim unsolicitedly 
— especially if one happened to 
be a Changeling. Such customs 
meant nothing to me, but Olmayne drew back with a hiss of 
distaste. 

I said, “We will wait here until 
our masters allow us to pass. Is 
there any choice?” 

“None friend, none.” 

At that friend, Olmayne hissed 
again and glowered at the little 
Changeling. He turned to her, 
and his anger showed, for suddenly six parallel bands of scarlet 
pigment blazed beneath the glossy skin of his cheeks. But his 
only overt response to her was 
a courteous bow. He said 1 , “I introduce myself. I am Bemalt, 
naturally guildless, a native of 
Nayrub in Deeper Afreek. I do 
not inquire after your names, 
Pilgrims. Are you bound for Jorslem?” 

“Yes,” I said, as Olmayne 
swung about to present her back. 
“And you? Home to Nayrub after travels?” 

“No,” said Bemalt. “I go to 
Jorslem also.” 

T nstantly I felt cold and hostile, 
-*■ my initial response to the 
Changeling’s suave charm fading 
at once. I had had a Changeling, 
false though he turned out to be, 
as a traveling companion before; 
he also had been charming, but I 
wanted no more like him. Edgily, 
distantly, I said, “May I ask 
what business a Changeling might 
have in Jorslem?” 

He detected the chill in my 
tone, and his huge eyes registered 
sorrow. “We too are permitted 
to visit the holy city, I remind 
you. Even our land. Do you fear 
that Changelings will once again 
seize the shrine of renewal, as 
we did a thousand years ago before we were cast down into 
guildlessness?” He laughed harshly. “I threaten no one, Pilgrim. 

I am hideous of face, but not dangerous. May the Will grant you 
what you seek. Pilgrim.” He 
made a gesture of respect and 
went back to the other Changelings. 

Olmayne spun around on me, 
furious. 

“Why do you talk to such; 
beastly creatures?” 

“The man approached me. He 
was merely being friendly. We 
are all cast together here, Olmayne, and — ” 

“Man. Man! You call a 
Changeling a man?” 

“They are human, Olmayne.” 
“Just barely. Tomis, I loathe 
such monsters. My flesh creeps 
to have them near me. If I could, 
I’d banish them from this world!” 
“Where is the serene tolerance 
a Rememberer must cultivate?” 
She flamed at the mockery in 
my voice. “We are not required 
to love Changelings, Tomis. They 
are one of the curses laid upon 
our planet — parodies of humanity, enemies of truth and beauty. 
I despise them!” 

It was not a unique attitude. 
But I had no time to reproach 
Olmayne for her intolerance; the 
vehicle of the invaders was drawing near. I hoped we might resume our journey once it went by. 
It slowed and halted, however, 
and several of the invaders came 
out. They walked unhurriedly toward us, their long arms dangling 
like slack ropes. 

“Who is the leader here?” asked one of them. 

No one replied. 

The invader said impatiently, 
after a moment, “No leader? No 
leader? Very well, all of you, 
listen. The road must be cleared. 
A convoy is coming through. Go 
back to Palerm and wait until 
tomorrow.” 

“But I must be in Agupt by — ” 
the Scribe began. 

“Land Bridge is closed today,” 
said the invader. “Go back to 
Palerm.” His voice was calm. 

The Scribe shivered, his jowls 
swinging, and said no more. 

Several of the others by the 
side of the road looked as if they 
wished to protest. The Sentinel 
turned away and spat. A man 
who boldly wore the mask of the 
shattered guild of Defenders in 
his cheek clenched his fists and 
plainly fought back a surge of 
fury. The Changelings whispered 
to one another. Bernalt smiled 
bitterly at me, and shrugged. 

Go back to^ Palerm? Waste a 
day’s march in this heat? For 
what ? 

nphe invader gestured casually, 
telling us to disperse. 

Now it was that Olmayne was 
unkind to me. In a low voice she 
said, “Explain to them, Tomis, 
that you are in the pay of the 
Procurator of Perris, and they 
will let the two of us pass.” 

My shoulders sagged as if she 
had loaded ten years on me. 
“Why did you say such a thing?” 
I asked. 

“It’s hot. I’m tired. It’s idiotic 
of them to send us back to Palerm.” 

“I agree. But I can do nothing. Why try to hurt me?” 

“Does the truth* hurt that 
much?” 

“I am no collaborator, Olmayne.” 

She laughed. “You say that so 
well! But you are, Tomis, you 
are! You sold them documents — “ 

“To save the Prince, your lover,” I reminded her. 

“You dealt with the invaders, 
though.” 

“Stop it, Olmayne.” 

“Now you give me orders?” 

“Olmayne — ” 

Go up to them, Tomis. Tell 
them who you are, make them let 
us go ahead.” 

“The convoys would run us 
down on the road. In any case, 
I have no influence with invaders. 
I am not the Procurator’s man.” 

“I’ll die before I go back to 
Palerm!” 

“Traitor! Treacherous old fool! 
Coward!” 

I .pretended to ignore her, but 
I felt the fire of her words. There 
was no falsehood in them, only 
malice. I had dealt with the conquerors I had betrayed the guild 
that sheltered me, yet it was unfair for her to reproach me with 
it. I had been trying only to save 
a man to whom I felt bound, a 
man moreover with whom she 
was in love. It was loathsome of 
Olmayne to tax me with treason 
now, to torment my conscience, 
merely because of a petty rage 
at the heat and dust of the road. 

But this woman had coldly 
slain her own husband. Why 
should she not be malicious in 
trifles as well? 

The invaders had their way; 
we abandoned the road and straggled back to Palerm, a dismal 
sizzling, sleepy town. That evening five Fliers, passing in formation overhead, took a fancy to the 
town and in the moonless night 
they came again and again 
through the sky, three men and 
two women, ghostly and slender 
and beautiful. I stood watching 
them for more than an hour. 
Their great shimmering wings 
scarcely hid the starlight; their 
pale angular bodies moved in 
graceful arcs, arms held pressed 
close to sides, legs together, backs 
gently curved. I had loved a Flier girl once, in a fashion, and the 
sight of those five stirred my 
memories and left me tingling 
with troublesome emotions. 

'Tphe Fliers made their last pass 
and were gone. The false 
moons entered the sky soon afterward. I went into our hostelry 
then, and shortly Olmayne asked 
admittance to my room. 

She looked contrite. She carried a squat octagonal flask of 
green wine, not a T alyan brew but 
something from an outworld, no 
doubt purchased at great price. 

Will you forgive me, Tomis?” 
she asked. “Here. I know you like 
these wines.” 

“I would rather not have had 
those words before, and not have 
the wine now,” I told her. 

“My temper grows short in the 
heat. I’m sorry, Tomis. I said a 
stupid and tactless thing.” 

I forgave her, in hope of a 
smoother journey thereafter, and 
we drank most of the wine, and 
then she went to her mom nearby 
to sleep. 

For a long while I lay awake 
beneath a lash of guilt. In her impatience and wrath Olmayne had 
stung me at my vulnerable place; 
I was a betrayer of mankind. I 
wrestled with the issue almost to 
dawn. 

— What had I done? 

I had revealed to our conquerors where a certain document 
might be found. 

— To whom did the document 
belong? 

To the guild of Rememberers. 

— Did’ the invaders have a 
moral right to the document? 

It told of the shameful treatment they had had at the hands 
of o' ancestors. It gave justification for the conquest oi Earth. 

— What, then, was wrong about 
giving it to them? 

One does not aid one’s conquerors, even when they are morally superior to one. 

— Is a small treason a serious 
thing? 

There are no small treasons. 

In this unprofitable way I 
consumed the night. When the 
day brightened I rose and looked 
skyward and begged the Will to 
help me find redemption in the 
waters of the house of renewal 
in Jorslem. Then I went to awaken Olmayne. 

Ill 

T and Bridge was open on this 
-®— ' 1 day, and we joined the 
throng that was crossing over 
out of Talya into Afreek. 

There are two main routes for 
Pilgrims from Eyrop to Jorslem. 
The northern route involves going through the Dark Lands east 
of Talya, taking the ferry at 
Stanbool, and skirting the western 
coast of the continent of Ais until Jorslem. But Olmayne Had 
been to Stanbool to do research in 
the days when she was a Rememberer, and disliked the place; and 
so we took the southern route, 
across Land Bridge into Afreek, 
and along the shore of the great 
Lake Medit, through Agupt and 
up to Jorslem. 

A true Pilgrim travels only by 
foot. It was not an idea that had 
much appeal to Olmayne, and 
though we walked a great deal, 
we rode whenever we could. She 
was shameless in commandeering 
transportation. Only two-days’ 
walk out of Perris she had got us 
a ride from a rich Merchant 
bound for the coast; the man had 
no intention of sharing His sumptuous vehicle with anyone, but 
he could not resist the sensuality 
of Olmayne’s deep, musical voice, 
even though it issued from the 
sexless grillwork of a pilgrim’s 
mask. 

The Merchant traveled in 
style. His self -primed landcar was 
four times the length of a man, 
wide enough to house five people 
in comfort. There was no direct 
vision, only a series of screens 
revealing upon command what 
lay outside. The temperature never varied. Spigots supplied liqueurs and stronger things; food 
tablets were available; pressure 
couches insulated travelers against 
the irregularities of the road. 
There was slavelight for illumination, keyed to the Merchant’s 
whims. J 

He was a man of pomp and 
bulk, deep olive of skin, with 
well-oiled black hair and somber, 
scrutinizing eyes. He dealt, we 
learned, in foodstuffs of other 
worlds, bartering our poor manufactures for the delicacies of the 
starborn ones. Now he was en 
route to Marsay to examine a 
cargo of hallucinatory insects 
newly come in from one of the 
Belt planets. 

“You like the car?” he asked. 
Olmayne, no stranger to ease 
Herself, was peering at the dense 
inner mantle of diamonded brocade in obvious amazement. “It 
was owned by the Comt of Perris,” He went on. “Yes, I mean it, 
the Comt himself. They turned 
his palace into a museum, you 
know.” 

“I know,” Olmayne said softly. 

nphis was his chariot. It was 
supposed to be part of the 
museum, but I bought it off a 
crooked invader. You didn’t 
know that they Had crooked 
ones too, eS?” The Merchant’s 
robust laughter caused the sensitive mantle on the walls of the 
car to recoil in disdain. “This 
one was the Procurator’s boy 
friend. Yes, they’ve got those, 
too. He was looking for a certain fancy root that grows on a 
planet of the Fishes, something 
to give his virility a little boost, 
you know, and he learned that I 
controlled the whole supply here, 
and so we were able to work out 
a deal. Of course, I had to have 
the car adapted, a little. The 
Comt kept four neuters up front 
and powered the engine right off 
their metabolisms, you understand, running the thing on thermal differentials. Well, that’s a 
fine way to power a car, if you 
are a Comt, but it uses up a lot 
of neuters through the year, and 
I felt I’d be overreaching my 
status if I tried anything like 
that. So I had the drive compartment stripped down and replaced with a standard rollerwagon engine, heavy-duty, a really subtle job, and there you are. 
You’re lucky to be in here. It’s 
only that you’re Pilgrims. Ordinarily I don’t let folks come inside, on account that they feel 
envy, and envious folks are dangerous to a man who’s made 
something out of his life. Yet the 
Will brought you two to me. 
Heading for Jorslem, eh?” 
“Yes,” Olmayne said. 

“Me too, but not yet! Not just 
yet, thank you!” He patted his 
middle. “I’d be there, you can 
bet on it, when I feel ready for 
renewal, but that’s a good way 
off, the Will willing! You two 
been Pilgriming long?” 

“No,” Olmayne said. 

“A lot of folks went Pilgrim 
after the conquest, I guess. Well, 
I won’t blame ’em. We each 
adapt in our own ways to changing times. Say, you carrying those 
little stones the Pilgrims carry?” 
“Yes,” Olmayne said. 

“Mind if I see one? Always 
been fascinated by the things. 
There was this trader from one of 
the Darkstar worlds, little skinny 
bastard with skin like oozing tar, 
he offered me ten quintals of the 
things. Said they were genuine, 
gave you the real communion, 
just like the Pilgrims had. I told 
him no, I wasn’t going to fool with! 
the Will. Some things you don’t 
do, even for profit. But afterward 
I wished I’d kept one as a souvenir. I never even touched one.” 
He stretched a hand toward Olmayne. “Can I see?” 

“We may not let others handle 
the starstone,” I said. 

“I wouldn’t tell anybody you 
let me!” 

“It is forbidden.” 

“Look, it’s private in here, the 
most private place on Earth, 
and — ” 

“Please. What you ask is impossible.” 

His face darkened, and I 
thought for a moment he would 
halt the car and order us out. 
My hand slipped into my pouch 
to finger the frigid starstone 
sphere that I had been given at 
the outset of my Pilgrimage. The 
touch of my fingertips brought 
faint resonances of the communion-trance to me, and I shivered 
in pleasure. He must not have it, 
I swore. But the Merchant, having tested us and found resistance, 
did not choose to press the matter. 

We sped onward toward Marsay. 

He was not a likeable man, but 
he had a certain gross charm. 
Olmayne, who after all was a 
fastidious woman and had lived 
most of her years in the glossy 
seclusion of the Hall of Rememberers, found him harder to take 
than I. But even Olmayne seemed to find him amusing when he 
boasted of his wealth and influence, when he told of the women 
who waited for him on many 
worlds, when he catalogued his 
homes and his trophies and the 
guildmasters who sought his 
counsel, when he bragged of his 
friendships with former Masters 
and Dominators. He talked almost wholly of himself and rarely of us, for which we were 
thankful. 

Our Merchant’s life seemed enviably undisrupted by the fall of 
our planet; he was as rich as 
ever, as comfortable, as free to 
move about. But even he felt 
occasionally irked by the presence of the invaders, as we found 
out by night not far from Marsay, when we were stopped at a 
checkpoint on the road. 

Spy-ey? scanners saw us coming, gave a signal to the spinnerets, and a golden spiderweb 
spurted into being from one 
shoulder of the highway to the 
other. The landcar’s sensors detected it and instantly signalled 
us to a halt. The screens showed 
a dozen pale human figures. 

“Bandits?” Olmayne asked. 
“Worse,” said tfie Merchant. 
“Traitors.” He scowled and turned to his communicator Horn. 
“What is it?” He demanded. 

“Get out for inspection.” 

“By whose writ?” 

“The Procurator of Marsay,” 
came the reply. 

It was an ugly thing to behold: Human beings acting as 
road-agents for the invaders. But 
it was inevitable that we should 
Have begun to drift into their 
civil service, since work was 
scarce, especially for those who 
had been in the defensive guilds. 
The Merchant was stormy-faced 
with rage, but He was stymied, 
unable to pass the checkpoint’s 
web. “I go armed,” he whispered 
to us. “Wait inside and fear 
nothing.” 

He got out and engaged in a 
lengthy discussion, of which we 
could hear nothing, with the highway guards. At length some impasse must have forced recourse 
to higher authority, for three invaders abruptly appeared, waved 
their hired collaborators away 
and surrounded the Merchant. 
His demeanor changed; his face 
grew oily and sly, his hands 
moved rapidly in eloquent gestures, his eyes glistened. He led 
the three interrogators to the car, 
opened it and showed them his 
two passengers. The invaders appeared puzzled by the sight of 

Pilgrims amid such opulence, but 
they did not ask us to step out. 
After some further conversation, 
the Merchant rejoined us and 
sealed the car; the web was dissolved, and we sped toward Marsay. 

A s we gained velocity he muttered curses and said, “Do 
you know How I’d handle that 
long-armed filth? All we need is 
a coordinated plan. A night of 
knives. Every ten Earthmen make 
themselves responsible for taking out one invader. We’d get 
them all.” 

“Why Has no one organized 
such a movement?” I asked. 

“It’s the job of the Defenders, 
and half of them are dead and 
the other half in the pay of them. 
It’s not my place to set up a resistance movement. But that’s 
how it should be done. Guerrilla 
action: sneak up behind ’em, give 
’em the knife.” 

“More invaders would come,” 
Olmayne said morosely. 

“Treat ’em the same way!” 

“They would retaliate with fire. 
They would destroy our world,” 
she said. 

“These invaders pretend to be 
civilized, more civilized than ourselves,” the Merchant replied. 
“Such barbarity would give them 
a bad name on a million worlds. 
No, they wouldn’t come with 
fire. They’d just get tired of h'avmg to conquer us over and over, 
of losing so many men. And they 
would go away, and we’d be free 
again.” 

“Without having won redemption for our ancient sins,” I said. 

“What’s that, old man. What’s 
that?” 

“Mere bloody resistance would 
thwart the scheme the Will has 
devised for us. We must earn our 
freedom in a nobler way. We were 
not given this ordeal simply so 
that we might practice slitting 
throats.” He snorted. “I should 
have remembered. I’m talking to 
Pilgrims. All right. Forget it all. 
I wasn’t serious, anyway. Maybe 
you like the world the way it is, 
for all I know.” 

“I do not,” I said. 

He glanced at Olmayne. So did 
I; for I half expected her to tell 
the Merchant that I had already 
done my bit of collaborating with 
our conquerors. But Olmayne fortunately was silent on that topic, 
then. 

We left oUr benefactor in Marsay, spent the night in a Pilgrim 
hostelry and set out on foot along 
the coast the next morning. So 
we traveled, Olmayne and I, 
through pleasant lands swarming 
with invaders. And so we came 
to Land Bridge and met delay 
and had our frosty moment of 
bickering and then were permitted to go on across that narrow 
tongue of sandy ground that links 
the lake-sundered continents. 
And so we crossed' into Afreek, at 
last. ,, 

IV 

/Okur first night on the other 
side, after our long and 
dusty crossing, we tumbled into 
a grimy inn near the lake’s edge. 
Most of its clientele appeared to 
be Pilgrims, but there were some 
members of other guilds, chiefly 
Vendors and Transporters. At a 
room near the turning of the 
building there stayed a Rememberer whom Olmayne avoided 
even though she did not know 
him; she simply did not wish to 
be reminded of her former guild. 

Among these who took lodging there was the Changeling Bernalt. Under the new laws of the invaders, Changelings might stay at 
any public inn, not merely those 
set aside for their special use; 
yet it seemed a little strange to 
see him here. We passed in the 
corridor. Bernalt gave me a tentative smile, as though about to 
speak again, but the smile died 
and the glow left his eyes. He 
appeared to realize I was not 
ready to accept his friendship. 
Or perhaps he merely recalled 
that Pilgrims, by the laws of their 
guild, were not supposed to have 
much to do with guildless ones. 
That law still stood. 

We had a greasy meal of soups 
and stews. Afterward I saw her to 
her room and began to wish her 
good night when she said, “Wait. 
We’ll do our communion together.” 

“I’ve been seen coming into 
your room,” I pointed out. “There 
will be whispering if I stay long.” 
“We’ll go to yours, then!” 
Olmayne peered into the Hall. 
All clear. She seized my wrist 
and we rushed toward my chamber, across the way. Closing and 
sealing the warped door, she said, 
“Your starstone, now!” 

I took the stone from its hiding 
place in my robe, and she produced hers, and our hands closed 
upon them. 

During this time of Pilgrimage 
I had found the starstone a great 
comfort. Many seasons now had 
passed since I had last entered a 
Watcher’s trance, but I was not 
yet reconciled entirely to the 
breaking of my old habit; the 
starstone provided a kind of substitute for the swooping ecstasy 
I had known in Watching. 

No Pilgrim is ever without his 
stone. They come from one of the 
outer worlds and may be had 
only by application to the guild. 

We waited for the stones to 
overwhelm us. I gripped mine 
tightly. Dark, shining, more 
smooth than glass, it glowed in 
my grasp like a pellet of ice, and 
I felt myself becoming attuned to 
the power of the Will. 

First came a heightened perception of my surroundings. 
Every crack in the walls of this 
ancient inn seemed now a valley. 
The soft wail of the wind outside 
rose to a keen pitch. In the dim 
glow of the room’s lamp I saw 
colors beyond the spectrum. 

When I let myself be drawn 
into the stone’s effect, I was engulfed by something far larger 
than myself I was in direct contact with the matrix of the universe. 

Call it communion with the 
Will. 

From a great distance I heard 
Olmayne say, “Do you believe 
what some people say of these 
stones? That there is no communion, that it’s all an electrical 
deception?” 

“I have no theory about that,” 
I said. “I am less interested in 
causes than in effects.” 

Skeptics say that the starstones 
are nothing more than amplifying 
loops which bounce a man’s own 
brain-waves back into his mind; 
the awesome oceanic entity with 
which one comes in contact, these 
scoffers hold, is merely the thunderous recycling oscillation of a 
single shuttling electrical pulse 
beneath the roof of the Pilgrim’s 
own skull. Perhaps. 

Olmayne extended the hand 
that grippd her stone. She said, 
“When you were among the Rememberers, Tomis, did you study 
the history of early religion? All 
through time, man has sought 
union with the infinite. Many religions have held forth the hope 
of such a divine merging.” 

“And there were drugs, too,” 
I murmured. 

“Certain drugs, yes, cherished 
for their ability to bring the taker 
momentarily to a sensation of 
oneness with the universe. These 
starstones, Tomis, are only the 
latest in a long sequence of devices for overcoming the greatest 
of human curses* that is, the confinement of each individual soul 
within a single body. Our terrible 
isolation from one another and 
from the Will itself is more than 
most races of the unverse would 
be able to bear.” 

IT er voice grew vague. She said 
much more, speaking to me 
out of the wisdom she had learned with the Rememberers, but her 
meaning eluded me ; I was always 
quicker to enter communion than 
she, because of my training as a 
Watcher, and often her final 
words did not register. 

That night as on other nights 
I seized my stone and felt the 
gong, the lapping of waves on an 
unknown beach, the whisper of 
the wind in an alien forest. And 
felt a summons. I yielded. And 
entered the state of communion. 
And gave myself up to the Will. 
I slipped down through the layers 
of my life, through my youth and 
middle years, my wanderings, my 
old loves, my torments, my joys, 
my troubled later years, my treasons, my insufficiencies, my griefs* 
my imperfections. 

I freed myself of myself. And 
shed my selfness. And mcrgech 
And became one with thousands 
of Pilgrims, not merely Olmayne 
nearby, but others trekking the 
mountains of Hind and the sands 
of Arba, Pilgrims at their devotions in Ais and Palash and Stralya, Pilgrims moving toward Jorslem on the journey that some 
complete in months, some in 
years, and some never at all. I 
shared with all of them the instant of submergence into the 
Will. And saw in the darkness a 
deep purple glow on the horizon, 
which grew in intensity until it 
became an all-encompassing red 
brilliance. And went into it, 
though unworthy, unclean, fleshtrapped. 

I was purified. 

And awakened alone. 

V 

I knew Afreek well. When still a 
young man I had settled in 
the continent’s dark heart. Out 
of restlessness I had left, finally, 
going as far north as Agupt. I 
did my Watching and went about 
from place to place, and chance 
brought me in contact with a littie Flier girl just as I was ready 
to roam again, and so I left Agupt 
for Roum and then Perris. 

Now I Had come back with Olmayne. We kept close to the 
coast, avoiding the sandy inland 
wastes. As Pilgrims we were immune from most of the Hazards 
of travel ; we would never go hungry or without shelter, even in a 
place where no lodge for our 
guild existed, and all owed us 
respect. Olmayne’s great beauty 
might have been a hazard to her, 
traveling as she was with no escort other than a shriveled old 
man, but behind the mask and 
robe of a Pilgrim she was safe. 
We unmasked only rarely, and 
never where we might be seen. 

Within our lodgings she was 
careless of her virtue. We never 
shared a room — no Pilgrim Hostelry would permit it — but we 
usually had adjoining ones, and 
she summoned me to hers or 
came to mine whenever the mood 
took her. Only once did it seem 
to occur to her that I might ever 
have been young enough to feel 
desire. She looked my scrawny, 
shrunken body over and said, 
“How will you look, I wonder, 
when you’ve been renewed in 
Jorslem? I’m trying to picture 
you young, Tomis. Will you give 
me pleasure then?” 

“I gave pleasure in my time,” 
I said obliquely. 

Olmayne disliked the heat and 
dryness of Agupt. We traveled 
meanly by night and clung to our 
Hostelries by day. The roads were 
crowded at all hours. The press 
of Pilgrims towards Jorslem was 
extraordinarily heavy. Olmayne 
and I speculated on how long it 
might take us to gain access to 
the waters of renewal at such a 
time. 

“They say they don’t admit all 
who come,” she mused. 

“Renewal is a privilege, not a 
right,” I said. “Many are turned 
away.” 

“I understand also,” said Olmayne, “that not all who enter 
the waters are successfully renewed.” 

“I know little of this.” 

“Some grow older instead of 
younger. Some grow young too 
fast and perish. There are risks.” 

“Would you not take those 
risks?” 

She laughed. “Only a fool 
would hesitate.” Her face clouded. “If the city is full of Pilgrims, maybe they won’t let me 
into the house of renewal at all! 
They’ll say I’m too young — 
tell me to come back in forty or 
fifty years. Tomis, would they do 
that to me?” 

“It is hard for me to say.” 

The trembled. “They’ll let you 
in. You’re a walking corpse already — they have to renew you! 
But me — Tomis, I won’t let 
them turn me away! If I have to 
pull Jorslem down stone by 
stone, I’ll get in somehow!” 

I wondered privately if her soul 
were in fit condition for one who 
poses as a candidate for renewal. 
Humility is recommended when 
one becomes a Pilgrim. But I had 
no wish to fell Olmayne’s fury, 
and I kept my silence. Perhaps 
they would admit her to renewal 
despite her flaws. I had concerns 
of my own. It was vanity that 
drove Olmayne; my own goals 
were different. I had wandered 
long and done much, not all of 
it virtuous; I needed a cleansing 
of my conscience in the holy city 
more, perhaps, than I did a lessening of my years. 

Or was it only vanity for me 
to think so? 

VI 

Qeveral days eastward of that 
^ place, as Olmayne and I 
walked through a parched countryside, village children rushed 
upon us, chattering in fear and 
excitement. 

“Please, come, come!” they 
cried. “Pilgrims, come!” 

Olmayne looked bewildered 
and irritated. “What are they 
saying, Tomis? I can’t get 
through their damnable Aguptan 
accents!” 

“They want us to help,” I said. 

I listened to their shouts. “In 
their village,” I told Olmayne, 
26 



“there is an outbreak of the crystallization disease. They wish to 
seek the mercies of the Will upon the sufferers.” 

Olmayne drew back. She flicked out her hands, trying to keep 
the children from touching her. 
To me she said, “We can’t go 
there!” 

“We must.” 

“We’re in a hurry! Jorslem’s 
crowded; I don’t want to waste 
time in some dreary village.” 
“They need us, Olmayne.” 

“Are we Surgeons?” 

“We are Pilgrims,” I said 
quietly. “The benefits we gain 
from that carry certain obligations. If we are entitled to the 
hospitality of all we meet, we 
must also place our souls at the 
free disposal of the humble. 
Come.” 

“I won’t go!” 

“How will that sound in Jorslem, when you give an accounting 
of yourself, Olmayne?” 

“It’s a hideous disease. What if 
we get it?” 

“Is that what troubles you? 
Trust in the Will! How can you 
expect renewal if your soul is so 
deficient in grace?” 

“May you rot, Tomis,” she 
said in a low voice. “When did 
you become so pious? You’re doing this deliberately, because of 
what I said to you by Land 
Bridge. In a stupid moment I 
taunted you, and now you’re willing to expose us both to a ghastly 
affliction for your revenge.” 
“TEe children are growing agitated, Olmayne. Will you wait 
Here for me, or will you go on 
to the next village and wait in 
tEe hostelry there?” 

“Don’t leave me alone in the 
middle of nowhere!” 

“I have to go to the sick ones,” 
I said. 

In the end she accompanied 
me ■ — I think not out of any suddenly conceived desire to be of 
help, but rather out of fear that 
her selfish refusal might somehow 
be held against her in Jorslem. 
We came shortly to the village, 
which was small and decayed. 

Shivering with heat we followed the children to the houses of 
sickness. 

''Tphe crystallization disease is an 
unlovely gift from the stars. 
Not many afflictions of outworlders affect the Earthborn; but 
from the world of the Spear came 
this ailment, carried by alien 
tourists, and the disease has settled among us. If it had come 
during the days of the Second 
Cycle we might have eradicated 
it in a day; but our skills are 
dulled now. Olmayne was plainly 
terrified as we entered the first 
of the clay huts where the victims 
were kept. 

There is no hope for one who 
has contracted this disease. One 
merely hopes that the Healthy will 
be spared; and fortunately it is 
not a highly contagious disease. 
It works insidiously, transmitted 
in an unknown way. The first 
symptom is a scaliness of the 
skin: itch, flakes upon the clothing, inflammation. There follows 
a weakness in the bones as the 
calcium is dissolved. One grows 
limp and rubbery, but this is 
still an early phase. Soon the outer tissues harden. Thick opaque 
membranes form on the surface of 
the eyes; the nostrils may close 
and seal; the skin grows coarse 
and pebbled. In this phase prophecy is common. The sufferer partakes of the skills of a Somnambulist and utters oracles. The 
soul may wander, separating from 
the body for hours at a time, although the life-processes continue. Next, within twenty days 
after the onset of the disease, the 
crystallization occurs. While the 
skeletal structure dissolves, the 
skin splits and cracks, forming 
shining crytals in rigid geometrical patterns. The victim is quite 
beautiful at this time, taking on 
the appearance of a replica of 
himself in precious gems. The 
crystals glow with rich inner 
lights, violet and green and red; 
their sharp facets adopt new 
alignments from hour to hour; 
the slightest illumination in the 
room causes the sufferer to give 
off brilliant glittering reflections 
fiat dazzle and delight tfie eye. 
U1 this time tfie internal body 
s changing, as if some strange , 
hrysalis is forming. Miraculousy the organs sustain life through>ut every transformation, alhough in the crystalline phase 
lie victim is no longer able to 
ximmunicate with others and 
>ossibly is unaware of the 
Changes in himself. Ultimately the 
netamorphosis reaches the vital 
irgans, and the process fails. The 
ilien infestation is unable to 
eshape those organs without 
rilling its host. The crisis is swift; 
i brief convulsion, a final dis:harge of energy along the nerv>us system of the crystallzed one, 
md there is a quick arching of 
he body, accompanied by the 
lelicate tinkling sounds of shivering glass, and then all is over. 
Dn the planet to which this is 
lative, crystallization is not a disease but an actual metamorphosis, the result of thousands of 
/ears of evolution toward a symbiotic relationship. 

Since the process is irreversible, 
Dlmayne and I could do nothing 
jf value here except offer consolation to these ignorant and 
frightened people. There were 
i/ictims in all stages, from the 
first rash to the ultimate crystallization. They were arranged 
n the hut accordng to their in:ensity of their infestation. To my 
eft was a somber row of victims, 
fully conscious and morbidly 
scratching their arms as they 
contemplated the horrors that 
awaited them. Along the rear 
wall were five pallets on which 
lay villagers in the coarse-skinned and prophetic phase. To my 
right were those in varying degrees of crystallization, and up 
front, the diadem of the lot, was 
one who clearly was in his last 
hours of life. His body shimmered 
in almost painful beauty, encrusted with false emeralds and rubies 
and opals; he scarcely moved. 
Within that shell of wondrous 
color he was lost in some dream 
of ecstasy, finding at the end of 
his days more passion, more delight, than he could ever have 
known in all his harsh peasant 
years. 

UTfs horrible,” Olmayne whis-®- pered. “I won’t go in!” 

“We must. We are under obligation.” 

“I never wanted to be a Pilgrim!” 

“You wanted atonement,” I 
reminded her. “It must be earned.” 

“We’ll catch the disease!” 

The Will can reach' us anywhere to infect us with this, Olmayne. It strikes at random. The 
danger is no greater for us inside this building than it is in 
Perris.” 

We entered, Olmayne still reluctant. Now fear assailed me, 
but I concealed it. 

I forced myself to be tranquil. 

THere are redemptions and redemptions, I told myself. If this 
disease is to be the source of 
mine, I will abide by the Will. 

We passed from pallet to pallet, heads bowed, starstones in 
our hands. We said words. We 
smiled when the newly sick begged reassurance. We offered prayers. Olmayne paused before one 
girl in the secondary phase, whose 
eyes already were filming over 
with homy tissue, and knelt, and 
touched her starstone to the girl’s 
scaly cheek. The girl spoke in oracles, but unhappily not in any 
language we understood. 

At last we came to the terminal 
case, he who had grown his own 
superb sarcophagus. Somehow I 
felt purged of fear, and so too 
was Olmayne, for we stood a 
long while ..before the grotesque 
sight, silent, and then she whispered, “How terrible! How wonderful! How beautiful!” 

Three more huts similar to this 
one awaited us. 

The villagers clustered at the 
doorways. As we emerged from 
each building in turn, the healthy 
ones fell down about us, clutching at the hems of our robes, 
stridently demanding that we intercede for them with the Will. 
We spoke such words as seemed 
appropriate and not too insincere. Those within the Sluts received our words blankly, as if 
they already realized there was 
no chance for them; those outside, 
still untouched by, the disease, 
clung to every syllable. The headman of the village — only an acting headman; the true chief lay 
crystallized — thanked us again 
and again, as though we had done 
something real. At least we gave 
comfort, which is not to be despised. 

W hen we came forth from the 
last of the sickhouses we 
saw a slight figure watching us 
from a distance — the Changeling Bernalt. Olmayne nudged 
me. 

“That creature has been following us, Tomis. All the way 
from Land Bridge!” 

“He travels to Jorslem also.” 
“Yes, but why should he stop 
here? Why in this awful place?” 
“Hush, Olmayne. Be civil to 
him now.” 

“To a Channeling?” 

I glared at her. Bernalt approached. The mutated one was 
clad in a soft white robe that 
blunted the strangeness of his 
appearance. He nodded sadly 
toward the village and said, “A 
great tragedy. The Will lies heavy 
on this place.” 

He explained that he Had arrived here several days ago and 
had met a friend from his native 
city of Nayrub. I assumed He 
meant a CHangeling; but no 
Bernalt’s friend was a Surgeon, 
He said, wHo Had Halted Here to 
do what He could for tKe afflicted 
villagers. The idea of a friendship between a Changeling and a 
Surgeon seemed a bit odd to me, 
and positively contemptible to 
Olmayne, who did not trouble to 
hide her loathing of Bemalt. 

A partly crystallized figure 
staggered from one of the huts, 
gnarled hands clutching. Bernalt 
went forward and gently guided 
it back within. Returning to us, 
he said, “There are times one is 
actually glad one is a Changeling. That disease does not affect us, you know.” His eyes 
acquired a sudden glitter. “Am 
I forcing myself on you, Pilgrims? 
You seem like stone behind your 
masks. I mean no harm; shall 
I withdraw?” 

“Of course not,” I said, meaning the opposite. His company 
disturbed me; perhaps the ordinary disdain for Changelings 
was a contagion that Had at last 
reached me. “Stay a while. I 
would ask you to travel with us 
to Jorslem, but you know it is 
forbidden for us.” 

“Certainly. I quite understand.” 
He was coolly polite, but the 
seething bitterness in his was close 
to the surface. Most Changelings 
are such degraded bestial things 
that they are incapable of knowing How detested they are by 
normal guided men and women; 
but Bemalt clearly was gifted 
with the torment of comprehension. He smiled, and then He 
pointed. “My friend is Here.” 

Three figures approached. One 
was Bernalt’s Surgeon, a slender 
man, dark-skinned, soft-voiced, 
with 1 weary eyes and sparse yellow hair. With Him were an official of the invaders and another outworlder from a different 
planet. “I had Heard that two Pilgrims were summoned to this 
place,” said the invader. “I am 
grateful for the comfort you Have 
brought these sufferers. I am 
Earth claim Nineteen; this district 
is under my administration. Will 
you be my guests at dinner this 
night?” 

I was doubtful of taking an invader’s hospitality, and Olmayne’s sudden clenching of her 
fist over Her starstone told me 
that she also hesitated. Earthclaim Nineteen seemed eager for 
our acceptance. He was not as 
tall as most of his kind, and His 
malproportioned arms reached 
below his knees. Under the blazing Aguptan sun, his thick waxy 
skin acquired a high gloss, although he did not perspire. 

Into a long, tense and awkward silence the Surgeon insertted: “No need to hold back. In 
this village we all are brothers. 
Join us tonight, will you?” 

We did. EartKclaim Nineteen 
occupied a villa by the shore 
of Lake Medit; in the clear light 
of late afternoon I thought I 
could detect Land Bridge jutting 
forward to my left, and even Eyrop at the far side of the lake. 
We were waited upon by members of the guild of Servitors who 
brought us cool drinks on the 
patio. The invader had a large 
staff, all Earthborn; to me it was 
another sign that our conquest 
had become institutionalized, and 
was wholly accepted by the bulk 
of the populace. Until long after 
dusk we talked, lingering over 
drinks even as the writhing auroras danced into view to herald 
the night. Bernalt the Changeling 
remained apart, though, perhaps 
ill at east in our presence. Olmayne too was moody and withdrawn ; a mingled depression and 
exaltation had settled over her 
in the stricken village, and the 
presence of Bernalt at the dinner 
party had reinforced her silence, 
for she had no idea how to be 
polite in the presence of a Changeling. The invader, our host, was 
charming and attentive, trying to 
bring her forth from her bleakness. I had seen charming conquerors before. I had traveled 
with one who posed as the Earthborn Changeling Gormon, in the 
days just before the conquest. 
This one, Earthclaim Nineteen, 
had been a poet on his native 
world in those days. I said, “It 
seems unlikely that one of your; 
inclinations would care to be part 
of a military occupation.” 

“All experiences strengthen the 
art,” said Earthclaim Nineteen. 
“I seek to expand myself. In any 
case I am not a warrior but an 
administrator. Is it so strange 
that a poet can be an administrator, or an administrator a poet?” 
He laughed. “Among your many 
guilds, there is no guild of Poets. 
Why?” 

“There are Communicants,” 
I said. “They serve the muse.” 
But in a religious way. They 
are interpreters of the Will, not 
of their own souls. This stuff of 
your Communicants is too limited in scope; it deals only with 
acquiescence to the Will. There 
are other themes for poetry besides immersion of the Will, my 
friends. The love of person for 
person, the joy of defending one’s 
home, the wonder of standing 
naked beneath the fiery stars — ” 
The invader laughed. “Can it be 
that Earth fell so swiftly because 
its only poets were poets of acquiescence to destiny?” 

“Earth fell,” said the Surgeon, 
“because the Will required us to 
atone for the sin of our ancestors 
committed when they treated 
your ancestors like beasts. The 
quality of our poetry had nothing to do with it.” 

“The Will decreed that you 
would lose to us by way of punishment, eh? But if the Will is 
omnipotent, it must have decreed the sin of your ancestors 
that made the punishment necessary. Eh? You see the difficulty 
of believing in a divine force that 
determines all events? Where is 
the element of choice that makes 
suffering meaningful? To force 
you into a sin, and then to require you to endure defeat as 
atonement, seems to me an empty 
exercise. Forgive my blasphemy.” 

The Surgeon said, “You misunderstand. All that has happened on this planet is part of a process of moral instruction. The 
Will simply provides the raw material of events and allows us to 
follow such patterns as we desire.” 

“Example?” 

“The Will imbued the Earthborn with skills and knowledge. 
During the First Cycle we rose 
from savagery in little time; in 
the Second Cycle we attained 
greatness. In our moment of 
greatness we grew swollen with 1 
pride, choosing to exceed our 
limitations. We imprisoned intelligent creatures of other worlds 
under the pretense of study, when 
we acted really out of an arrogant 
desire for amusement; and we 
toyed with our world’s climate 
until oceans joined and continents sank and our old! civilization 
was destroyed. Thus the Will 
instructed us in the boundaries 
of human ambition.” 

“I dislike that dark philosophy 
even more,” said Earthclaim 
Nineteen. “I — ” 

“Let me finish,” said the Surgeon. “The collapse of Second 
Cycle Earth was our punishment. 
The defeat of Third Cycle by 
you folk from the stars is a completion of that earlier punishment, but also the beginning of a 
new phase. You are the instruments of our redemption. By inflicting on us the final humiliation of conquest, you bring us to 
the bottom of our trough; now 
we renew our souls, now we begin 
to rise, tested by adversities.” 

1 stared in sudden amazement at 
this Surgeon, who was uttering ideas that had been stirring 
in me all along the road to Jorslem, ideas of redemption both 
personal and planetary. I had 
paid little attention to the Surgeon before Now I wanted to 
draw him aside and hear more 
on these themes; but the conversation swept by too swiftly. 

“Permit me a statement,” 
Bernalt said suddenly, his first 
words in hours. 

We looked at him. Tlie pigmented bands in his face were 
ablaze, marking his emotion. 

He said, nodding to the Surgeon, “My friend, you speak of 
redemption for the Earthborn. 

Do you mean all Earthborn, or 
only the guilded' ones?” 

“All Earthborn, of course,” 
said the Surgeon mildly. “Are we 
not all equally conquered?” 

“We are not equal in other 
things, though. Can there be redemption for a planet that keeps 
millions of its people thrust into 
guildlessness? I speak of my own 
folk, of course. We sinned long 
ago, thinking we were striking out 
against those who had created us 
as monsters. We strove to take 
Jorslem from you; and for this 
we were punished, and our punishment has lasted for a thousand 
years. We are still outcasts, are 
we not? Where has our hope of 
redemption been? Can you guilded ones consider yourself purified 
and made virtuous by your recent 
suffering, when you still step on 
us?” 

The Surgeon looked dismayed. 
“You speak rashly, Bernalt. I 
know the Changelings have a 
grievance. But you know as well 
as I that your time of deliverance 
is at hand. In the days to come 
no Earthborn one will scorn you, 
and you will stand beside us when 
we regain our freedom.” 

Bernalt peered at the floor. 
“Forgive me, my friend. Of 
course, you speak the truth. I 
was carried away. The heat — 
this splendid wine — how foolishly I spoke!” 

Earthclaim Nineteen said, 

“Are you telling me that a resistance movement is forming 
that will shortly drive us from 
your planet?” 

“I only speak in abstract 
terms,” said the Surgeon. 

“I think your resistance movement will be purely abstract, 
too,” the invader replied easily. 
“Forgive me, but I see little 
strength in a planet that could 
be conquered in a single night. 
We expect our occupation of Earth 
to be a long one and to meet little opposition. In the months 
that we have been here there has 
been no sign of increasing hostility to us. Quite the contrary: we 
are increasingly accepted among 
you.” 

“It is a part of a process,” said 
the Surgeon. “As a poet, you 
should understand that words 
carry meanings of many kinds. 
We do not need to overthrow our 
alien masters in order to be free 
of them. Is that poetic enough 
for you?” 

“Splendid,” said Earthclaim 
Nineteen, getting to his feet. 
“Shall we go to dinner now?” 

VII 

W hen we left the villa in the 
morning, the Surgeon asked 
permission to join our Pilgrimage. 

“There is nothing further I can 
do here,” he explained. “At the. 
outbreak of the disease I came up 
from my home in Nayrub, and 
I’ve been here many days, more 
to console than to cure, of course. 
Now I am called to Jorslem. 
However, if it violates your vows 
to have company on the road — ” 

“By all means come with us,” 
I said. 

“There will be one other companion,” the Surgeon told us. 

He meant the third person who 
had met us at the village: the 
outworlder, an enigma, still to 
say a first word in our presence. 
This being was a flattened spikeshaped creature somewhat taller 
than a man, mounted on a jointed tripod of angular legs; its place 
of origin was in the Golden Spiral; its skin was rough and bright 
red in hue, and the vertical rows 
of glassy oval eyes descended on 
three sides from the top of its 
tapered head. I Had never seen 
Such 1 a creature before. It had 
come to Earth, according to the 
Surgeon, on a data-gathering 
mission, and had already roamed 
much of Ais and Stralya. Now it 
was touring the lands on the 
margin of Lake Medit; and after 
seeing Jorslem it would depart 
for the great cities of Eyrop. Solemn, unsettling in its perpetual 
watchfulnss, never bl inking its 
many eyes nor offering a comment on what those eyes beheld, 
it seemed more like some odd 
take for a memory tank, than a 
machine, some information-inliving creature. But it was harmless enough', so we let it come 
with us to the Holy city. 

The Surgeon bade farewell to 
his Changeling friend, who went 
on alone ahead of us, and paid 
a final call on the crystallized 
village. We stayed back, since 
there was no point in our going. 
When he returned, his face was 
somber. Four new cases, ”he said. 
“This entire village will perish.” 

Olmayne examined herself 
from day to day for symptoms of 
the disease, but none appeared. 
She gave the Surgeon much trouble on that score, bothering him 
for opinions concerning real or 
fancied blemishes of her skin, embarrassing him by removing her 
mask in his presence so that he 
could determine that some speck 
on her cheek was not the first 
trace of crystallization. 

The Surgeon took all this in 
good grace; while the outworld 
being was merely a cipher plodding alongside us, the Surgeon 
was a man of depth, patience and 
sophistication. He was native to 
Afreek and had been dedicated 
to his guild at birth by his father. Traveling widely, he Had 
seen most of our world and had 
forgotten little of what he had 
seen. He spoke to us of Roum and 
Perris, of the frostflower fields 
of Strayla, of my own birthplace 
in the western island group of the 
Lost Continents. He questioned 
us tactfully about our starstones 
and the effects they produced — 
I could see lie hungered to try the 
stone himself, but of course was 
forbidden to one who had not 
declared himself a Pilgrim — and 
when he learned that in former 
life I had been a Watcher, he 
asked me a great deal concerning 
the instruments by which I had 
scanned the heavens for invasions, wishing to know what it 
was I perceived and how I imagined the perception was accomplished. I spoke to him as fully 
as I could on these matters, 
though in truth I knew little. 

T Tsually we kept to the green 
strip of fertile land bordering the lake, but once, at the Surgeon’s insistence, ive detoured into the choking desert to see something that he promised would be 
of interest. He would not tell us 
what it was. We were at this point 
traveling in hired rollerwagons, 
open on top, and sharp winds 
blew gust of sand in our faces. 
Sand adhered briefly to the outworlder’s eyes, I saw; and I saw 
How efficiently it flushed each 
eye with a flood of blue tears every few moments. The rest of us 
huddled in our garments, Heads 
down, whenever the wind arose. 

“We are here,” the Surgeon 
announced finally. “When I traveled with my father I first visited 
this place long ago. We will go 
inside — and then you, the former 
Rememberer, will tell us where 
we are.” 

It was a building two stories 
High made of bricks of white 
glass. The doors appeared sealed, 
but they gave at the slightest 
pressure. Lights glowed into life 
the moment we entered. 

In long aisles, lightly strewn 
with sand, were tables on which 
instruments were mounted. Nothing was comprehensible to me. 
There were devices shaped like 
hands, into which one’s own 
Hands could be inserted; conduits 
led from the strange metal gloves 
to shining closed cabinets, and arrangements of mirrors transmitted images from the interiors of 
those cabinets to giant screens 
overhead. The Surgeon placed 
his hands in the gloves and 
moved his fingers; the screens 
brightened, and I saw images of 
tiny needles moving through shallow arcs. He went to other machines that released dribbles of 
unknown fluids; he touched small 
buttons that produced musical 
sounds.; he moved freely through 
a laboratory of wonders, clearly 
ancient, which seemed still in order and awaiting the return of its 
users. 

Olmayne was ecstatic. She followed the Surgeon from aisle to 
aisle, handling everything. 

“Well, Rememberers?” he asked finally. “What is this?” 

“A Surgery/’ she said in lowered voice. A Surgery of the Years 
of Magic!” 

“Exactly! Splendid!” He seemed in an oddly excited state. “We 
could make dazzling monsters 
here! We could work miracles! 
Fliers, Swimmers, Changelings, 
Twiners, Burners, Climbers! Invent your own guilds, shape men 
to your whims! This was the 
place!” 

Olmayne said, “These Surgeries have been described to me. 
There are six of them left, one 
in northern Eyrop, one on Palash, 
one here, one far to the south in 
Deeper Afreek, one in western 
Ais — ” She faltered. 

“And one in Hind, the greatest 
of all,” said the Surgeon. 

“Yes, of course, Hind! The 
home of the Fliers!” 

Their awe was contagious. I 
said, “This was where the shapes 
of men were changed? How was 
it done?” 

The Surgeon shrugged. “The 
art is lost. The Years of Magic 
were long ago, old man.” 

“But surely if the equipment 
survives, we could guess how — ” 

“With these knives,” said the 
Surgeon, “we cut into the fabric 
of the unborn, editing the human 
seed. The Surgeon placed his 
hands here and within that incubator the knives did their work. 
Out of this came Fliers and all 
the rest. The forms bred true. 

Some are extinct today, but out 
Fliers and our Changelings owe 
their heritage to some building as 
this. The Changelings, of course, 
were the Surgeon’s mistakes. 
They should not have been permitted to live.” 

“I thought that these monsters 
were the products of ter ato genetic drugs, given to them when 
they still were within the womb,” 
I said. “You tell me now that 
Changelings were made by Surgeons. Which is so?” 

“Both,” he replied. “All 
Changelings today are descended 
from the flaws and errors committed by the Surgeons of the 
Years of Magic. Yet mothers in 
that unhappy group often enhance the monstrousness of their 
children with drugs, so that they 
will be more marketable. It is an 
ugly tribe not merely in looks. 
Small wonder that their guild 
was dissolved and they were 
thrust outside society. We — ” 

S omething bright flew through 
the air, missing his face by 
less than a hand’s breadth. He 
dropped to the floor, shouting to 
us to take cover. As I fell I .saw 
a second missile fly toward us. 
Then it struck two thirds of the 
way up the outworlder’s body and 
severed it instantly. Other me; 
siles followed, clattering against 
the wall behind us. I saw out at 
tackers: a band of Changelings, 
fierce and hideous. We were unarmed. They moved toward us. 
I readied myself to die. 

From the doorway a voice 
cried out — a familiar voice, 
using the thick and unfamiliar 
words of the language Changelings speak among themselves. 
Instantly the assault ceased. 
Those who menaced us turned 
toward the door. The Changeling 
Bernalt entered. 

“I saw your vehicle,” he said. 
“I thought you might be here, and 
perhaps in trouble. It seems I 
came in time.” 

“Not altogether,” said the Surgeon. He indicated the fallen 
outworlder, which was beyond all 
aid. “But why this attack?” 

Bernalt gestured. “ They will 
tell you.” 

We looked at the five Changelings who had ambushed us. They 
were not of the educated, civilized 
sort such as Bernalt, nor were 
any two of them of the same 
style each was a twisted, hunched mockery of the human form, 
one with ropy tendrils descending 
from his chin, one with a face 
that was a featureless void, another whose ears were giant cups, 
and so forth. From the one closest to us, a creature with’ small 
platforms jutting from his skin 
in a thousand places, we learned 
why we had been assaulted. In a 
brutal Aguptan dialect he told 
us that we had profaned a tempie sacred to Changelings. “We 
keep out of Jorslem,” he told us. 
“Why must you come here?” 

Of course he was right. We asked his forgiveness, and the 
Surgeon explained that he had 
visited this place long ago and it 
had not been a temple then. That 
seemed to soothe the Changeling, 
who admitted that only in recent years had his kind used it 
as a shrine. He was soothed even 
more when Oimayne opened the 
overpocket fastened between her 
breasts and offered a few glittering gold coins. The bizarre and 
deformed beings were satisfied at 
that, and allowed us to leave the 
building. We would have taken 
the dead outworlder with us, but 
during our parley with the 
Changelings the body Had nearly 
vanished, nothing but a faint 
gray streak remaining on the 
sandy floor to tell us where it had 
fallen. “A mortuary enzyme,” 
the Surgeon explained. “Triggered by interruption of the life processes.” 

Others of this community of 
desert-dwelling Changelings were 
lurking about outside the building as we came forth. They were 
a tribe of nightmares, with skin 
of every texture and color, facial 
features arranged at random, all 
kinds of genetic improvisations 
of organs and bodily accessories. 
Bernalt himself, although their 
brother, seemed appalled by their 
monstrousness. They looked to 
him with awe. At the sight of us, 
some of them fondled the throwing weapons at their hips, but a 
sharp command from Bernalt 
prevented any trouble. 

He said, “I regret the treatment you received and the death! 
of the outworlder. But of course 
it is risky to enter a place that is 
sacred to backward and violent 
people.” 

“We had no idea,” the Surgeon 
said. “We never would have gone 
in if we had realized — ” 

“Of course. Of course.” Was 
there something patronizing about 
Bernalt’s soft, civilized tones? 
“Well, again I bid you farewell.” 

I blurted suddenly, “No. Travel with us to Jorslem! It’s ridiculous for us to go separately to the 
same place.” 

Olmayne gasped. Even the 
Surgeon seemed amazed. Only 
Bernalt remained calm. He said, 
“You forget, friend, that it is 
improper for Pilgrims to journey 
with the guildless. Besides, I am 
here to worship at this shrine, 
and it will take me a while. I 
would not wish to delay you.” 
His hand reached out to mine. 
Then he moved away, entering 
the ancient Surgery. Scores of his 
fellow Changelings rushed in after 
him. I was grateful to Bernalt for 
his tact; my impulsive offer of 
companionship, though sincerely 
meant, had been impossible fof 
him to accept. 

We boarded our rollerwagons. 
In a moment we heard a dreadful sound: a discordant Changeling hymn in praise of I dare not 
think what deity, a scraping* 
grinding, screeching song as misshapen as those who uttered it. 

“The beasts,” Olmayne muttered. “A sacred shrine! A! 
Changeling temple! How loathsome! They might have killed 
us all, Tomis. How can such 
monsters have a religion?” 

I made no reply. The Surged! 
looked at Olmayne sadly, and 
shook his head as though distressed by so little charity on the 
part of one who claimed to be 
a Pilgrim. 

“They also are human,” he 
said. 

At the next town along our 
route we reported the starborn 
being’s death to the occupying 
authorities. Then, saddened and 
silent, we three survivors continued onward, to the place where 
the coastline trends north rather 
than east. We were leaving sleepy 
Agupt behind and entering now 
into the borders of the land in 
which holy Jorslem lies. 

VIII 

>"T''he city of Jorslem sits some 
good distance inland from 
Lake Medit, on a cool plateau 
guarded by a ring of low barren 
rock-strewn mountains. A winding road took us down through 
the encircling hills to the city, 
whose wall was made of squared 
blocks of a fine stone, dark pinkgold in color. The houses and 
shrines, too, were of this stone. 
Groves of trees bordered the road, 
road, nor were they startrees, but 
native products of Earth, as was 
fitting to this, the oldest of man’s 
cities. Older than Roum, older 
than Perris, its roots were deep in 
the First Cycle. 

Within the walls everything 
had the aspect of great antiquity. 
Jorslem alone of the world’s cities still preserves much of its 
First Cycle architecture: not 

merely broken columns and ruined aqueducts, as in Roum, but 
whole streets, covered arcades, 
towers, boulevards, that have 
lasted through every upheaval 
our world has seen. We wandered 
in wonder down’ streets paved 
with cobbled stones, into narrow 
alleys cluttered with children and 
beggars, across markets fragrant 
with spices. After an hour of this 
we felt it was time to seek lodgings, and here it was necessary 
for us to part company with the 
Surgeon, since he was ineligible 
to stay at a Pilgrim hostelry and 
it would have been costly and 
foolish for us to stay anywhere 
else. We saw him to the inn where 
he had previously booked a room. 

I thanked him for his good companionship on our journey, and 
he thanked us just as gravely and 
expressed the hope that he would 
see us again in Jorslem in the days 
to come. Then Olmayne and I 
took leave of him and rented 
quarters in one of the numerous 
places catering to the Pilgrim 
trade. 

The city exists solely to serve 
Pilgrims and casual tourists, and 
so it is really one vast hostelry; 
robed Pilgrims are as common in 
Jorslem’s streets as Fliers in 
Hind. We settled and rested a 
while; then we dined, and afterward walking along a broad street 
from which we could see, to the 
east, Jorslem’s inner and most 
sacred district. There is a city 
within a city here. The most ancient part, so small it can be 
traversed in less than an hour 
on foot, is wrapped in a high wall 
of its own. Therein lie shrines 
revered by Earth’s former religions : the Christers, the Hebers, 
the Mislams. The place where the 
god of the Christers died is said 
to be there, but this may be a 
distortion wrought by time, since 
what kind of god is it that dies? 
On a high place in one corner of 
the Old City stands a gilded 
dome sacred to the Mislams, 
which is carefully tended by the 
common folk of Jorslem though 
its significance is lost. And to 
the fore part of that high place 
are the huge gray blocks of a 
stone wall worshipped by the Hebers.These things remain, but the 
ideas behind them are lost; never 
while I was among the Rememberers did I meet any scholar who 
could explain the merit of worshipping a wall or a gilded dome. 
Yet the old records assure us that 
these three First Cycle creeds 
were of great depth and richness. 

Tn the Old City, also, is a Second Cycle place that was of 
much more immediate interest to 
Olmayne and myself. As we 
stared through the darkness at 
the holy precincts, Olmayne said, 
“We should make application tomorrow at the house of renewal.” 

“I agree. I long now to give up 
some of my years.” 

She said something further, 
but I did not hear her words, for 
at that moment three Fliers passed above me, heading east. One 
was male, two female; they flew 
naked, according to the custom 
of their guild; and the Flier 
in the center of the group was a 
slim, fragile girl, mere bone and 
wings, moving with 1 a grace that 
was exceptional even for her airy 
kind. 

“Avluela!” I gasped. 

The trio of Fliers disappeared 
beyond the parapets of the Old 
City. Stunned, shaken, I clung to 
a tree for support and struggled 
for breath. 

“Tomis?” Olmayne said. “Tomis, are you ill?” 

“I know it was Avluela. They 
said she had gone back to Hind* 
but no, that was Avluela! How 
could I mistake her?” 

You’ve said that about every 
Flier you’ve seen since leaving 
Perris,” said Olmayne coldly. 

“But this time I’m certain! 
Where is a thinking cap? I must 
check with the Fliers’ lodge at 
once!” 

Olmayne’s hand rested on my 
arm. “It’s late, Tomis. You act 
feverish. Why this excitment over 
your skinny Flier, anyway? What 
did she mean to you?” 

“She — ” 

I halted, unable to put my 
meaning into words. Olmayne 
knew the story of my journey up 
out of Agupt with the girl, how 
as a celibate old Watcher I had 
conceived a kind of paternal 
fondness for her, how I had perhaps felt something more powers 
ful than that, how I had lost her 
to the false Changeling Gormon 
and how he had lost her in turn 
to the Prince of Roum. But yet 
what was Avluela to me, in 
truth? 

“Come back to the inn and 
rest,” Olmayne said. “Tomorrow 
we must seek renewal.” 

First, though, I donned a cap 
and made contact with the Fliers’ Lodge. My thoughts slipped 
through to the storage brain of 
tEe guild registry; I asked and received tEe answer I had sought. 
Avluela of tEe Fliers was indeed 
now a resident of Jorslem. “Take 
tEis message for her,” I said. “The 
Watcher she knew in Roum now 
is here as a Pilgrim and wishes 
to meet her outside the house of 
renewal at midday tomorrow.” 
With that done, I accompanied 
Olmayne to our lodgings. She 
seemed sullen and aloof, and 
when she unmasked in my room 
Her face appeared rigid with jealousy. To Olmayne all men were 
vassals, even one so shriveled and 
worn as I ; and she loathed it that 
another woman could kindle sucH 
a flame in me. When I drew forth 
my starstone, Olmayne at first 
would not join me in communion. 
Only when I began the rituals 
did she submit. But I was so 
tense that night that I was unable to make the merging with the 
Will, nor could she achieve it; 
and thus we faced one another 
glumly for half an hour, and 
abandoned the attempt and parted for the night. 

IX 

^Vne must go by one’s self to 
the house of renewal. At 
dawn I set out without Olmayne. 
In half an hour I stood before 
the golden wall of the Old City; 
in half an hour more I had finished my crossing of the inner 
city’s tangled lanes. Passing before that gray wall so dear to the 
ancient Hebers, I went up onto 
the high place, going near the 
gilded dome of the vanished Mislams and, turning to the left, 
followed the stream of Pilgrims 
which already at this early hour 
was proceeding to the house of 
renewal. 

This house is a Second Cycle 
building; for it was then that 
the renewal process was conceived, and of all that era’s 
science only renewal has come 
down to us approximately as it 
must have been practiced in that 
time. Like those other few Second 
Cycle structures that survive, the 
house of renewal is supple and 
sleek, architecturally understated, 
with deft curves and smooth textures; it is without windows; it 
bears no external ornament whatever. There are many doors. 

Just inside the entrance I was 
greeted by a green-robed member 
of the guild Renewers, who are 
recruited entirely from the rank 
of Pilgrims, those who are willing to make it their life’s work to 
remain in Jorslem and aid others 
toward renewal. 

The Renewer’s voice was light 
and cheerful. “Welcome to this 
house, Pilgrim. Who are you, 
where are you from?” 

“I am the Pilgrim Tomis, formerly Tomis of the Rememberers, 
and prior to that a Watcher, 
born to the name Wuellig. I am 
native to the Lost Continents 
and have traveled widely both 
before and after beginning my 
Pilgrimage.” 

“What do you seek here?” 

“Renewal. Redemption.” 

“May the Will grant your wishes,” said the Renewer. “Come 
with me.” 

I was led through a close, dimly lit passage into a small stone 
cell. The Renewer instructed me 
to remove my mask, enter into 
a state of communion, and wait. 
I freed myself from the bronze 
grillwork and clasped my starstone tightly. The familiar sensations of communion stole over me. 

Something probed my soul. Everything was drawn forth and laid 
out as if for inspection on the 
floor of my cell: my acts of selfishness and of cowardice, my 
flaws and failings, my doubts, 
my despairs, above all the most 
shameful of my acts, the selling 
of the Rememberer document to 
the invader overlord. In this 
house one might extend one’s lifetime two or three times over; but 
why should the Renewers offer 
such benefits to anyone as lacking in merit as I? 

I remained a long while in 
contemplation of my faults. Then 
the contact broke, and a different 
Renewer, a man of remarkable 
stature, entered the cell. 

“The mercy of the Will is upon you, friend,” he said, reaching 
forth fingers of extraordinary 
length to touch the tips of mine. 

TTThen I heard that deep voice 
’ ' and saw those white fingers 
I knew that I was in the presence 
of a man I had met briefly before, as I stood outside the gates 
of Roum in the season before the 
conquest of Earth. He had been 
a Pilgrim then, and he had invited me to join him on his 
journey to Jorslem, but I had declined, for Roum had beckoned 
to me. 

“Was your Pilgrimage an easy 
one?” I asked. 

“It was a valuable one,” he replied. “And you? You are a 
Watcher no longer, I see.” 

“I am in my third guild this 
year.” 

“With one more yet to come.” 
“Am I to join you in the Renewers, then?” 

“I did not mean that guild, 
friend Tomis. But we can talk 
more of that when your years are 
fewer. You have been approved 
for renewal, I rejoice to tell you.” 
“Despite my sins?” 

“Because of your sins, such as 
they are. At dawn tomorrow you 
enter the first of your renewal 
tanks. I will be your guide 
through your second birth. I am 
the Renewer Talmit. Go, now, 
and ask for me when you return.” 

“One question — ” 

“Yes?” 

“I made my Pilgrimage together with' a woman, Olmayne, 
formerly a Rememberer of Perris. Can you tell me if she has 
been approved for renewal as 
well?” 

I know nothing of this Olmayne.” 

“She is not a good woman,” 
I said. “She is vain, imperious, 
and cruel. But yet I think she 
is not beyond saving. Can you 
do anything to help her?” 

“I have no influence in such 
things,” Talmit said. “She must 
face interrogation like everyone 
else. I can tell you this, though: 
virtue is not the only criterion 
for renewal.” 

He showed me from the building. Cold sunlight illuminated the 
city. I was drained and depleted, 
too empty even to feel cheered 
that I had qualified for renewal. It was midday. I remembered 
my appointment with Avluela; I 
circled the house of renewal in 
rising anxiety. Would she come? 

She waited by the front of the 
building, crimson jacket, furry 
leggings, glassy bubbles on her 
feet, telltale humps on her back; 
from afar I could make her out 
to be a Flier. “Avluela!” I called. 

She whirled. She looked pale, 
thin, even younger than when I 
Had last seen her. Her eyes 
searched my face, once again 
masked, and for a moment she 
was bewildered. 

“Watcher? she said. “Watcher, 
is that you?” 

“Call me Tomis now,” I told 
her. “But I am the same man. you 
knew in Agupt and Roum.” 
“Watcher! Oh, Watcher! Tomis.” She clung to me. “How long 
it’s been! So much has happened!” She sparkled now, and the 
paleness fled her cheeks. “Come, 
let’s find an inn, a place to sit 
and talk! How did you discover 
me here?” 

“Through your guild. I saw 
you overhead last night.” 

“I came here in the winter. 
I was in Perris for a while, halfway back to Hind, and then I 
changed my mind. There could 
be no going home. Now I live 
near Jorslem, and I help with — ” 
She cut her sentence sharply off. 
“Have you won renewal, Tomis?” 

T TTe descended from the high 
* ' place into a humbler part of 
the inner city. “Yes,” I said, “I 
am to be made younger. My guide 
is the Renewer Talmit — we met 
him as a Pilgrim outside Roum, 
do you remember?” 

She had forgotten that. We 
seated ourselves at an open-air 
patio adjoining an inn, and’ Servitors brought us food and wine. 
Her gaiety was infectious; I felt 
renewed just to be with Her. She 
spoke of those final cataclysmic 
days in Roum, when she had been 
taken into the place of the Prince 
as a concubine; and she told me 
of that terrible moment when 
Gorman the Changeling defeated 
the Prince of Roum on the evening of conquest, announcing 
Himself as no Changeling but an 
invader in disguise, and taking 
from the Prince at once his throne, 
his concubine, and his vision. 

“Did the Prince die?” she asked. 

“Yes, but not of his blinding.” 
I told her how that proud man 
Had fled from Roum disguised as 
a Pilgrim, and how I Had accompanied him to Perris, and how 
while we were among the Rememberers he Had involved himself 
with Olmayne and Had been slain 
by Olmayne’s husband, whose life 
was thereupon taken by his wife. 
I also saw Gormon in Perris,” I 
said'. “He goes by the name of 
Victorious Thirteen now. He is 
High in the councils of the invaders.” 

Avleula smiled. “Gormon and 
I were together only a short while 
after the conquest. When does 
your renewal begin?” 

“At dawn.” 

“Oh, Tomis, how will it be 
when you are a young man? Did 
you know that I loved you? All 
the time we traveled, all while 
I was sharing Gormon’s bed and 
consorting with the Prince, you 
were the one I wanted! But of 
course you were a Watcher, and 
it was impossible. Besides, you 
were so old. Now you no longer 
Watch’, and soon you will no 
longer be old, and — ” Her hand 
rested in mine. “I should never 
have left your side. We both 
would have been spared much 
suffering.” 

“From suffering we learn,” I 
said. 

“Yes. Yes. I see that. How long 
will your renewal take?” 

The usual time, whatever that 
may be.” 

“After that, what will you do? 
What guild will you choose? You 
can’t be a Watcher, not now.” 
“No, nor a Rememberer either. 
My guide Talmit spoke of some 
other guild, which’ he would not 
name, and assumed that I would 
enroll in it when I was done with 
renewal. I suppose he thought 
I’d stay here and join the Renewers, but he said it was another 
guild than that.” 

“Not the Renewers,” said Avluela. She leaned close. “The Redeemers,” she whispered. 

“Redeemers? That is a guild 
I do not know.” 

“It is newly founded.” 

No new guild Has been established in more than a — ” 
“This is the guild Talmit 
meant. You would be a desirable 
member. The skills you developed 
when you were a Watcher make 
you exceptionally useful.” 

“Redeemers,” I said, probing 
the mystery. “Redeemers. What 
does this guild do?” 

Avluela smiled jauntily. “It 
rescues troubled souls and saves 
unhappy worlds. But this is no 
time to talk of it. Finish your 
business in Jorslem, and everything will become clear. We rose. 
Her lips brushed mine. “This is 
the last time I’ll see you as an 
old man. It will be strange, Tomis, when you’re renewed.” 

She left me then. 

Toward evening I returned to 
my lodging. Olmayne was not in 
her room. A Servitor told me that 
she had been out all day. I waited 
until it was late; then I made my 
communion and slept, and at 
dawn I paused outside her door. 
It was sealed. I hurried to the 
house of renewal. 

X 

'Tplie Renewer Talmit met me 
within the entrance and conducted me down a corridor of 
green tile to the first renewal 
tank. “The Pilgrim Olmayne,” 
he informed me, “has been accepted for renewal and will come 
here later this day.” Talmit showed me into a small low room, close 
and humid, lit by dim blobs 
of slave-light and smelling faintly of crushed deathflower blossoms. My robe and my mask 
were taken from me, and the Renewer covered my head with a 
fine golden-green mesh of some 
flimsy metal, through which Ke 
sent a current, and when he removed the mesh my hair was 
gone, my head was as glossy as 
the tiled walls. It makes insertion of the electrodes simpler,” 
Talmit explained. “You may enter the tank, now.” 

A gentle ramp led me down 
into the tank, which was a tub of 
no great size. I felt the warm soft 
slipperiness of mud beneath my 
feet, and Talmit nodded and told 
me it was irradiated regenerative 
mud, which would stimulate the 
increase of cell division that was 
to bring about my renewal, and 
I accepted it. I stretched out on 
the floor of the tank with only 
my head above the shimmering 
dark violet fluid that it contained. Talmit loomed above me, 
holding what seemed to be a mass 
of entangled copper wires, but 
as he pressed the wires to my 
bare scalp they opened as of their 
own accord and their tips sought 
my skull, burrowing down 
through skin and bone into the 
hidden wrinkled grayness. I felt 
nothing more than tiny prickling 
sensations. 

“The electrodes,” Talmit explained, “seek out the centers of 
ageing within your brain; we 
transmit signals that will induce 
a reversal of the normal processes of decay, and your brain 
will lose its perception of the direction of the flow of time. Your 
body thus will become more receptive to the stimulation it receives from the environment of 
the renewal tank. Close your 
eyes.” 

Over my face he placed a 
breathing mask. He gave me a 
gentle shove, and the back of 
my head slipped from the edge of 
the tank, so that I floated out 
into the middle. The warmth increased. I dimly heard bubbling 
sounds. I imagined black sulfurous bubbles coming up from the 
mud through the fluid in which 
I floated; I imagined that the 
fluid had turned the color of 
mud. Adrift in a tideless sea I lay, 
distantly aware that a current 
was passing over the electrodes, 
that something was tickling my 
brain, that I was engulfed in mud 
and in what could well have been 
an amniotic fluid. From far away 
came the deep voice of the Renewer Talmit, summoning me to 
youth, drawing me back across 
the decades, unreeling time for 
me. There was a taste of salt in 
my mouth. 

Again I was crossing Earth 
Ocean, beset by pirates, defending my Watching equipment 
against their jeers and thrusts. 
Again I stood beneath the hot 
Aguptan sun meeting Avluela for 
the first time. I lived once more 
on Palash. I returned to the place 
of my birth in the western isles of 
the Lost Continents, in what formerly had been Usa-amrik. I 
watched Roum fall a second 
time. Fragments of memories 
swam through my softening brain. 
There was no sequence, no rational unrolling of events. I was a 
child. I was a weary ancient. I 
was among the Rememberers. I 
visited Somnambulists. I saw the 
Prince of Roum attempt to purchase eyes from an Artificer in 
Dijon. I bargained with the Procurator of Perris. I gripped the 
handles of my instruments and 
entered Watchfulness. I ate sweet 
things from a far-off world; I 
drew into my nostrils the perfume of springtime on Palash; I 
shivered in an old man’s private 
winter; I swam in a surging sea, 
buoyant and happy; I sang; I 
wept; I resisted temptations; I 
yielded to temptations; I quarreled with Olmayne; I embraced 
Avluela; I experienced a flickering succession of nights and days 
as my biological clock moved in 
strange rhythms of reversal and 
acceleration. Illusions beset me. 
It rained fire from the sky; time 
rushed in several directions; I 
grew small and then enormous. I 
heard voices speaking in shades 
of scarlet and turquoise. Jagged 
music sparkled on the mountains. 
The sound of my drumming 
heartbeats was rough and fiery. 
I was trapped between strokes of 
my brain-piston, arms pressed to 
my sides so that I would occupy 
as little space as possible as it 
rammed itself home again and 
again and again. The stars throbbed, contracted, melted. Avluela 
said gently, “We earn a second 
youthtime through the indulgent 
benevolent impulses of the Will 
and not through the performance 
of individual good works.” Qlmayne said, “How sleek I get!” 
Talmit said, “These oscillations 
of perception signify only the dissolution of the wish toward selfdestruction that lies at the heart 
of the ageing process.” Gormon 
said, “These perceptions of oscillation signify only the self-destruction of the wish toward dissolution that lies at the ageing 
process of the heart.” The Procurator Man rule Seven said, “We 
have been sent to this world as 
the devices of your purgation. We 
are instruments of the Will.” 
Earfhdaim Nineteen said, “On 
the ether hand, permit me to disagree. The intersection of Earth’s 
destinies and ours is purely accidental.” My eyelids turned to 
stone. The small creatures comprising my lungs began to flower. 
My skin sloughed off, revealing 
strands of muscle clinging to 
bone. Olmayne said, “My pores 
grow smaller. My flesh grows 
tight. My breasts grow small.” 
Avluela said, “Afterwards you 
will fly with us, Tomis.” The 
Prince of Roum covered his eyes 
with his hands. The towers of 
Roum swayed in the winds of the 
sun. I snatched a shawl from a 
passing Rememberer. Clowns 
wept in the streets of Perris. 

Talmit said, “Awaken, now, 
Tomis, come up from it, open 
your eyes.” 

“I am young again,” I said. 

“Your renewal has only begun,” he said. 

T could no longer move. Attend -*• ants seized me and swathed 
me in porous wrappings, and 
placed me on a rolling cart, and 
took me to a second bank, much 
larger, in which dozens of people 
floated, each in a dreamy seclusion from the others. Their naked 
skulls were festooned with electrodes their eyes were covered 
with pink tape; their hands were 
peacefully joined on their chests. 
Into this tank I went, and there 
were no illusions here, only a 
long slumber unbroken by 
dreams. 

This time I awakened to the 
sounds of a rushing tide, and 
found myself passing feet-first 
through a constricted conduit, 
into a sealed tank where I breathed only fluid, and where I remained something more than a 
minute and something less than 
a century, while layers of sin 
were peeled from my soul. It was 
slow, taxing work. The Surgeons 
worked in a distance, their hands 
thrust into gloves that controlled 
the tiny flaying-knives, and they 
cleansed me of evil with flick 
after flick after flick of the little 
blades, cutting out guilt and sorrow, jealously and rage, greed, 
lust and impatience. 

When they were done with 
me, they opened the lid of the 
tank and lifted me out. I was 
unable to stand unaided. They attached instruments to my limbs 
that kneaded and massaged my 
muscles, restoring the tone. I 
walked again. I looked down at 
my bare body, strong and tautfleshed and vigorous. Talmit 
came to me and threw a handful 
of mirror- dust into the air so that 
I could see myself, and as the 
tiny particles cohered I peered 
at my gleaming reflection. 

“No,” I said. “You have the 
face wrong. I didn’t look like 
that. My nose was sharper — the 
lips weren’t so full — the hair not 
such a deep black — ” 

We have worked from the records of the guild Watchers, Tomis.. You are more exactly a replica of your early self than your 
own memory realizes.” 

“Can that be?” 

“If you prefer, we can shape 
you to fit your self-conceptions 
and not reality. But it would be a 
frivolous thing to do, and it would 
take much time.” 

“No,” I said. “It hardly matters.” 

He informed me then that I 
would have to remain in the 
house of renewal a while longer, 
until I was fully adapted to my 
new self. I was given the neutral 
clothes of a guildless one to wear, 
for I was without affiliation now; 
and I might now opt for any 
guild that would admit me once 
I left the house. How long will 
my renewal last?” I asked Talmit as I dressed 1 . He replied, “You 
came here in summer. Now it is 
winter. We do not work swiftly.” 
“And how fares my companion 
Olmayne?” 

“We failed with her.” 

“I don’t understand.” 

“Would you like to see her?” 
Talmit asked. 

“Yes,” I said, thinking that he 
would bring me to Olmayne’s 
room. In stead he conveyed me to 
Olmayne’s tank. I stood on a ramp 
looking down into a sealed container; Talmit indicated a fiber 
telescope, and I peered into its 
staring eye and beheld Olmayne. 
Or rather, what I was asked to 
believe was Olmayne. A naked 
girl-child of about eleven, 
smooth-skinned and breastless, 
lay curled up in the tank, knees 
drawn close to the -flat chest, 
thumb thrust in mouth. At first I 
did not understand. Then the 
child stirred, and I recognized the 
embryonic features of the regal 
Olmayne I had known: the wide 
mouth', the strong chin, the sharp 
strong cheekbones. A dull shock 
of Horror rippled tErougfi me, 
and I said to Talmit, “WEat is 
tHis?” 

ti’^TT'Hen tHe soul is too badly stained, Tomis, we 
must dig deep to cleanse it. Your 
Olmayne was a difficult case. We 
sHould not Have attempted Her; 
But sHe was insistent, and tKere 
were some indications tKat we 
migHt succeed witH her. THose 
indications were in error, as you 
can see.” 

“But what Happened to Her?” 
“THe renewal entered the irreversible stage before we could 
achieve a purging of her poisons,” 
Talmit said. 

“You went too far? You made 
her too young?” 

“As you can see. Yes.” 

“What will you do? Why don’t 
you get out of there and let her 
grow up again?” 

“You should listen more carefully, Tomis. I said the renewal 
is irreversible.” 

‘ ‘Irreversible?’ ’ 

“SHe is lost in childhood’s 
dreams. Each day she grows years 
younger. The inner clock whirls 
uncontrollably. Her body shrinks; 
her brain grows smooth. She enters babyhood shortly. She will 
never awaken.” 

“And at the end — ” I looked 
away. “What then? A sperm and 
an egg, separating in the tank?” 

“The retrogression will not go 
that far. She will die in infancy. 
Many are lost this way.” 

“She spoke of the risks of renewal,” I said. 

“Yet she insisted on our taking 
Her. Her soul was dark, Tomis. 
She lived only for Herself. She 
came to Jorslem to be cleansed, 
and now she has been cleansed, 
and she is at peace with the Will. 
Did you love Her?” 

“Never. Not for an instant.” 
“Then what Have you lost?” 
“A segment of my past, perhaps.” I put my eye to tHe telescope again and beheld Olmayne, 
innocent now, sexless, cleansed. 
At peace with the Will. I searched her oddly altered yet familiar 
face for insight into Her dreams. 
Had she known wKat was befalling her, as she tumbled Helplessly 
into youthfulness? Had she cried 
out in anguish and frustration 
when she felt her life slipping 
away? Had there been a final 
flare of the old imperious Olmayne, before she sank into this 
unwanted purity? The child in 
the tank was smiling. THe supple 
little body uncoiled, tEen drew 
more tightly into a Huddled ball. 
Olmayne was at peace witH the 
Will. Suddenly, as th'ougH Talmit had spread another mirror in 
the air, I looked into my own 
new self and saw what Had been 
done for me and knew that I 
had been granted another life 
with the proviso that I make 
something more of it than I had 
of my first one, and I felt humbled, and pledged myself to serve 
the Will, and I was engulfed in 
joy that came in mighty waves, 
like the surging tides of Earth 
Ocean, and I said farewell to Olmayne and asked Talmit to take 
me to another place. 

XI 

A vluela came to me in my room 
1 in the house of renewal, and 
we both were frightened when we 
met. The jacket she wore left her 
bunched-up wings bare; they 
seemed hardly under her control at all, but fluttered nervously, starting to open a short way, 
their gossamer tips expanding in 
little ^quivering flickers. Her eyes 
were large and solemn; her faee 
looked more lean and pointed 
than ever. We stared in silence at 
one another a long while. 

“Tomis?” she said finally, and 
I nodded. 

She touched my shoulders, my 
arms, my lips. We were strangers. 
That withered old Watcher she 
had known and perhaps loved 
was gone, banished for the next 
fifty years or more, and in his 
place stood someone mysteriously 
transformed, unknown, unmet. 
The old Watcher had been a sort 
of father to her; what was this 
guildless young Tomis supposed 
52 

to be? And what was she to me, 
a daughter no longer? 

“Your eyes are the same,” she 
said. “I would always know you 
by the eyes.” 

“What have you done these 
many months, A vluela?” 

“I have been flying every 
night. I flew to Agupt and deep 
into Afreek. When it gets dark I 
go aloft. Do you know, Tomis, 

I feel truly alive only when I’m 
up there?” 

“You are of the Fliers. It is in 
the nature of your guild to feel 
that way.” 

“One day we’ll fly side by side, 
Tomis.” 

I laughed at that. “The old 
Surgeries are closed, Avluela. 
They work wonders here, but they 
can’t transform me into a Flier. 
One must be born with wings.” 

“One doesn’t need wings to 
fly,” she said. 

“I know. The invaders lift 
themselves without the help of 
wings. I saw you, one day soon 
after Roum had fallen, you and 
Gormon in the sky together — ” 
I shook my head. “But I am no 
invader either.” 

“You will fly with me, Tomis. 
We’ll go aloft, and not only by 
night, even though my wings are 
merely nightwings. In bright sunlight we’ll soar together.” 

Her ' fantasy pleased me. I 
gathered her into my arms, and 
she was cool and fragile against 
time, and for a while we talked 
no more of flying. Later we walked through the corridors, passing 
others who were newly renewed, 
and we went into the great central room whose ceiling admitted 
the winter sunlight, and studied 
each other by that changing pale 
light, and walked and talked. 

She came to me each day at 
my exercise time, and I went 
through the building with her, 
no longer leaning on her arm. In 
my room we embraced, and she 
was cool and slim against me, 
and in her ecstasy her wings unfolded until I was wrapped in 
their silken softness. 

Hpalmit was with me frequently 
too. He showed me the arts 
of using my renewed body, and 
helped me successfully grow 
young. One day he told me that 
Olmayne’s retrogression had come 
to its end. I felt no sorrow over 
that, just a curious emptiness. 

“You will leave here soon,” the 
Renewer said. “Are you ready?” 

“I think so.” 

“Have you given much thought 
to your destination after this 
house?” 

I must seek a new guild, I 
know.” 

“Many guilds would have you, 
Tomis. But which do you want?” 

“The guild in which I would 
be most useful to mankind,” I 
said. I owe the Will a life.” 

Talmit said, “Has the flier girl 
spoken to you of the possibilities 
before you?” 

She mentioned a newly founded guild.” 

“Did she give it a name?” 
“The guild of the Redeemers.” 
“What do you know of it?” 
“Very little,” I said. 

“I am of the guild of the Redeemers,” Talmit said. So is the 
Flier. Avluela.” 

“You both are already guilded! How can you belong to more 
than one guild?” 

“Tomis, the guild of Redeemers accepts members from all 
other guilds. It is the supreme 
guild, as the guild of Dommators 
once was. In its ranks are Rememberers and Scribes, Indexers, Servitors, Fliers, Landholders, Somnambulists, Surgeons, 
Clowns, Merchants, and Vendors. There are Changelings too — ” 
“They are outside all guilds 
by law — ” 

“This is the guild of Redeemers. Even Changelings may win 
redemption, Tomis.” 

Chastened, I said, “Even 
Changelings, yes. But how 
strange it is to think of such a 
guild!” 

“Would you despise a guild 
that embraces Changelings?” 

“I find this guild difficult to 
comprehend.” 

“Understanding will come at 
the proper time,” 

“When is the proper time?” 
“The day you leave this place,” 
said Talmit. 

nphat day shortly arrived. AvA luela came to fetch me. I 
stepped forth uncertainly into 
Jorslem’s springtime to complete 
the ritual of renewal. She took 
me through the city to the holy 
places, so that I could worship 
at each of the shrines. I knelt 
at the wall of the Hebers and at 
the gilded dome of the Mislams; 
then I went down into the lower 
part of the city, through the marketplace, to the gray dark illfashioned building covering the 
place where the god of the Christers is said to have died; then I 
went to the spring of knowledge 
and the fountain of the Will, and 
from there to the guildhouse of 
the guild of Pilgrims to surrender 
my mask and robes and starstone, 
and thence to the wall of the Old 
City. At each of these places I 
offered myself to the Will with 
words I had waited long to 
speak. Pilgrims and ordinary citizens of Jorslem gathered at a respectful distance, knowing that 
I had been lately renewed and 
hoping that some emanation from 
my newly youthful body would 
bring them good fortune. At last 
my obligations were fulfilled. I 
was a free man in full health, able 
now to choose the quality of the 
life I wished to lead. 

Avluela said, “Will you come 
with me to the Redeemers now? 
A meeting will convene in an 
hour’s time.” 

From her tunic she drew something small and gleaming, which 
I recognized in bewilderment as 
a starstone. “What are you doing 
with that?” I asked. “Only Pilgrims — ” 

“Put your hand over mine,” 
she said, extending a fist in which 
the starstone was clenched. 

I obeyed. Her small pinched 
face grew rigid. 

“Avluela, what — ?” 

“A signal to the guild,” she said 
gently. “A notice to them to gather now that you are on your way.” 
“How did you get that stone?” 
“Come with me,” she said. “Oh, 
Tomis, if only we could fly there! 
But it is not far. We meet almost 
in the shadow of the house of renewal. Come, Tomis. Come! 

XII 

Hphere was no light in the room. 

Avluela led me into the subterranean blackness and told me 
that I had reached the guildhall 
of the Redeemers and left me 
standing by myself. “Don’t 
move,” she cautioned. 

» I sensed the presence of others 
in the ' room about me. But I 
heard nothing and saw nothing. 

Something was thrust toward 
me. 

Avluela said, “Put out your 
Hands- WKat do you feel?” 

I toucKed a small square cabinet, resting perhaps on a metal 
framework. Along its face were 
familiar dials and levers. My 
groping Hands found Handles rising from tHe cabinet’s upper surface. At once it was as thougH all 
my renewal Had been undone and 
tHe conquest of EartH cancelled 
as well: I was a WatcHer again, 
for surely this was a Watcher’s 
equipment! 

I said, “Is it not tHe same cabinet I once had. But it is not 
greatly different.” 

“Have you forgotten your 
skills, Tomis?” 

“I think they remain witK me 
even now.” 

“Use tHe machine, then,” said 
Avluela. “Do your WatcEing 
once more, and tell me what you 
see.” 

Easily and Happily I slipped into the old attitudes. I performed 
the preliminary rituals quickly, 
clearing my mind of doubts and 
frictions. It was surprisingly simple to bring myself into a spirit 
of Watchfulness thougH I Had not 
attempted it since the night EartH 
fell. 

Now I grasped the Handles. 
They did not terminate in the 
grips to which I was accustomed: 
rather, something cool and Hard 
was mounted at the tip of eacH 
handle. My Hands closed over 
the twin coolnesses. I felt a moment of fear. Then I regained the 
necessary tranquility, and my 
soul flooded into the device before me, and I began to WatcH. 

In my Watchfulness I did not 
soar to tfie stars, as I Had in the 
old days. My perception was limited to the immediate surroundings of my room. Eyes closed, 
body Hunched in trance, I readied 
out and came first to Avluela, 
near me, almost upon me. I saw 
Her plainly. She smiled; she nodded; her eyes were aglow. 

— I love you. 

— Yes, Tomis. And we will 
be together always. 

— I Have never felt so close to 
another person. 

— In this guild we are all 
close, all the time. We are the 
Redeemers, Tomis. We are new. 
Nothing like this Has been on 
EartH before. 

— How am I speaking to you, 
Avluela? 

— Your mind speaks to mine, 
tHrougK tHe machine. And some 
day tlie macHine will not be needed. 

nplie starstones grew warm in 
my Hands. I clearly perceived 
tHe instrument, now: a Watcher’s 
cabinet, but with’ certain modifications, among them the starstones mounted on the Handles. 
And I looked beyond Avluela 
and saw other faces, ones that I 
knew. The austere figure of the 
Renewer Talmit was to my left. 
Beside him stood the Surgeon 
with whom I had journeyed to 
Jorslem, with the Changeling 
Bernalt at his elbow; and now I 
knew what business it was that 
brought these men of Nayrub to 
the holy city. The others I did 
not recognize ; but I saw them all, 
by an inner light for the room was 
as dark as it had been when I entered it. Not only did I see them 
but I touched them, mind to 
mind. 

The mind I touched first was 
Bernalt’s. I met it easily though 
fearfully, drew back, met it again. 
I tried to enter Bernalt’s mind, 
but I was afraid. How could I 
hide those prejudices, those petty 
contempts, those conditioned reflexes with which we unavoidably think of Changelings? 

“Hide nothing,” he counseled. 
“Those things are no secret to 
me. Give them up now and join 
me.” 

I struggled. I cast out demons. 

I summoned up the memory of 
the moment outside the Changeling shrine, after Bernalt had 
saved me, when I had invited him 
to journey with us. How had I 
felt then toward him? 

I amplified that moment of 
gratitude and companionship. I • 
let it swell and blaze, and it obliterated the encrustations of 
scorn and empty disdain, and I 
saw the human soul beneath the 
strange Changeling surface, and 
broke through that surface. He 
drew me toward his mind. I 
joined Bernalt, and he enrolled 
me in his guild. I was of the Redeemers now. 

Through my mind rolled a 
voice, and I did not know whether I heard the resonant boom of 
Talmit, or the dry ironic tone of 
the Surgeon, • or Bernalt’s controlled murmur, or Avluela’s soft 
whisper, for it was all these voices 
at once, and others, and they 
said: 

“When all mankind is enrolled 
in our guild, we will be conquered 
no longer. When each of us is 
part of every other one of us, 
our sufferings will end. There is 
no need for us to struggle against 
our conquerors, for we will absorb them, once we are all Redeemed. Enter us, Tomis who 
was the Watcher Wuellig.” 

And I entered. 

T became the Surgeon and the 
Flier and the Renewer and 
the Changeling and the Servitor 
and the rest. And they became 
me. And so long as my hands 
gripped the starstones we were 
one soul and one mind. It was 
the keen perception one gets from 
Watching coupled with the submergence in a larger entity that 
one gets from communion, and I 
knew this was something wholly 
new on Earth, not merely the 
founding of a new guild but the 
initiation of a new cycle of human 
existence, the birth of the Fourth 
Cycle upon this defeated planet. 

The voice said, “Tomis, we will 
Redeem those in greatest need 
first. We will go into Agupt, into 
the desert where miserable 
Changelings huddle in an ancient 
building that they worship, and 
we will take them into us and 
make them clean again. And we 
will go on beyond Agupt, to all 
the lands of the world, and find 
those who are without guilds, 
and those who are without hope, 
and those who are without tomorrows, and we will give them 
life and purpose again. And a 
time will come when all Earth 
is Redeemed.” 

They put a vision before me 
of a transformed planet, and of 
the harsh-faced invaders yielding 
peacefully to us, begging to be 
incorporated into that new thing 
that had germinated in the midst 
of their conquest. They showed 
me an Earth that had been purged of its ancient sins. 

Then I felt it was time to withdraw my hands-from the machine 
I grasped, and I withdrew my 
hands. 

The vision ebbed. The glow 
faded. But yet I was no longer 
alone in my skull, for some contact lingered, and the room had 
ceased to be dark. 

“How did this happen?” I 
asked. “When did this begin?” 

“In the days after the conquest,” said Talmit, “we asked 
ourselves why we had fallen so 
easily, and how we could lift 
ourselves above what we Had 
been. We saw that our guilds had 
not provided enough of a structure for our lives that some closer union was our way to redemption. We had the starstones; we 
had the instruments of Watching; 
all that remained was to fuse 
them.” 

The Surgeon said, “You will 
be important to us, Tomis, because you understand how to 
throw your mind forth. We seek 
former Watchers. They are the 
nucleus of our guild. Once your 
soul roved the stars to search 
out mankind’s enemies; now it 
will roam the Earth to bring mankind together.” 

Avluela said, “You will help 
me to fly, Tomis, even by day 
And you will fly beside me.” 

“When do you leave?” I asked. 

“Now,” she said. “I go to 
Agupt, to the temple of the 
Changelings, to offer them what 
we have. And all of us will join to 
give me strength, and that 
strength will be focused through 
you, Tomis.” Her hands touched 
mine. Her lips brushed mine. 
“The life of Earth begins again, 
now this year, this new cycle. Oh’, 
Tomis, we are all reborn!” 

XIII 

1 remained alone in the room. 

The others scattered. Avluela 
went above, into the street. I 
put my hands to the mounted 
Starstones and I saw her as clearly as though she stood beside me. 
She was preparing herself for 
flight. First she put off her clothing, and her bare form glistened 
in the afternoon sun. Her body 
seemed impossibly delicate; a 
strong wind would scatter her, I 
thought. Then she knelt, bowed, 
made her ritual. She spoke to 
herself, yet I heard her words, 
the secret words Fliers say as 
they ready themselves to leave 
the ground. 

She rose and let her wings unfold. Some passersby looked oddly at her, not because there was 
anything unusual about the sight 
of a naked Flier in the streets of 
Jorslem, but because the sunlight was so strong and her transparent wings, so lightly stained 
with' pigment, were evidently 
nightwings incapable of withstanding the pressure of the solar 
wind. 

“Now we fly to Agupt,” she 
murmured, “to Redeem the 
Changelings and make them one 
of us. Tomis, will you come with 
me?” 

“I will be with you,” we said, 
and I gripped the starstones 
tightly and crouched over my 
cabinet of instruments in the dark 
room beneath the place where she 
stood. “We will fly together, Avluela.” 

“Up then,” she said, and we 
said, “Up.” 

Her wings beat, curving to take 
the wind, and we felt her struggling in the first moment, and we 
gave her the strength she needed; 
she took it as it poured from ug 
through me to her, and we rose 
high. The spires and parapets of 
Jorslem the golden grew small, 
and the city became a pink dot in 
the green hills. Avluela’s throbbing wings thrust her swiftly 
westward, toward the setting sun, 
toward the land of Agupt. Her ecstasy swept through us all. “See, 
Tomis, how wonderful it is, far 
above everything? The cool wind 
against your bare flesh — the 
breeze in your hair — you drift 
on the currents, you coast, you 
soar — ” 

To Agupt. To the sunset. 

W e looked down at the sparkling Lake Medit. From 
this height one could not tell 
that our world had even been 
conquered. One saw only the 
beauty of the colors of the land 
and the sea, not the checkpoints 
.of the invaders. 

Those checkpoints would not 
long endure. We would conquer 
our conquerors, not with weapons but with love, and as the 

Redemption of Earth became uni- come down. I wished we could 
yersal we would welcome into our stay aloft forever, Avluela and I. 
new self even the beings who “We will, Tomis, we will!” she 
Bad seized our planet. told me. “Nothing can separate 

In my dark room I sent new us now. You believe that, don’t 
surges of power through her you, Tomis?” 
wings. “Yes,” we said, “I believe that.” 

She hovered over the desert. And we guided her down through 
The old Surgery, the Changeling the darkening sky. 
shrine would soon be in sight. I 

grieved that we would have to — ROBERT SILVERBERG 

TO JORSLEM 
