THE MAN IN THE MAZE. “What do you want from me?” he said, this time in his true voice, deep» crackling with suppressed rage. “Just to talk. Honestly. I don’t want to cause any trouble for you, Mr. Muller.” “You know me!” “Of course I do. Everyone knows Richard Muller. I mean, you were the galactic hero when 1 was going to school. We did reports on you. Essays about you. We — ” “Get out of here!” The shriek again. “ — and Stephen Rawlins was my father. I knew you, Mr. Muller.” T he dark apple was rising. The small square window was facing him. Rawlins remembered how the relay from the drone probe had suddenly ceased. “Stephen Rawlins?” The apple descended. “My father.” Rawlins’s left leg seemed to be turning to water. He was getting the outpouring from Muller more strongly now, as though it took a few minutes to tune to his wavelength. Now Rawlins felt the torrent of anguish, the sadness. “I met you long ago,” he said. “You had just come back from — let’s see, it was 82 Eridani, I think. You were all tanned and windbumed. I think I was eight years old, and you picked me up and threw me, only you were not used to Earthnorm gravity and you threw me too hard, and I hit the ceiling and began to cry, and you gave me something to make me stop, a little bead that changed colors.” Muller’s hands were limp at his sides. The apple had disappeared into his garment He said tautly, “What was your name? Fred, Ed — that’s it Yes. Ed. Edward ELawlins.” “They started calling me Ned a little later on.” Muller turned away and coughed. His hand slipped into his pocket He raised his head, and the descending sun glittered weirdly against his face, staining it deep orange. He made a quick edgy gesture with one finger. “Go away, Ned. Tell your friends that I don’t want to be bothered. I’m a very sick man and I want to be alone.” “Sick?” “Sick with a mysterious inward rot of the soul. Look, Ned, you’re a fine handsome boy, and I love your father dearly, if any of this is true, and 1 don’t want you hanging around me. You’ll regret it. I don’t mean that as a threat, just as a statement of fact. Go away.” “Stand your ground,” Boardman told him. “Get closer. Right in where it hurts.” Rawlins took a wary step. He diminished the distance between them by ten per cent The impact of the emanation seemed to double. He said, “Please don’t chase me away. Mr. Muller. I just want to be friendly. My father would never have forgiven me if he could have found out that I met you here, like this, and didn’t tiy to help you at all.” Would have? Could have? What happened to your father?” “Dead. Four years ago, Rigel XXU. He was helping to set up a tight beam network connecting the R> gel worlds. There was an amplifier accident. The focus was inverted; he got the whole beam.” “Jesus. He was still youngl” “He would have been fifty in a month.” Muller’s face softened. Some of the torment ebbed from the eyes. His lips became more mobile. It was as though someone else’s grief had taken him momentarily from his own. “Get closer to him,” Boardman ordered. Another step, and then since Muller did not seem to notice, another. Rawlins sensed heat: not real but psychical, a furnace-blast of directionless emotion. He shivered in awe. Muller said, “What are you doing on Lemnos, boy?” “I’m an archaeologist.” The lie came awkwardly. “This is my first field trip. We’re trying to carry out a thorough examination of the maze.” “The maze happens to be someone’s home. You’re intruding.” Rawlins faltered. ‘Tell him you didn’t know he was here,” Boardman prompted. “We didn’t realize that anyone was here,” said Rawlins. “We had no way of knowing that — ” “You sent your damned robots in, didn’t you? Once you found someone here — someone you knew damned well wouldn’t want any company — “I don’t understand,” Rawlins said. “We had the impression you were wrecked here. We wanted to offer our help.” How easily I do this, he told himselfl Muller scowled. “You don’t know why I’m here?” “I’m afraid not.” “You wouldn’t, I guess. You were too young. But the others — once they saw my face, they should have known. Why didn’t they tell you?” “I really don’t understand — ” “Come close!” Muller bellowed. Rawlins felt himself gliding forward. Abruptly he was face to face with Muller, conscious of the man’s massive frame, his furrowed brow, his fixed, staring, angry eyes. Muller’s immense hand poimced on Rawlins’s wrist. Rawlins rocked, stunned by the impact, drenched with a despair so vast that it seemed to engulf whole universes. He tried not to stagger. “Now get away from me!” Mulled cried harshly. “Go on! Out of here! Out!” Rawlins did not move. Muller howled a curse and ran ponderously into a low glassy-walled building. The door closed, sealing without a perceptible opening. Rawlins sucked in breath and fougbt for his balance. “Stay where you are,” said Boardman. “Let him get over his tantrum. Everything’s going well.” vm M uller crouched behind the door. Sweat rolled down his sides. A dhill swept him. He wrapped his arms about himself so tightly that his ribs complained. He had not meant to handle the intruder that way at all. A few words of conversation, a blunt request for privacy; then, if the man would not go away, the destructor globe. So Muller had planned. But he had hesitated. He had spoken too much and learned too much. Stephen Rawlim’s son? A party of archeologists out there? The boy had hardly seemed affected by the radiation, except at very close range. Was it losing its power with the years? Muller fought to collect himself and to analyze his hostility. Why so fearful? Why so eager to cling to solitude? He had nothing to fear from Earthmen; they and not he were the sufferers in any contact he had with them. His original pretense was that he had come here out of consideration for his fellow man, that he was unwilling to inflict the painful ugliness that was himself upon them. But the boy had wanted to be friendly and helpful. Why flee? Slowly Muller rose and undid the door. He stepped outside. Night had fallen with winter’s swiftness; the sky was black, and the moons seared across it The boy still stood in the plaza, looking a little dazed. The biggest moon, Clotho, bathed him in golden light, so that his curling hair seemed to sparkle with inner flame. His face was very pale, with sharply accentuated cheekbones. His blue eyes gleamed in shock. Muller felt like some great halfrusted machine called into action after too many years of neglect. “Ned?” he said. “Look, Ned, 1 want to tell you that Fm sorry. Youve got to understand, I’m not used to people. Not — used — to — people' “It’s all right, Mr. Muller. I real ize it’s been rough for you.” “Call me Dick.” Muller raised both hands and spread them as if trying to cup moonbeams. On the wall beyond the plaza small animal shapes leaped and danced. Muller said, “I’ve come to love my privacy. You can even cherish cancer if you get into the right frame of mind. Look, you ought to realize something. I came here deliberately. It wasn’t any shipwreck. I picked out the one place in the universe where I was least likely to be disturbed and hid myself inside it. But of course you had to come with your tricky robots and find the way in.” “If you don’t want me here. I’ll go,” Rawlins said. “Maybe that’s best for both of us. No. Wait. Stay. Is it very bad, being this close to me?” “It isn’t exactly comfortable,” said Rawlins. “But it isn’t as bad as — as — well, I don’t know. From this distance I just feel a little depressed.” “You know why?” Muller asked. “From the way you talk, I think you do, Ned. You’re only pretending not to know what happened to me on Beta Hydri IV.” Rawlins colored. “Well, I remember a little bit, I guess. They operated on your mind?” “Yes, that’s right. What you’re feeling, Ned, that’s me, my goddamn soul leaking into the air. You’re picking up the flow of neural current, straight from the top of my skull. Isn’t it lovely? Try coming a little closer. That’s it.” Rawlins halted. ^ “There,” Muller said. “Now it’s ' stronger. You’re getting a better dose. Now recall what it was like when you were standing right here. That wasn’t so pleasant, was it? From ten meters away you can take it. From one meter away it’s intolerable. Can you imagine holding a woman in your arms while you give off a mental stink like that? You can’t make love from ten meters away.” Muller said, “Let’s sit down, Ned. It’s safe here. I’ve got detectors rigged in case any of the nastier animals come in, and there aren’t any traps in this zone. Sit.” He lowered himself to the smooth milky white stone floor, the alien marble that made this plaza so sleek. Rawlins, after an instant of deliberation, slipped lithely into the lotus position a dozen meters away. Muller said, “How old are you, Ned?” ‘Twenty-three.” “Married?” A shy grin. “Afraid not.” “Got a girl?” “There was one, a liaison contract. We voided it when I took on this job.” ” “How many men have you lost here so far?” Muller asked. “Five, I think. Fd like to know the sort of people who’d build a thing like this.” Muller said, “This was the grand creative triumph of their race, I believe. Their masterpiece, their monument. They must have been proud of this murderous place. It summed up the whole essence of their philosophy: kill the stranger.” “Are you just speculating, or have you found some clues to their cultural outlook?” “The only clue I have to their cul tural outlook is all around us. But I’m an expert on alien psychology, Ned. I know more about it than any other human being, because I’m the only one who ever said hello to an alien race. Kill the stranger: it’s the law of the universe. And if you don’t kill him, at least screw him up a little.” “We aren’t like that,” Rawlins said. “We don’t show instinctiye hostility to — ” “Crap.” “But — ” Muller said, “If an alien starship ever landed on one of our planets, we’d quarantine it and imprison the crew and interrogate them to destruction. We pretend that we’re too noble to hate strangers, but we have the politeness of weakness. Take the Hydrans. A substantial faction within our government was in favor of generating fusion in their cloud layer and giving them an extra sun. Before sending an emissary to scout them.” “No.” “They were overruled, and an emissary was sent, and the Hydrans wasted him. Me.” An idea struck Muller suddenly. Appalled, he said, “What’s happened between us and the Hydrans in the last nine years? Any contact? War?” “Nothing,” said Rawlins. “We’ve kept away.” “Are you telling me the truth? Or did we wipe the bastards out? God knows I wouldn’t mind that, but yet it wasn’t their fault they did this to me. They were reacting in a standard xenophobic way. Ned, has there been a war with them?” “No, there really hasn’t. I swear.” Muller relayed. After a moment he said, “All right. I won’t aric you to fill me in on all the other news developments. 1 dWt really give a damn. How long are you people staying on Lemnos?” “We don’t know yet. A few weeks, I suppose. We haven’t even really begun to explore the maze. And then there’s the area outside. We want to run correlations on the work of earlier archaeologists, and — ” “Are the others going to come into the center of the maze?” Rawlins moistened his lips. “We don’t have any plan yet. It ah depends on you. We don’t want to impose on you. So if you don’t want us to work here — ” “I don’t,” Muller said crisply. “Tell that to your friends. In fifty or sixty years I’ll be dead, and they can sniff around here then. But while Fm here I don’t want them bothering me. Let them work in the outer four or five zones. If any of them sets foot in A, B or C, I’ll kill him.” “What about me? Am I welcome?” “Occasionally. I can’t predict my moods. If you want to talk to me, come around and see. And if I tell you to get the hell out, Ned, then get the hell out. Clear?” Rawlins grinned sunnily. “Clear.” He got to his feet. Muller, unwilling to have the boy standing over him, rose also. Rawlins took a few steps toward him. Muller said, “Where are you going?” “I hate having to talk at this distance. To shout like this. I can get a little closer to you, can’t I?” Instantly suspicious, Muller replied, “Are you some kind of masochist?” “Sorry, no.” “Well, I’m no sadist, either. I dotfl want you near me.” “It’s really not that unpleasant — Dick.” “You’re lying. You hate it like all the others. I’m like a leper, boy, and if you’re queer for leprosy I feel sorry for you, but don’t come any closer. It embarrasses me to see other people suffer on my account.” Rawlins stopped. “Whatever you say. Look, Dick, I don’t want to cause troubles for you. I’m just trying to be friendly and helpful. If doing that in some way makes you uncomfortable, well, just say so and I’ll do something else.” “That came out pretty muddled, boy. What is it you want from me, anyhow?” “Nothing.” “Why not leave me alone?” “You’re a human being and you’ve been alone here for a long time. It’s my natural impulse to offer companionship.” Muller shrugged. “I’m not much of a companion. Maybe you ought to take all your sweet Christian impulses and go away. There’s no way you can help me, Ned. You can only hurt me by reminding me of all I can no longer have or know.” Stiffening, Muller looked past the tall young man toward the shadowy figures cavorting along the walls. He was hungry, and this was the hour to begin hunting for his dinner. He said brusquely, “Son, I think my patience is running out. Leave.” “All right. Can I come back tomorrow?” “Maybe.” The boy smiled ingenuously. “Thanks for letting me talk to you, Dick. I’ll be back.” B y troublesome moonlight Rawlins made his way out of Zone A. He edged over a spring-loaded stone block that was capable of hurling him from a precipice if he applied his weight the wrong way. A small toothy animal snickered at him as he crossed. On the far side Rawlins prodded the wall in a yielding place and won admission to Zone B. Rawlins still throbbed with the impact of that brief moment of direct contact with Muller. For an instant he had received a formless incoherent emanation of raw emotion, the inner self spilling out involuntarily and wordlessly. The flow of uncontrollable innerness was painful and depressing to receive. It was not true telepathy that the Hydrans had given him . Muller could not “read” minds, nor could he communicate his thoughts to others. What came forth was this gush of self. A torrent of raw despair, a river of regrets and sorrows, all the sewage of a soul. He could not hold it back. For that eternal moment Rawlins had been bathed in it; the rest of the time he had merely picked up a vague and general sense of distress. Rawlins had felt that he was tuned to every discord in creation: the missed chances, the failed loves, the hasty words, the unfair griefs, the hungers, the greeds, the lusts, the knife of envy, the acid of frustration. the fang of time, the death of small insects in winter, the tears of things. He had known aging, loss, mortality, impotence, fury, helplessness, loneliness, desolation, self-contempt, and madness. It was a silent shriek of cosmic anger. Are we all like that, he wondered? Is the same broadcast coming from me, and from Boardman, and from my mother, and from the girl I used to love? Do we walk about like beacons fixed to a frequency we can’t receive? Thank God, then. That’s a song too painful to hear. Boardman said, “Wake up, Ned. Stop brooding and watch out for trouble. You’re almost in Zone C now.” “Charles, how did you feel the first time you came close to Muller?” “We’ll discuss that later.” “Did you feel as if you knew what human beings were all about for the first time?” “I said we’d discuss — ” “Let me say what I want to say, Charles. I’m not in any danger here. I just looked into a man’s soul, and I’m shaken by it. But — listen, Charles — he isn’t really like that He’s a good man. That stuff he radiates, it’s just noise, it’s a kind of sludge that doesn’t tell you a real thing about Dick Muller.” Ned. Get back to camp. We all agree that Dick Muller’s a fine human being. That’s why we need him.” IX W hen they met again the next morning it was easier for both of them. Rawlins, having slept well under the sleep wire, went to the heart of the maze and found Muller standing beside a tall flat-sided spike of dark metal at the edge of the great plaza. “What do you make of this?” Muller asked conversationally as Rawlins approached. “There are eight of them» one at each comer. I’ve been watching them for years. They turn. Look here.” Muller pointed to one face of the pylon. Rawlins came close, and when he was ten meters away he picked up Muller’s emanation. Nevertheless he forced himself closer. “You see this?” Muller asked, tapping the spike. “A mark.” “It took ^e close to six months to cut it. I used a sliver from the crystahine outcropping set in that wall yonder. Every day for an hour or two I’d scrape away, until there was a visible mark in the metal. I’ve been watching that mark. In the course of one local year it turns all the way round. So the spikes are moving. You can’t see it, but they move. They are some kind of calendars.” “Do — they — can — have you ever — “You aren’t making sense, boy.” ‘Tm sorry.” Rawlins backed away, trying hard to hide the impact of Mtdler’s nearness. He was flushed and shaken. At five meters the effect was not so agonizing, and he stayed there making an effort, telling himself that he was developing a tolerance for it. “You were saying?” “Is this the only one you’ve been watching?” ‘Tve scratched a few of the others. I’m convinced that they all turn. I haven’t found the mechanism. Underneath this city, you know, there’s some kind of fantastic brain. It’s millions of years old, but it still works, so it’s probably some sort of liquid metal with cognition elements floating in it. It turns these pylons and runs the water supply and cleans the streets.” “And operates the traps.” “And operates the traps,” Muller said. “But I haven’t been able to find a sign of it. I’ve done some digging here and there, but I find only dirt below. Maybe you archeologist bastards will locate the city’s brain. Eh? Any clues?” “I don’t think so,” said Rawlins. “Most of the time I go outside the city, directing the entry operations. And then when I got in, I came right in here. So I don’t know what the others may have discovered so far. If anything.” “Are they going to rip up the streets?” M^er asked. “I don’t think so. We don’t dig so much, any more. We use scanners and sensors and probe beams.” Glibly, impressed with his own improvisations, he went on headlong. “Archeology used to be destructive, of course. To find out what was under a pyramid we had to take the pyramid apart. But now we can do a lot with probes. That’s the new school, you understand, looking into the ground without digging, and thus preserving the monuments of the past for — ” “On one of the planets of Epsilon Indi,” said Muller, “a team of archeologists completely dismantled an ancient alien burial pavilion about fifteen years ago, and then found it impossible to put the thing back together because they couldn’t comprehend the structural integrity of the building. When they tried> it fell apart and was a total loss. 1 happened to see the ruins a few months later. You know the case, of course.” Rawlins didn’t. He said, reddening, “Well there are always bunglers in any discipline — ” hope there are none here. 1 don’t want the maze damaged. Not that there’s much chance of that. The maze defends itself quite well.” Mulled strolled casually away from the pylon. He said, half to himself, “The cages are closed again.” “Cages?” “Look down there. Into that street branching out of the plaza.” R awlins saw an alcove against a building wall. Rising from the ground were a dozen or more curving bars of white stone that disappeared into the wall at a height of about four meters, forming a kind of cage. He could see a second such cage farther down the street. Muller said, There are about twenty of them arranged symmetrically in the streets off &e plaza. Three times since I’ve been here the cages have opened. Those bars slide into the street, somehow, and disappear. The third time was two ni^ts ago. I’ve never seen the cages either open or close, and I’ve missed it again.” “\^at do you think the cages were used for?” Rawlins asked. ’To hold dangerous beasts. Or captured enemies.” “And when they open now — ” “The city’s still trying to serve its people. There are enemies in the outer zones. The cages are ready in case any of the enemies are captured.” “You mean us?” “Yes. Enemies.” Muller’s eyes glittered with sudden paranoid fury; it was alarming how easily he slipped from rational discourse to that cold blaze. ‘Homo sapiens. The most dangerous, the most ruthless, the most despicable beast in the universet” “You say it as if you believe it.” “I do.” “Come on,” Rawlins said. “You devoted your life to serving mankind. You can’t possibly believe — ” “I devoted my life,” said Muller slowly, “to serving Richard Muller.” He swung around so that he faced Rawlins squarely. They were only six or seven meters apart. The emanation seemed almost as strong as though they were nose to nose. Muller said, “I gave less of a damn for humanity than you might think, boy. 1 saw the stars and 1 wanted them. 1 aspired after the condition of a deity. One world wasn’t enough for me; I was hungry to have them all. So 1 built a career that would take me to the stars. I risked my life a thousand times. 1 endured fantastic extremes of temperature. I rotted my lungs with crazy gases and had to be rebuilt from the inside out. 1 ate foods that would sicken you to hear about. Kids like you worshiped me and wrote essays about my selfless dedication to man, my tireless quest for knowledge. Let me get you straight on that. I’m about as selfless as Columbus and Magellan and Marco Polo. They were great explorers, yes, but they also looked for a fat profit. The profit I wanted was in here. I wanted to stand a hundred kilometers high. 1 wanted golden statues of me on a thousand worlds. You know poetry? Fame is the spur. That last infirmity of noble mind. Milton. Do you know your Greeks, too? When a man overreaches himself, the gods cast him down. It’s called hybris, 1 had a bad case of it. When I dropped through the clouds to vissit the Hydrans, 1 felt like a god. Christ, 1 was a god. And when I left, up through the clouds again. To the Hydrans I’m a god, all right. 1 thought it then: I’m in their myths, they’ll always tell my story.” “The cage — ” “Let me finish,” Muller rapped. “You see, the truth is, I wasn’t a god, only a rotten mortal human being who had delusions of godhood, and the real gods saw to it that 1 learned my lesson. They decided to remind me of the hairy beast inside the plastic clothing. So they arranged it for the Hydrans to perform a clever little surgical trick on my brain, one of their specialties, 1 guess. 1 don’t know if the Hydrans were being malicious for the hell of it or whether they were genuinely trying to cure me of a defect, my inability to let my emotions get out to them. But they did their little job. And then I came back to Earth. Hero and leper all at once. Stand near me and you get sick. Why? It reminds you that youre an animal, too, because you get a full dose of me. So we go round and round in our endless feedback. You hate me because you leam things about your own soul by getting near me. And I hate you because you must draw back from me. What 1 am, you see, is a plague carrier, and the plaque I carry is the truth. My message is that it’s a lucky thing for humanity that we’re shut up each in our own skulls, because if we had even a little drop of telepathy, even the blurry non-verbal thing I’ve got, we’d be unable to stand each other. The Hydrans can reach right into each other’s minds, and they seem to like it, but we can’t. And that’s why I say that man must be the most despicable beast in the whole universe. He can’t even take the reek of his own kind, soul to soull” Rawlins said, "The cage seems to be opening.” 44TT^hat? Let me look!” Muller Vy came jostling forward. Unable to step aside rapidly enough, Rawlins received the brunt of the emanation. It was not as painful this time. Images of autumn came to him: withered leaves, dying flowers, a dusty wind, early twilight More regret than anguish over the shortness of life, the necessity of the condition. “It’s withdrawn by several centimeters already. Why didn’t you tell me?” “I tried to. But you weren’t listening.” “No. No. My damned soliloquizing.” Muller chuckled. “Ned, I’ve been waiting years to see this. The cage actually in motion. Look how smoothly it moves, gliding into the ground. This is strange, Ned. It’s never opened twice the same year before, and here’s it’s opening for the second time this week.” The cage was fully open now. There was no sign of the bars except the row of small openings in the pavement. Rawlins said, “Have you ever tried to put anything in the cages? Animals?” “Yes. I dragged a big dead beast inside one. Nothing happened. Then I caught some live little ones. Nothing happened.” He frowned. I once thought of stepping into the cage myself to see if it would close automatically when it sensed a live human being. But I didn’t. When you’re alone you don’t try experiments like that.” He paused a moment. “How would you like to help me in a little experiment right now, eh, Ned? Just step across into the alcove and wait a minute or so. See if the cage closes on you,” “And if it does,” Rawlins said, not taking him seriously, “do you have a key to let me out?” “I have a few weapons. We can always blast you out by lasing the bars.” “That’s destructive. You warned me not to destroy anything here.” “Sometimes you destroy in order to learn. Go on, Ned. Step in.” Muller’s voice grew flat and strange. He was standing in an odd expectant half-crouch, hands at his sides, fingertips bent inward toward his thighs. As though he’s going to throw me into the cage himself, Rawlins thought. Boardman said quietly in Rawlin’s ear, “Do as he says, Ned. Get into the cage. Show him that you trust him.” I trust him, Rawlins told himself. But I don’t trust that cage. He had uncomfortable visions of the floor of the cage dropping out as soon as the bars were in placed Of himself dumped into some underground vat of acid or lake of fife. The disposal pit for trapped enemies. “Do it, Ned,” Boardman murmured. I t was a grand crazy gesture. Rawlins stepped over the row of small openings and stood with his back to the wall. Almost at once the curving bars rose from the groimd and locked themselves seamlessly into place above his head. The floor seemed stable. No death-rays lashed out at him. “Fascinating,” Muller said. “It must scan for intelligence. When I tried with animals, nothing happened. Dead or alive. What do you make of that, Ned?” ‘Tm very glad to have your research. I’d be happier if you’d let me out now.” “I can’t control the movements of the bars.” “You said you’d laser them open.” “But why be destructive so fast? Let’s wait, shall we? Perhaps the b^s will open again of their own accord. You’re perfectly safe in there, til bring you food, if you have to eat/’ “Stay cool,” Boardman advised. ‘Tf necessary, we can get you out of that ourselves. It’s important to humor Muller in everything you can until you’ve got real rapport widi him.” Muller said, “That was pretty brave of you, Ned. Or stupid. I’m sometimes not sure if there’s a di^ tinction. But I’m grateful, anyway. I had to know about those cages.” “Glad to have been of assistance. You see^ human beings aren’t all that monstrous.” “Not consciously. It’s the sludge inside that’s ugly, Rawlins.” He sat down crosslegged. “Did you make any attempt at all to get yourself fixed when you returned to Earth?” “1 talked to the shapeup boys. They couldn’t begin to figure out what changes had been made in my neural flow, and so they couldn’t begin to figure out how to fix things.” “How long did you stay?” “A few months. Long enough to discover that there wasn’t one human being 1 knew who didn’t turn green after a few minutes of close exposure to me. 1 tried some fancy drugs, and then 1 tried drink, and then 1 tried living dangerously. And at the end of it 1 was still alive. 1 was in and out of four neuropsychiatric wards in a single month. 1 tried wearing a padded lead helmet to shield the thought radiations. It was like trying to catch neutrinos in a bucket,” Muller spat. “You know, I could always take society or leave iU When I was among people I was happy. I was cordial; 1 had the social graces. I wasn’t a slick, sunny article like you, all overflowing with kindness and nobility, but 1 interacted with others, 1 related, 1 got along. Then 1 could go on a trip for a year and a half and not see or speak to anyone, and that was all right too. But once 1 found out that 1 was shut off from society for good, 1 discovered that 1 had needed it after all. But that’s over. I outgrew the ne^, boy. 1 can spend a hundred years alone and never miss one souL 1 trained myself to see humanity as humanity sees me: something sid^ening, a damp hunkering crippled thing avoid^ To heU with you aU. I don’t owe any of you anything, love included. 1 have no obligations. 1 could leave you to rot in that cage» Ned, and never feel upset about it. 1 could pass that cage twice a day and smile at your skull.” “You speak as if you belong to an alien race,” Rawlins said in wonder. “No. 1 belong to the human race. I’m the most human being there is, because Tm the only one who can’t hide his humanity. What’s inside me is also inside you. I speak for man I tell the truth. I’m the skull beneath the face, boy. I’m the hidden intestines. I’m ail the garbage we pretend isn’t there, all the filthy animal stuff, the lusts, the little hates, the sicknesses, the envies.” Rawlins said quietly, “Why did you decide to come to Lemnos?” “A man named Charles Boardman put the idea into my head.” X R ’awlins recoiled in surprise at the mention of the name. Muller said, “You know him?” ‘Well, yes. Of course. He — he’s a , very important man in the government” “It was Boardman who sent me to Beta Hydri IV. Oh, he didn’t trick me into it, he didn’t have ^ to persuade me in any of his slippery ways. He simply played on my ambitions. There’s a world there with aliens on iU he said, and we want a man to visit it Probably a suicide mission, but it would be man^s first contact with another intelligent species, and are you interested? So of Course 1 went. And afterward, when 1 came back this way, he tried to duck me a while, either because he couldnH abide being near me or because he couldn’t abide his own guilt, and fi^ nally 1 caught up with him and 1 said, look at me, Charles, this is how 1 am now, where can 1 go, what shall 1 do? 1 got close to him. His face changed color. 1 could see the nausea in his eyes. And he reminded me about the maze on Lemnos.’ “Why?” “He offered it as a place to hide. I suppose he thought I’d be killed on my way into the maze. But I told Boardman I wouldn’t think of it 1 wanted to cover my trail. 1 blew up and insisted that the last thing in the world I’d do was come here. Then I spent the month on skids in Under New Orleans, and when 1 surfaced again I rented a ship and came here, using maximum diversionary tactics to insure that nobody found out my true destination.” Rawlins said, “How did you get inside the maze?” “Through sheer bad luck.” “Bad luckr “I was trying to die in a blaze of glory,” said Muller. ”I didn’t give a damn if 1 survived the maze or not. I just plunged right in and headed for the middle. The trouble was, Ned, I’m a survival type. It’s an innate gift, maybe even something paranor^ mat. 1 have unusual reflexes. Also my urge to stay alive is well developed. Besides that, I had mass detectors and some other useful equipment. So I came into the maze, and whenever I saw a corpse lying about I looked a little sharper than usual, and I stopped and rested when I felt my visualization of the place beginning to waver. I fully expected to be killed in Zone H. I Wanted it. But it was my luck to make it where everybody failed.” He said, “Are you getting hungry, boy?” “A little.” “Don’t go away. I’ll bring you some lunch.” M uller strode toward the nearby buildings and disappeared. Rawlins said quietly, “This .is awful, Charles. He’s obviously out of his mind.” “Don’t be sure of it,” Boardman replied. “He may be playing a game with you, pretending to be crazy to test your good faith.” Muller returned, carrying a platter of meat and a handsome crystal beaker of water. “Best I can offer,” he said. The water had an agreeable flavor, or lack of flavor. Muller sat quietly before the cage, eating. Rawlins noticed that the effect of his emanation no longer seemed so disturbing, even at a range of less than five meters. Obviously one builds a tolerance to it, he thought. , • Rawlins said after a while, “Would you come out and meet my companions in a few days?” . “Absolutely not.” “They’d be eager to talk to you.” “I have no interest in talking to them. I’d sooner talk to wild beasts.” “You talk to me,” Rawlins pointed out. “For the novelty of it. And because your father was a good friend. Aud because as human beings go, boy, you’re reasonably acceptable. But I don’t want to be thrust into any miscellaneous mass of bug-eyed archeologists.” Possibly meet two or three of them,” Rawlins suggested. “Get used to the idea of being among people again.” "Why should I get used to the idea of being among people again?” Rawlins said uneasily, “Well, because there are people here, because it’s not a good idea to get too isolated from — ” “Are you planning some sort of trick? Are you going to catch me and pull me out of this maze? Come on, come on, boy, what’s in back of that little mind of yours? What motive do you have for softening me up for human contact?” Rawlins faltered. In the awkward silence Boardman spoke quickly, supplying the guile he lacked, prompting him. RawUns listened and did his best. H e said, “You’re making me out to be a real schemer, Dick. But I swear to you I’ve got nothing sinister in mind. I admit I’ve been softening you up a little, jollying you, trying to make friends with you, and I guess I’d better tell you why.” “I guess you’d better.” It’s for the archeological survey’s sake. We can spend only a few weeks here. You’ve been here — what is it, nine years? You know so much about this place, Dick, and I t hink it’s unfair of you to keep it to yourself. So what I was hoping, I guess, was that I could get you to ease up, then maybe come to Zone E, talk to the others, answer their questions, explain what you know about the maze — ” “Unfair to keep it to myself?” “Well, yes. To hide knowledge is a sin.” “Is it fair to mankind to call me unclean and run away from me?” “That’s a different matter,” Rawlins said. “It’s beyond all fairness. It’s a condition you have, an unfortunate condition that you didn’t deserve, and everyone is quite sorry that it came upon you, but on the other hand you surely must realize that from the viewpoint of other human beings it’s rather difficult to take a detached attitude toward your — ■ your — ” “Toward my stink,” Muller supplied. “All right. It’s rather difficult to stand my presence. Therefore I willingly refrain from inflicting it upon your friends. Get it out of your head that I’m going to speak to them or sip tea with them or have anything at all to do with them. I have separated myself from the human race and I stay separated, and it’s irrelevant that I’ve granted you the privilege of bothering me.” Boardman continued to instruct him. Rawlins, with the sour taste of lies on his tongue, went on, “I can’t blame you for being bitter, Dick. But I still think it isn’t right for you to withhold information from us. I mean, look back on your exploring days. If you landed on a planet, and someone had vital information you had come to find, wouldn’t you make every effort to get that information, even though the other f)erson had certain private problems which — “Fm sorry,” said Muller frostily. “I’m beyond caring.” He walked away, leaving Rawlins alone in the cage with two chunks of meat and the beaker of water, nearly empty. When Muller was out of sight Boardman said, “He’s a touchy one, all right. But I didn’t expect sweetness from him. You’re getting to him, Ned. You’re just the right mixture of guHe and naivete.” “And I’m in a cage.” “That’s no problem. We can send a drone to release you if the cage doesn’t open by itself soon.” , “Muller isn’t going to work out,” Rawlins murmured. “He’s full of hate. It trickles out of him everywhere. We’ll never get him to cooperate. I’ve never seen such hate in one man.” “You don’t know what hate is,” said Boardman. “And neither does he. I tell you everything is moving well. There are bound to be some setbacks, but the fact that he’s talking to you at all is the important thing. He doesn’t want to be full of hate. Give him half a chance to get off his frozen position, and he will.” M uller did not return. The afternoon grew darker and the air became chilly. Rawlins huddled uncomfortably in the cage. He tried to imagine this city when it had been alive, when this cage had been used to display prisoners captured in the maze. In the eye of his mind he saw a throng of the city-builders, short and thick, with dense coppery fur and greenish skin, swinging their long arms and pointing toward the cage. And in the cage huddled a thing like a giant scorpion, with waxy claws that scratched at the stone paving blocks, and fiery eyes, and a savage tail that awaited anyone who came to close. Harsh music sounded through the city. Alien laughter. The warm musky reek of the city-builders. Children spitting at the thing in the cage. A trapped creature, hideous and malevolent, lonely for its own kind, its hive on a world of Alphecca or Markab, where waxy tailed things moved in shining tunnels. For days the city-builders came, mocked reproached. He grew sick of their massive bodies and their intertwining spidery fingers, of their flat faces and ugly tusks. And a day came when the floor of the maze gave way, for they were tired of the outworlder captive, and down he went, tail lashing furiously, down into a pit of knives. It was night. Rawlins had not heard from Boardman for several hours. He had not seen Muller since early afternoon. Animals were prowling the plaza, mostly small ones, all teeth and claws. Rawlins had come unarmed today. Hunger and cold assailed him. He searched the darkness for Muller. This had ceased to be a joke. “Can you hear me?” he said to Boardman. “We’re going to get you out soon.” “Yes, but when? “We sent a probe in, Ned.” “It shouldn’t take more than fifteen minutes for a probe to reach me. These zones aren’t really hazardous.” Boardman paused. “Muller intercepted the probe and destroyed it an hour ago.” “Why didn’t you tell me that?” ‘We’re sending several drones at Boardman said. “Muller’s bound to overlook at least one of them. Everything’s perfectly all right, Ned. You’re in no danger.” “Until something happens,” Rawlins said gloomily. Cold, hungry, he slouched against the wall and waited. He saw a small lithe beast stalk and kill a much bigger animal a hundred meters away in the plaza. He watched scavengers scurrying in to rip away slabs of bloody meat. He craned Ws neck to search for the drone probe that would set him free. No probe appeared. He felt like a sacrificial victim, staked out for the kilk , The scavengers had finished their work. They came padding across the plaza toward him — little weaselshaped beasts with big tapering heads and paddle-shaped paws from which yellow recurving claws protruded. Their eyes were red in yellow fields. They studied him with interest, solemnly, thoughtfully. Blood, thick and purplish, was smeared over their muzzles. A long narrow snout intruded between two bars of his cage. Rawlins kicked at it. The snout withdrew. To his left, another jutted through. Then there were three snouts. And then the scavengers began slipping into the cage on all sides. Boardman had established a comfortable little nest for himself in the Zone F camp. Under the mUky-white curve of the extrusion dome he had carved a private sector with radiant heating, glow-drapes, a gravity suppressor, and even a liquor console. Brandy and other delights were never far away. He slept on a soft inflatable mattress covered with a thick red quilt inlaid with heater strands. Greenfield entered. “We’ve lost another drone, sir,” he said crisply. “That leaves three in the inner zones.” Boardman flipped the ignition cap on a cigar. “Is Muller going to get those too?” “I’m afraid so. He knows the access routes better than we do. He’s covering them all.” “And you haven’t sent any drones in through routes we haven’t charted?” ‘Two, sir. Lost them both.” “Umm. We’d better send out a great many probes' at once, then, and hope we can slip at least one of them past Muller. That boy is getting annoyed at being caged. Change the program, will you? The brain can manage diversionary tactics if it’s told. Say, twenty probes entering simultaneously.” “We have only three left,” Greenfield said. “Who allowed this to happen? Call Hosteen! Get those templates working! I want fifty drones built by morning! No, make it eighty! Of all the stupi^ty, Greenfield!” Boardman puffed furiously. He dialed for brandy, the thick, rich, viscous stuff made by Prolepticalist fathers on DeUeb XIII. The situation was growing infuriating. He knew that he was in danger of losing his perspective — the worst of sins. The delicacy of this assignment was getting to him. All these mincing steps, the tiny complications, the painstaking edgings tdward and away from the goal. Rawlins in the cage. Rawlins and his moral qualms. Muller and his neurotic world-outlook. The little beasts that nipped at your heels here and thoughtfully eyed your throat. The traps these demons had built. And the waiting extragalactics, saucer-eyed, radio-sensed, to whom even a Charles Boardman was no more than an insensate vegetable. Doom overhanging all. With a petulant gesture of his hand Boardman reactivated his communication link with Ned Rawlins. The screen showed him moonlight, curving bars and small furry snouts bristling with teeth. “Ned?” he said. “Charles here. We’re getting you those drones, boy. We’ll have you out of that stupid cage in five minutes, do you hear, five minutes.” Rawlins was very busy. It seemed almost funny. There was no end to the supply of the little beasts. They came nosing through the bars two and three at a time, weasels, ferrets, minks, stoats, whatever they were, all teeth and eyes. But they were scavengers, not killers. They clustered about him, brushing his ankles with their coarse fur, pawing him, slicing through his skin with their claws, biting his shins. He trampled them. He learned very quickly that a booted foot placed just behind the head could snap a spinal column quickly and effectively. Then, with a swift kick, he could sweep his victim into a corner of the cage, where others would pounce upon it at once. Cannibals, too. Rawlins developed a rhythm of it. Turn, stomp, kick. Turn, stomp, kick. Crunch. Crunch. Crunch. They were cutting him up badly. For the first five minutes he scarcely had time to pause for breath. He took care of at least twenty of them in that time. Against the far side of the cage a heap of ragged little corpses had risen, with their comrades nosing around hunting for the tender morsels. At last a moment came when all the scavengers cm:rently inside the cage were busy with their fallen cohorts, and no more lurked outside. Rawlins had a momentary respite. He seized a bar with one hand and lifted his left leg to examine the miscellany of cuts, scratches and bites. Do they ^ve a posthumous Stellar Cross if you die of galactic rabies, he wondered? His leg was bloody from the knee down, and the wounds, though not deep, were hot and painful. Suddenly he discovered why the scavengers had come to him. While he paused he had time to inhale, and he smelled the ripe fragrance of rotting meat. He could almost visualize it: a great bestial corpse, split open at the belly to. expose red sticky organs, perhaps a maggot or two circumnavigating the mound of flesh — Nothing was rotting here. Rawlins realized that it must be some sensory delusion: an olfactory trap touched off by the cage, evidently. The cage was broadcasting the stink of decay. Why? Obviously to lure that pack of little weasels inside. A refined form of torture. He wondered if Muller had somehow seen behind it, going off to a nearby control center to set up the scent. A fresh battalion of beasts was scurrying across the plaza toward the cage. These looked slightly larger, although not so large that they would not fit between the bars, and their fangs had ‘an ugly gleam in the moonlight. Rawlins hastily stomped three of the snuffling, gorging . cannibals still alive in his cage and stuffed them through the bars, giving them a wrist-flip that tossed them ei^t or ten meters outside the cage. Good. The newcomers halted skiddingly and began at once to pounce on the twitching, not quite dead bodies that landed before &em. Only a few of the scavengers bothered to enter the cage, and these came spaced widely enough so that Rawlins had a chance to trample each in turn and toss it meters. The last few survivors, stuffout to feed the onrushing horde. At that rate, he thought, he could get rid of them all, if only new ones would stop coming. New ones finally did stop coming. He had killed seventy or eighty by this time; the stink of raw blood overlaid the synthetic stench of rot; his legs ached from all the carnage and his brain was orbiting dizzyingly. But at length the night grew peaceful once more. Bodies, some clad in fur, some just frameworks of bone, lay strewn in a wide arc before the cage. A thick deep-hued puddle of mingled bloods spread over a dozen square meters. The last few survivors, stuffed on their gluttony, had gone slinking away without even trying to harass the occupant of the cage. Weary, drained, close to laughter and close to tears, Rawlins clung to the bars and did not look down at his throbbing, blood-soaked legs. He felt the fire rising in him. He imagined alien microorganisms launching their argosies in his bloodstream. T hree bulky brutes paraded toward him from different directions. They had the stride of lions, but the swinishness of boars: lowslung, sharp-backed creatures, 100 kilograms or so, with long pyramidal heads, slavering thin-lipped mouths, and tiny squinting eyes arranged, two sets of two on either side, just before their ragged droopy ears. Curving tusks jutted down and intersected smaller and sharper canine teeth that rose from powerful jaws. They rooted about a bit in the heap of scavenger corpses. But clearly they were no scavengers themselves; they were looking for living meat, and their disdain for the broken cannibalized little bodies was evident. When they had completed their inspection, they swung about to stare at Rawlins. Rawlins felt grateful for the security of his cage. He would not care to be outside, unprotected and exhausted, with these three cruising the city for their dinner. At that moment, of course, the bars of the cage began to retract. Muller, arriving just then, took in the whole scene. “Get down!” he yelled. ^ Rawlins got down by taking four running steps to the left, slipping on the blood-slicked pavement, and skidding into a heap of small cadavers at the edge of the street. In the same moment Muller fired. Three quick bolts brought the pigs down. Muller started to go to Rawlins, but then one of the robots from the camp in Zone F appeared, gliding cheerfulUy toward them. Muller cursed softly. He pulled the destructor globe from his pocket and aimed the window at the robot. The robot disintegrated. Rawlins had managed to get up. “You should not have blasted it,” he said woozily. “It was just coming to help.” “No help was needed,” said Muller. “Can you walk?” “I think so.” “How badly are you hurt?” “I’ve been chewed on, that’s all. It isn’t as bad as it looks.” “Come with me,” Muller said. Already more scavengers were filing through the plaza, drawn by the mysterious telegraphy of blood. Small toothy things were getting down to serious work on the trio of fallen boars. Forgetting his own emanation, Muller seized him by the arm. Rawlins winced and twitched away, and then, as if repenting the appearance of rudeness, gave Muller his arm again. They crossed the plaza together. “In here,” Muller said roughly. They stepped into the hexagonal cell where he kept his diagnostat. Muller sealed the door, and Rawlins sank down limply on the bare floor. Muller said, “How long were you under attack?” “Fifteen, twenty minutes. I don’t know. There must have been fifty or a hundred of them. I kept breaking their backs. And then the cage went away.” Rawlins laughed wildly. “That was the best part. I had just finished smashing up all those little bastards, and I was catching my breath, and then the three big monsters came along, and so naturally the cage vanished and — ” “Easy,” Muller said. “You’re talking so fast I can’t follow everything. Get those boots off, and we’ll patch those legs of yours.” Rawlins picked at the catches. “Can you help me? I’m afraid that I can’t — ” “You won’t like it if I come any closer,” Muller warned. “To hell with that!” Muller shrugged. He approached Rawlins and manipulated the broken and bent snaps of his boots. The metal chasing was scarred by tiny teeth; so were the boots themselves, and so were the legs. In a few moments Rawlins was out of his boots and leggings. His legs were in bad shape, though none of the wounds seemed really serious; it was just that there were so many of them. MuUer got the diagnostat going. The lamps glowed, and the receptor slot beckoned. A blue light played on his wounds. In the bowels of the diagnostat things chuttered and clicked. A swab came forth on a jointed arm and raa deftly and lightly up his left leg to a point just above the knee. The machine engulfed the bloody swab and began to digest it back to its component molecules while a second swab emerged to clean up his other leg. Rawlins bit his lip. He was getting a coagulant as well as a cleanser, so that when the swabs had done their work all blood was gone and the shallow gouges and rips were revealed. It still looked pretty bad, Muller thought, though not as grim as before. T he diagnostat produced an ultrasonic node and injected a golden fluid into Rawlin’s rump. Pain-damper. A second injection, deep amber, was probably some kind of all-purpose antibiotic to ward off infection. Rawlins grew visibly less tense. Now arms sprang forward from various sectors of the device, inspecting Rawlins’s lesions in detail scanning them for necessary repairs. There was a humming sound and three sharp clicks. Then the diagnostat began to seal the wounds, clamping them firmly “You shouldn’t be doing this,” said Rawlins. “We have our own medical supplies back in camp. You must be nming short on necessities. All you had to do was let the drone probe take me back to my camp, and — ” “I don’t want those robots crawling around in here. And the diagnostat has at least a fifty-year supply of usefuls. I don’t get sick often.” The machine released Rawlins, who swimg away from it and looked up at Muller. The wildness was gone from the boy’s face now. Muller said. “I didn’t think that you’d be attacked by beasts or I wouldn’t have left you alone so long. You aren’t armed?” “No.” “Scavengers don’t bother living things. What made them go after you?” “The cage did,” Rawlins said. “It began to broadcast the smell of rotting flesh. A lure. Suddenly they were crawling all over me. I thought they’d eat me alive.” Muller grinned. “Interesting. So the cage is programmed as a trap too. We got some useful information out of your little predicament, then.” Rawlins laughed. “I’m glad to have helped you learn something. Am I excused from the next round?” 4CT suppose,” Muller said. An odd Ji feeling of good will had come over him, somehow. He almost forgotten how pleasant it was to be able to help anodier person. He said, “Do you drink, Ned?” “In moderation.” “This is our local liquer,” said Muller. “It’s produced by gnomes somewhere in the bowels of the planet.” He produced a delicate flask and two wide-mouthed goblets. Carefully he tipped about twenty centiliters into each goblet. “I get this in 2k>ne C,” he explained, handing Rawlins his drink. Gingerly Rawlins tasted it. “Strongl” “About 60% alcohol, yes. Lord knows what the rest of it is, or how it’s synthesized, or why. I simply accept it. I like the way it manages to be both sweet and ^gery at the same time. It’s terribly intoxicating, of course. It’s intended as another trap, i suppose. You get happily drunk, and then the maze gets you.” He raised his goblet amiably. “Cheers.” “Cheers.” They laughed at the archaic toast and dnmk. Careful, Dickie, he told himself. You’re getting downright sociable, with this boy. Remember where you are. And why. “May 1 take some of this back to camp with me?” Rawlins asked. •Tliere’s a man there who’d appreciate it. He’s a gourmet of sorts. He’s traveling with a liquor console that dispenses a hundred different drinks, 1 imagine, from about forty different worlds.” “Anything from Marduk?” Muller asked. “The Deneb worlds? Rigel?” “I really can’t be sure. I’m no connoisseur.” “Perhaps this friend of yours would be willing to exchange — ” Muller stopped. “No. No. Forget I said that. I’m not getting into any deals.” “You could come back to camp with me,” said Rawlins. “He’d give you the run of the console, I’m sure.” “Very subtie of you. No.” Muller glowered at his liqueur. “I won’t be eased into it, Ned. I don’t want anything to do with them.” “I’m sorry you feel that way.” “Another drink?” “No. I’ll have to start getting back to camp now. It’s late.” Rawli^ finished his drink and got to his feet, grunting a little. He looked down at his bare legs. The diagnbstat had covered the wounds with a nutrient spray, flesh-colored; it was almost impossible to tell that his skin had been broken anywhere. Stiffly he puUed his tattered leggings on. “You’ll give me some of that liqueur for my friend?” Silently Muller extended the flask, half full. Rawlins clipped it to his belt. “It was an interesting day. I hope 1 can come again.” B oardman said, as Rawlins limped back toward Zone E, “How are your legs?” ‘Tired. They’re healing fast. I’ll be all right.” “Ned, listen to me, we did try to get the drones to you. I was watching every terrible minute of it, when those animals were attacking you. But there was nothing we could do. Muller was intercepting our probes and knocking them out.” “All right,” Rawlins said. “He’s clearly unstable. He wasn’t going to let one of those drones into the inner zones.” “All right, Charles. I survived.” Boardman said after a long while, “It seems you and Muller are quite good friends now. I’m pleased. It’s c^Qining to-be time for you to tempt him out.” “How do I do that?” “Promise him a cure,” Boardman said. They met again on the third day afterward, at midday in Zone B. Rawlins came diagonally across the oval ball court, or whatever it was, that lay between two snub-nosed dark blue towers» and Muller nodded. “How are your legs?” “Doing fine.” “And your friend? He liked the liqueur?” “He loved it,” Rawlins said, thinking of the glow in Boardman’s foxy eyes. “He sends back your flask with some special brandy in it and hopes you’ll treat him to a second round.” Muller eyed the flask as Rawlins held it forA. “He can go to hell,” Muller said coolly. “I won’t get into any trades. If you give me that flask I’ll smash it.” “Why?” “Give it here, and I’ll show you. No. Wait. Wait. I won’t. Here, let me have it.” Rawlins surrendered it. Muller cradled the lovely flask tenderly in both hands, activated the cap, and put it to his lips. “You devils,” he said in a soft voice. “What is this, from the monastery on Deneb XIII?” “He didn’t say. He just said you’d like it.” “Devils. Temptations. It’s a trade, damn you! But only this once. Where have you been all week, anyway?” “Working.” “Where are they excavating?” “They aren’t excavating at aU. They’re using sonic -probes at the border between Zone E and F. Trying to determine the chronology, whether the whole maze was built at once, or in accretive layers out from the middle. What’s your opinion, Dick?” “Go to hell. No free archeology out of me!” Muller sipped the brandy again. ‘You’re standing pretty close to me, aren’t you?” “Four or five meters, I’d guess.” “You were closer when you gave me the brandy. Why didn’t you look sick? Didn’t you feel the effect?” “I felt i^ yes.” “And hid your feelings like the good stoic you are?” Shrugging, Rawlins said genially, “1 guess the effect loses impact on repeated exposure. Have you ever noticed that happening with someone else?” “There were no repeated exposures with anyone else,” said Muller. “Come over here, boy. See the sights. This is my water supply. Quite elegant. This black pipe runs right around Zone B.” Muller knelt and stroked the aqueduct. “There’s a pumping system. Brings water up from some underground aquifer^ maybe a thousand kilometers down. Over here, you see, here’s one of the spigots. Every fifty meters. As far as 1 can tdl, it’s the water supply for the entire city, right here, and so perhaps the builders didn’t need much water. No conduits that I’ve found. No real plumbing.” Muller cupped his hand under the ornately engraved spigot, a thing of concentric ridges. Water gushed. Muller took a few quick gulps; the flow ceased the moment the hand was t^en from the area below the spigot. A scanning system of some kind, Rawlins thou^t. Clever. How had it lasted all these millions of years? T hey went into Zone A, an easy stroll. Muller was in a talkative mood. The conversation was fitful, dissolving every now and then into an acid spray of anger or self-pity. but most of the time Muller remained calm and even charming, an older man clearly enjoying the company of a younger one, the two of them exchanging opinions, experiences, scraps of philosophy. Muller spoke a good deal about his early career, the planets he bad seen, the delicate negotatk>ns on behalf of Earth with the frequently prickly colony worlds. He mentioned Boardman’s name quite often; Rawlins kept his face studiously blank. “And what about you?” Muller said finally. “You’re brighter than you pretend to be. Hampered a little by your shyness, but plenty of brains, carefully hidden behind college-boy virtues. What do you want for yourself, Ned? What does archeology give you?” Rawlins looked him straight in the eyes. “A chance to recapture a million pasts. I’m as greedy as you are. I want to know how things happened, how they got this way. Not just on Earth or in the System. Everywhere.” “Well spokenP’ Rawlins said, “1 suppose I could have gone in for diplomatic service, the way you did. Instead I chose this. 1 think it’ll work out. There’s so much to discover, here and everywhere else. We’ve only begun to look.” ‘The ring of dedication is in your voice. 1 like to hear that sound. It reminds me of the way 1 used to talk.” Rawlins said, “Just so you don’t think I’m hopdessly pure, 1 ought to say that it’s personal curiosity that moves me on, more than abstract love of knowledge.” ' “Understandable. Forgiveable. We are not too different, really. Allowing for forty-odd years between us. Don’t worry so much about your motives, Ned. Go to the stars, see, do. Enjoy. Eventually life will sma^ you, the way it’s smashed me, but that’s far off.” Rawlins felt the warmth of the man now, the reaching out of genuine sympathies. There was still th^ carrier wave of nightmare, though, the unending broadcast out of the mucky depths of the soul, attenuated at this distance but unmistakeable. Imprisoned by his pity, Rawlins hesitated to say what it now was time to say. Boardman prodded him irritably. “Go on, boyl Slip it ini” “You look very far away,” Muller said. “Just thinking how — how sad it is that you won’t trust us at all. That you have such a negative attitude toward humanity/’ “I come by it honestly.” “You don’t need to spend the rest of your life in this maze, though. There’s a way out.” “Garbage.” “Listen to me,” Rawlins said. He took a deep breath and flashed his quick, transparent grin. “1 talked about your case to our expedition medic. He’s studied neurosurgery. He says there’s a way to fix what you have, now. Recently developed, the last couple of years. It — shuts off the broadcast, Dick. We’ll take you back to Earth. For the operation, Dick. The cure.” The sharp glittering barbed word came swimming along on the breast of a torrent of bland sounds and speared him in the gut. Cure. He stared. There was reverberation from the looming dark buildings. Cure. Cure. Cure. Muller felt the poisonous temptation gnawing at his liver. “No,” he said. “That’s garbage. A cure’s impossible.” “How can you be so sure?” “I know.” “Science progresses in nine years. They understand how the brain works, now. Its electrical nature. What they did, they built a tremendous simulation intone of the lunar labs, and they ran it all through from start to finish.” “You look so angelic,” . Muller said. “Those sweet blue eyes and that golden hair. What’s your game, Ned? Why are you reeling off all this nonsense.” Rawlins reddened. “It isn’t nonsensel” “I don’t believe you. And I don’t believe in your cure.” There was a long sticky silence. Muller revolved a maze of thoughts. To leave Lemnos? To have the curse lifted? To hold a woman in his arms again? Breasts like fire against his skin? Lips? Thigbs? To rebuild his career? To reach across the heavens once more? To shuck nine years of anguish? To believe? To go? To submit? “7j there a cure?” “The medic says there is.” “I think you’re lying to me, boy;” Rawlins danced away. “What do I have to gain by lying?” ‘T can’t guess.” “All right, I’m lying,” Rawlins said brusquely. “There’s no way to help you. Let’s talk about something else.” “Why did you tell me that story if it wasn’t true?” “I said we’d change the subject.” ‘^Let’s assume for the moment that it is true,” Muller persisted. “That if I go back to Earth I can be cured. I want to let you know that I’m just not interested not even with a guarantee. I’ve seen Earthmen in their true natures. They kicked me when I was down. Not sporting, Ned. They stink. They reel^ They gloried in what had happened to me.” “That isn’t sol” “What do you know? You were a child. Even more then than now. They treated me as filth because I showed them what was inside themselves. A mirror for their dirty souls. Why should I go back to them now? I saw them as they really are, those few months I was on Earth after Beta Hydri IV. The look in the eyes, the nervous smile as they back away from me. Yes, Mr. Muller. ,Of course, Mr. Muller. Just don’t come too close, Mr. Muller. Boy, come by here some time at night and let me show you the constellations as seen from Lenmos. I’ve ^ven them my own names. There’s the Dagger, a long keen one. It’s about to be thrust into the Back. Then there’s the Sh^. And you can see the Ape^ too, and the Toad. They interlock. The same star is in the forehead of the Ape and the left eye of the Toad. That star is Sol, my Mend. An ugly little yellow star, ^e color of thin vomit Whose plwets are populated by ugly little people who have spread throng the universe.” say something that might offend you?” Rawlins asked. “You can’t offend me. But you can try.” “f think your outlook is distorted. You’ve lost your perspectm> all those years. You’re blaming humanity for being humanu It’s not easy to accept someone like you. If you were sitting here in my place» and 1 in yours, you’d understand tliat. It hurts to be near you. It hurts. Right now 1 feel pain in every nerve. If 1 came closer I’d tod like crying. You can’t expect people to adjust quickly to somebody like that. Not even your loved ones could — ” “1 had no loved ones.” “You were married.” “Tenmnated.” “Friends?” Thoy ran,” Muller said. “On all six legs they scuttled away from me.” “You didn’t give them time.” ‘Time enough.” “No,” Rawlins said. He shifted about uneasily on the chair. “Now Fm going to say something that will really hurt you, Dick. I’m sorry, but I have to. What you’re telling me is the kind of stuff I beard in college. Sophomore cynicism. The wodd is de^cable, you say. Evil evil evil. You’ve seen the true nature of man^ kind and you don’t want anything to do mth mankind ever again. Ei^rybody talks that way at eighteen. But k’s a phase tiiat passes. We get over the confurioos of being eighten, and we see that the world is a pretty decent place, that people tiy to do theif best, that we’re imper^t but not loathsome — ” “An eighteen-year-old has no right to those opinions. I do. I come by my hatreds the hard way.” “But why cling to them? You seem to be glorying in your own misery. Break loose] Shake it off I Come back to Earth with us and forget the past. Or at least forgive.” “No forgetting. No forgiving.” Muller scowled. A tremor of feat shook him, and he shivered. What if this were true? A genuine cure? Leave Lemnos? He felt a trifle embarrassed. The boy had semed a palpable hit with that line about sophomore cynictsm. It was. Am 1 really such a misanthrope? A pose. He ^rced me to adopt it. Now 1 choke on my own stubbomness. But there’s 210 cure. The boy’s transparent; he’s lying, though 1 don’t k^w why, wants to trap me, to get me aboaM that ship of theirs. What if it’s true? Why not go back? Muller could supply his own answers. It was the fe^ that held him. To see Earth’s billions. To enter the stream of life. Nine years on a desert island and he dread^ to return. Rawlins said, “1 can feel the flavor of your thoughts changing.” , “You can?' “Nothing specific. But you were angry and bitter before. Now I’m getting something — wistful.” “No one ever told me he could detect meanings,” Muller said in wonder. “Why did you go wistful just then, though? If you did. Thinking of Earth?” “Maybe I was.” Muller hastily patched the sudden gap in his annor. His face darkened. He denebed his jaws. He stood up and deliberately approached Rawlins^ watching the young man struggling to hide his real fedin^ of discomfort. Muller said, “I think you’d better get about your archeologizing now, Ned.” 1 still have some time.” “No you don’t. Go.” XVI A gainst Charles Boardman’s express orders, Rawlins insisted on returning all the way to the Zone F camp that evening. He found Boardman at dinner. A polished dining-board of dark wood mortised with light woods set before him. Out of elegant stoneware he ate candied fruits, brandied vegetables, meat extracts, pungent juices. A carafe of wine of a deep oUve hue was near his fleshy hand. Mysterious pills of several types rested in the shallow pits of an oblong block of black glass; from time to time Boardman popped one into his mouth. Rawlins stood at the sector opening for a long while before Boardman appeared to notice him. “I told you not to come here, Ned,” the old man said finally. “Muller sends you this.” Rawlins put the flask down beside the carafe of wine. “We could have talked without this visit.” ‘Tm tired of that. I needed to see you.” Boardman left him standing and did not interrupt his meal. “Charles, I don’t think I can keep up the pretense with him.” “You did an excellent job today,” said Boardman, sipping his wine. “Quite convincing.” “Yes, I’m learning how to tell lies. But what’s the use? You heard him. Mankind disgusts him. He’s not going to cooperate once we get him out of the maze.” “He isn’t sincei:c. You said it yourself, Ned. Cheap sophomore cynicism. The man loves mankind. That’s why he’s so bitter: because his love has turned sour in his mouth. But it hasn’t turned to hate.” Rawlins bent into a crouch to get on Boardman’s level. Boardman nudged a candied pear onto his fork, equalized gravity, and flipped it idly toward his mouth. He’s intentionally ignoring me, Rawlins thought. He said, “Charles be serious. I’ve gone in there and told Muller some monstrous lies. I’ve offered him a completely fraudulent cure, and he threw it back in my face.” “Saying he didn’t believe it existed. But he does believe, Ned. He’s simply afraid to come out of hiding.” “Please. Listen. Assume he does come to believe me. Assume he leaves the maze and puts himself in our hands. Then what? Who gets the job of telling him that there isn’t any cure, that weVe tricked him shamelessly, that we merely want him to be our ambassador again, to visit a bunch of aliens twenty times as strange and fifty times as deadly as the ones that ruined his life? Vm not going to break that news to him!” “You won’t have to, Ned. I will.” “And how will he react? Are you simply expecting him to smile and bow and say, very clever, Charles, you’ve done it again? To yield and do whatever you want? No. He couldn’t possibly.” “That isn’t necessarily true,” said Boardman calmly, ^^WIU you e^q^iain the tactics you pr<^)ose to use» theiv once you’ve informed him that the cure is a lie and that there’s a dangerous new job he has to undertake?” “1 prefer not to discuss future strategy now.” “I resign,” Rawlins sakL B oardman had been expecting something like that. A noUe gesture; a moment of headstrong defiance; a rush of virtue to the l^ain. Abandoning now his studied detachment, he looked up, his eyes locking firmly on Rawlins’s. Quietly Boardman said, “You resign? After all your talk of service to mankind? We need you, Ned.” “My dedication to mankind includes a dedication to Dick Muller,” Rawlins said stiffly. “I’ve already committed a considerable crime against him. If you won’t let me in on the rest of this scheme, I’m damned if I’ll have any part in it.” adnure your convictions.” “My resignation sdll stands.” “I even agree with your position,” said Boardman. “I’m not proud of what we must do here.” “How are you gmng to get Muller to cooperate? Drug him? Torture him? Brainblast him?” “None of those.” “What, then? I’m serious, Charles. My role in this job ends right here, ^ unless 1 know w^t’s ahead.” Bosudman coughed, drained his wine, ate a peach, took three pSls • in quick successicm. Rawlinses rebdlion had been inevitable, and he was prepared for it, and yet he was annoyed that it had come. Now was the time for calculated risks. He said, ‘1 see that it’s time to drop the pretenses, then, Ned. I’ll tell you what’s in store f < m: Dick Muller — but I want you to consider it within the framework of the larger position. Don’t forget that the little game we’ve been playing on this planet isn’t simply a matter of private moral postures.” “I’m listening, Charles.” “Very well. Dick Muller must go to our extragalactic friends and convince them that human beings ^e indeed an intelligent species. Agreed? He alone is capable of doing this, because of his unique inability to cloak his thoughts.” “Agreed.” “Now, it isn’t necessary to convince the alii^ that we’re good people, or that we’re honorable people, or. that we’re lovable people. Sim^y that we have minds and can think. That we feel, that we sense, that we are something other than clever machines. For our purposes it doesn’t matter what emotions Dick Muller is radiating, so long as he’s radiating something.” “I begin to see.” “Therefore, once he’s out of the maze, we can tell him what his assignment is to be. No doubt he’ll get angry at our trickery. But beyond his anger he may see where his duty lies. I hope so. You seem to think he won’t. But it makes no difference, Ned. He won’t be giv^ an option once he leaves his sanctuary. He’ll be tak^ to the aliens and handed over to them to make contact.” “His cooperation is irrelevant. then»” said Rawlins slowly. ^HeU just be dumped. Like a sack.” thinking sack. As our friends out there will learn.” Ned. Don’t say anything now. 1 know what you’re thinking. You hate the sdieme. You have to. 1 hate it mysetf. Just go off» now» and think it ov^. Examine it from all sides befoce you come to a decision. If you want out toauMTOW, let me know and weil cany on somehow without you, but {Hromise me youll sleep on it, first’ Rawlii^’s face was pate a mom^t Then color flooded into it He dan^ ed his lips. Boardman smiled bmgnly. Rawlins clenched his fists, squuUturned, went hastily out. A calculated risk. Boardman lock another pill. Then he reached for ttxe flask Muller had sent him. He poured a littte. Sweet, gihgery, strong. An excellent liqueur. XV Muller had almost come to like the Hydrans. What he remembered most clearly and most favorably about them was their grace of motion. He had landed in a damp, dreary part of the planet, a little to the north of its equator, on an amoeboid continent occupied by a dozen large quasi-cities, each spread ovA over several thous^md square kilometers. His life-support system, specially designed for this mission, was littte more than a thin f iltzation sheet dinging to him like a second titin. It fed air to him through a thousand dialysis plaques. He oioved easily if not comfortably within it He walked for an hour through a forest of the giant toadstool-like trees before he came upon any of the natives. The trees ran to heights of several hundred meters; perhaps the gravity, five-eighth Earthnorm, had something to do with that Their curving trunks did not look sturdy. He suspected that an external woody layer no thicker than a fing^p surrounded a broad core of soggy pulp. The cap-like crowns of the trees met in a neatiy continuous canopy overhead, cutting almost all light from the forest floor. Since the pl^ets doud layer permitted only a hazy pearl-cdored to come through> and even that was intercepted by the trees, a maroon darkness prevafled below. When he encountered the aliens he was surprised to find that they were about three meters talk He stood ringed by them, straining upward to meet their many eyes. In a quiet voice he said, “My name is Richard Muller. 1 come in friendship from the peo^es of the Terran Cultural Sphere.” Dropping to his knees, Muller traced the Pytiiagorean Theorem in the soft mcH&t soil He looked up. He smiled. “A batic concept of geometry. A universal pattern of thought.” Their vertical slitlike nostrils fiid^ered dightiy. They inclined their heads. He imagined that they were exchan^g thoug^itful glsmces. With eyes in a circlet entirely around their heads, they did not need to diange posture to do that. He sketched a line on the ground. A short distance from it he sketched a pair of lines. At a greater distance he drew three lines. He filled in the signs^ h plus 11 equals 111. “Yes?” he said. “We call it addition.” The jointed limbs swayed. Two of his listeners touched arms. Muller remembered how they had obliterated the spying eye as soon as they had discovered it, not hesitating even to examine it. He had been prepared for the same reaction. Instead they were listening. A promising sign. He stood up and pointed to his marks on the ground. I “Your turn,” he said. He spoke V quite loudly. He smiled quite broadly. “Show me that you understand. Speak to me in the universal language of mathematics.” After a long pause one of the Hydrans moved fluidly forward and let one of its globe-like foot-pedestals hover over the lines in the soil. The leg moved lightly, and the lines vanished as the alien smoothed the soil. “All right,” said Muller. “Now you draw something.” The Hydran returned to its place in the circle. “Very well,” Muller said. “There’s another universal language. I hope this doesn’t offend your ears.” He drew a soprano recorder from his pocket and put it between his lips. Playing through the filtration sheet was cumbersome. He caught breath and played a diatonic scale. Their limbs fluttered a bit. They could hear, then, or at any rate could sense vibrations. “Does that get to you?” he asked. They appeared to be conferring. They walked away from him. He tried to follow. He was unable to keep up, and soon he lost sight of them in the dark, misty forest; but he persevered and found them clustered as if waiting for him, farther on. When he neared them they began to move again. In this way they led him, by fits and starts, into their city. He subsisted on synthetics. Chemical analysis showed that it would be unwise to try local foods. He drew the Pythagorean Theorem many times. He sketched a variety of arithmetical processes. He played Schonberg and Bach. He constructed equilateral triangles. He ventured into solid geometry. He sang. He spoke French, Russian and Mandarin, as well as English, to show them the diversity of human tongues. He displayed a chart of the periodic table. After six months he still knew nothing more about the workings of their minds than he had an hour before landing. They tolerated his presence, but they said nothing to him. Eventually they wearied of him and came for him. He slept. He did not discover until much later what had been done to him while he slept. H e had had nine years to sharpen his memories. He had filled a few cubes with reminiscences, but that had mainly been in the early years of his exile, when he worried about having his past drift away to be lost in fog. He discovered that the memories grew keener with age. Perhaps it was training. He could su£QLiu 0 «i eights, sounds, tafities, odors. He coukl reconstruct whole conversations convincingly. He was able to quote the liull texts of aeweral treaties he had negotiated. He admitted to bijiiself lliat, given (he chance, he would go hack. EveryIhiflg else had been foetense and hhmer. He had fooied iidther Ned &aiii4iiis nor himself, he loiew. The contempt he fdt soanldnd was real, but not the wish to remain isolated. He waited eageijy ior Rawlins to letum. While he waited, he drank several goUets of the dtgr’s liqueur; he went on a killing spoee, nervously gunning down ammate he could not pesfl^y eoasunae in a year’s time; he oaadiipted intricate dialogues with himself; he dreamed of Earth. R awlins was ruttuihig. Muller, standing a hundind mefers deep in Zone C, saw hkn oome striding through the entcaoee, breathless, flushed. “Ycni shouldn’t rm in here,” Muller said. ‘‘Even in the safer zones. There’s ahsohitely no leBing — ” Rawhns sprawled dom beside a rianged ttoi^one tub, griping its aides and sucking air. Gtt me a drink, will you?” he gasped. ‘That hqueur of yours — »» Mniicr went to the fountain nearby and filled a handy flask with the sharp hqueur. Rawlins did not wince at ail as Muller dnew near to give it to him. He seemed altogether unaware of Muller’s emanation. Greedily, sloppily, he emptied the flask, letting dr^^s of the gleaming fl^ roll down his dun and onto W clothes. Then he closed his eyes. “Wait. Let me get my breath. I ran ail the way from Zooe F.” ' You’re lud^ to he alive, then. Muller studied hifli, perplei^ The change was striktng and unsettUng, and mere fatigue could not accomt for it all. Randias was bloodshot, flushed, puffy-faoed; Ms facial mnsckn were tightly jgait; Ms eyes moved randomly, seeking iml not finding. Dtouok? Sick? Awgged? After a long OMment Muller said, 'T’lie done a lot M thinking about om last conversatidin. I’ve decided that I was acting like a damned f col. All that cheap misanthropy 1 was dishing up.” knelt and tried to peer into the fomiger man’s shifting eyes. “Look btxe, Ndd, 1 want to lute it all back. I’m willing to return to Earth ior treatment. Even if die treatment’^ experimental, I’Ll chance it” “There’s no treatment,” said Rawlins dully. “No Treatment.” “No treatment. None. It was all a lie.” ^cs. Of cowse.'’ 'You said so 3 «iitt»elf,” Rawlins necninded him. ^ou didn’t briieve a word of what I was saying. Remember?” “A he.” 'You didn’t juderstand why 1 was aaying it hnt you said it was nommise. You teld me i was Ijtng. You wondered sriiait I had to gain by lying. I was lyii^, Dick.” “Lying.” “Yes.” “But I changed my mind,” said Midler sofitly. 'T was ready to go back to Earth.” “There’s no hope of a cure,” Rawlins said. He got slowly to his feet and ran his hand through his long golden hair. He arranged his disarrayed clothing. He picked up the flask, went to the liqueur fountain and filled it. Returning, he handed the flask to Muller, who drank from it. Muller said finally, “Do you want to explain some of this?” “We aren’t archeologists. We came here looking especially for you. It wasn’t any accident. We knew where you were all along. You were tracked from the time you left Earth nine years ago.” took precautions.” “They weren’t any use. Boardman knew where you were going, and he had you tracked. He left you in peace because he had no use for you. But when a use developed, he had to come after you.” 4(^harles Boardman sent you to ^ fetch me?” Muller asked. “That’s why we’re here, yes. That’s the whole purpose of this expedition,” said Rawlins tonelessly. “1 was picked to make contact with you because you knew my father and might trust me. All the time Boardman was directing me, telling me what to say, coacfa^g me, even telling me what mistakes to make, how to blunder successfully. He told me to get into that cage, for instance. He thought it would help win your sympathy.” “Boardman is here? Here on Lemnos?” “In Zone F. He’s got a camp there.” Muller’s face was stony. Within, all was turmoil. “Why did he do all this? What does he want with me?” Rawlins said, “You know that there’s a third intelligent race in the universe, beside us and the Hydrans.” “Yes. They had just been discovered when I left. That was why 1 went to visit the Hydrans. I was supposed to arrange a defensive alliance with them, before these other people, these extragalactics, came in contact with us. It didn’t work. But — ” “How much do you know about these extragalactics?” “Very little,” Muller admitted. “Essentially, nothing but what I’ve just told you. The day I agreed to go to Beta Hydri IV was the first time I heard about them. Boardman told us. All he said was that they were extremely intelligent — a superior species, he said — and that they lived in a neighboring cluster. And that they had a galactic drive and might visit us some day.” “We know more about them now,” Rawlins said. “First tell me what Boardman wants with me.” “Everything in order and it’ll be easier.” Rawlins grinned, perhaps a bit tipsily. He said, “We don’t actually know a great deal about the extragalactics. What we did was send a ramjet out, throw it into warp, and bring it out a few thousand light-years away. Or a few million light-years. Anyway, it was a drone ship with all sorts of eyes. The place it went to was one of the X-ray galaxies, classified information, but I’ve heard it was either in Cygnus A or Scorpius II. We found that one planet of the galactic system was inhabited by an advanced race of very alien aliens.” “How alien?” ‘They see all up and down the spectrum,” Rawlins said. “Their basic visual range is in the high frequencies. They see by the light of X rays. They also seem to be able to m^e use of the radio frequ^icies to see, or at least to get some kind of sensory information. And they pick up most wavelengths in between, except that they don’t have a great deal of interest in the stuff between infrared and ultraviolet What we like to call the visible spectrum. “Wait a minute. Radio senses? Do you have any idea how long radio waves are? If they’re gmng to get any information out of a single wave, they’ll need eyes, or receptors or whatever of gigantic uze. How big are these being supposed to be?” “They could eat elejdiants for breakfast,” said Rawlins. “Intelligent life doesn’t come that big.” “What’s the limitation? This is a gas giant jdanet, all ocean, no gravity to sp^ oL piey float. They have no squai6-cul]« proUems.” “And a bunch of superwhales has developed a technc^gical culture?” Muller asked. “You won’t get me to believe — ” “They have,” said Rawlins. “1 told you, these were very alien aliens. They can’t build machinery themselves. But they have slaves,” 44 ^^h,” said Muller quietly. ‘We’re only beginning to understand this, and of course 1 don’t have much of the inside information myself, but it seems that these beings m^e use of lower life-forms, turning them essentially into radio-controlled robots. They’ll use anything with limbs and mobility. They started with certain animals of their own planet, a small dolphin-like form perhaps on the threshold of intdligence, and worked through them to achieve a space-drive. Then they got to neighboring {Janets, land planets, and took control of pseudo-primates, protochimps of some kind. They look for fing^. Manual dexterity counts a great deal to them. At present their sphere of influence covers some dghty light-years, and it i^ears to be spreading at an exponential rate.” Muller shook his head. “This is worse nonsense than the stuff you were handing me about a cure. Look, there’s a Hinting velocity for radio transmission, ri^? If they’re contrdling flunkeys from eig^ lightyears away, it’ll take ei^ty years for any command to reach its destination. Every twitch of a muscle, every trifling movement — ” “They can leave their home world,” said Rawlins. “But if they’re so big — ” “They’ve used their ^ve beings to build gravity tanks. They also have a star drive. All colonies are run by overseers in orbit a few thousand kilom^ers up, floating in a simulated home-world environmimt It takes one overseer to run one planet” MuUn: closed his eyes a moment. The image came to him of these colossal, unimaginable beasts spreading through their distant galaxy, impressing ftTiimak of all sorts into service, for^g a captive society, vicariously technological and drifting in orbit like spacebome whales to direct and coordinate the grandiose improbable enterprise, while masses of glossy pink protoplasm, fresh from the sea, bristling with perceptors functioning at both ends of the spectrum Whispering to one another in pulses of X rays. Sending out orders via radio. No, he thought. No. “Well,” he said at length, “what of it? They’re in another galaxy.” N ot any longer. They’ve impinged on a few of our outlying colonies. Do you know what they do when they find a human world? They station an orbiting overseer above it and take control of the colonists. They find that humans make outstanding slaves. At the moment they have six of our worlds. They had a seventh, but we shot up their overseer. Now they make it much harder to do that. They just take control of our missiles as they home in, and throw them back.” “If you’re inventing this,” said Muller, “I’ll kill you!” “It’s true. I swear.” “When did this begin?” “Within the past year.” “And what happens? Do they just march right through our galaxy and turn us all into zombies?” “Boardman thinks we have one chance to prevent that.” “Which is?” Rawlins said, “The aliens don’t appear to realize that we’re intelligent beings. We can’t communicate with them, you see. They function on a completely non-verbal level, some kind of telepathic system, and we’ve tried all sorts of ways to reach them, bombarding them with messages at every wavelength, without any flicker of a sign that they’re receiving us. Boardman believes that if we could persuade them that we have — well, souls — they might leave us alone. God knows why he thinks so. It’s some kind of computer prediction. He feels that these aliens work on a consistent moral scheme, that they’re willing to grab any animals that look useful, but that they wouldn’t touch a species that’s on the same side of the intelligence boundary as they are. And if we could show them somehow — ” “They see that we have cities. That we have a star drive. Doesn’t that prove intelligence?” ‘ 'Beavers make dams,” said Rawlins. “But we don’t make treaties with beavers. We don’t pay reparations when we drain their marshes. We know that in some way a beaver’s feelings don’t count.” “Do we?” “I don’t want to argue philosophy with you,” Rawlins said hoarsely. “I’m trying to tell you what the situation is. Boardman thinks that we really can get the radio beasts to leave our galaxy alone, if we show them that we’re closer to them in intelligence th^ we are to their other slaves. If we get across to them that we have emotions, needs, ambitions, dreams.” Muller spat. “Hath not a Jew eyes? Hath not a Jew hands, organs, dimensions, senses, affections, passions? If you prick us, do we not bleed?” “Like that, yes.” “How do we get this across to them if they don’t speak a verbal language?” ^Don’t you see?” Rawlins asked. “No, I — yes. Yes. God, yesl” “We have one man, out of all our billions, who doesn’t need words to communicate. He broadcasts his in« ner feelings. His souk We don’t know what frequency he uses, but they might” “Yes. Yes.” “And so Boardman wanted to ask you to do one more thing for mankind. To go to these aliens.” “What makes you think 1 would lift a finger to keep all of man’s worlds from being swallowed up?” “Your help wouldn’t have to be voluntary,” Rawlins said. N ow it came flooding forth, the hatred, the anguish, the fear, the jealousy, the torment, the bitterness, the mockery, the loathing, the contempt, the despair, the viciousness, the fury, the desperation, the vehemence, the agitation, the grief, the pangs, the agony, the furor, the fire. Rawlins pulled bade as though depths of desolation. A trick, a trick, all a trick! Used again. Boardman’s tool. Muller blazed. He spoke only a few words aloud; the rest came from within, pouring out, the gates wide, nothing penned back, a torrent of anger. Wl;^ tiie wild spasm passed Muller said, “Boardman would dump me onto the aliens whether 1 was willing to go or not?” “Yes. He said this was too important to allow you free dioice. Your wishes were irrdevant. The many against the one.” With deadly calm Muller said, “You’re part of this conspiracy. Why have you been telHng me this?” “I resigned.” “Of course.” “No, I mean it. Oh, 1 was part of it; 1 was going along with Boardman; yes, I was lying in everything I said to you. But 1 didn’t know the last part: that you wouldn’t be given any chmee. 1 had to pull out feere. 1 couldn’t let them do this to you.” “V^ thoughtful. I now have two c^ems, di, N^?l can let myself be dragged out of here to play catspaw for Boardman again — or I can kill myself a minute from now and let mankind go to hell. Yes?” “Don’t talk like that,” Rawlins said edgily. “Why not? Those are my options. You were kind enough to tell me the real situation, and now 1 can react as 1 choose. You’ve handed me a death sentence, Ned.” “No.” “What else is there? To let myself be used again?” “You could — cooperate with Boardman,” Rawlins said. He licked his lips. “No!” “You aren’t being rational.” “No, I’m not And I don’t intend to start now. Assuming that it could affect humanity’s destiny in the dightest if I bcxxime ambassador to these radio people — and I don’t buy the idea at all — it would give me great pleasure to shirk my duty. I’m grateful to you for your warning. Now that at last I know what’s going on here, I have the excuse I’ve been lookup for all along. I know a Boardman found all this distasteful, But it was also necessary, and he was not surprised that events had taken this turn. In his original analysis he had forecast two events of equal probability: that Rawlins would succeed in winning Muller out of the maze and that Rawlins would ultimately rebel and blurt the truth. He was prepared for either. Now Boardman had advanced into the center of the maze, coming from thousand places here where death is quick and probably not painful. Then let Charles Boardman talk to the aliens himself. I — ” “Please don’t move, Dick,” said Boardman from a point about thirty meters behind him. Zone F to follow Rawlins before the damage became irreparable. He could predict one of Muller’s likely responses; suicide. Muller would never commit suicide out of despair, but he might do it by way of a vengeance. With fioardman were Ottavio, Davis, Reynolds, and Greenfield. Hosteen and the others were monitoring from outer zones. Muller turned. The look on his face was not easy to behold. ‘Tm sorry, Dick,” Boardman said. “We had to do this.” “You have no shame at all, do you?” Muller asked. “Not where Earth is concerned.” “I realized that a long time ago. But I thought you were human, Charles. I didn’t comprehend your depths.” “I wish we didn’t have to do any of this, Dick. But we do. Come with us.” “No.” “You can’t refuse. The boy’s told you what’s at stake. We owe you more already than we can repay, Dick, but run the debt a little higher. Please.” “I’m not leaving Lemnos. I feel no sense of obligation to humanity. I won’t do your work.” “Dick — ” Muller said, “Fifty meters to the northwest of where I stand is a flame pit. I’m going to walk over and step into it. Within ten seconds there will be no more Richard Muller. One unfortunate calamity will cancel out another, and Earth will be no worse off than it was before I acquired my special ability.” “That’s childish. The last sin I’d ever imagine you committing.” “It was childish of me to dream of stars,” Muller said. “I’m simply being consistent. The galactics can eat you alive, Charles. I don’t care if they do. Won’t ^ou fancy being a slave? Somewhere under your skull you’ll still be there, screaming to be released, and the radio messages will tell you which arm to life, which leg to move. I wish I could last long enough to see that. But I’m going to walk into that flame pit.” Boardman said, “At least come out to Zone F with me. Let’s sit down quietly and discuss this over brandy.” “Side by side?” Muller laughed. “You’d vomit. You couldn’t bear it.” He took a shaky step toward the northwest. His big powerful body seemed shrunken and withered, nothing but sinew stretching tighter over a yielding armature. He todr another step. Boardman watdied. Casually^ Boardman gestured with two flickiDg fingers. Greenfield and Reynolds pounced. C atlike they darted forth, ready for this, and cau^ Muller by the inner forearms. Boardman saw the grayness sweep over their faces as the impact of Muller’s Held got to them. Muller struggled, heaved, tried to break loose. Davis and 0^vk> were upon him now too. A stungun would have been easier, Boardman reflected. But stunguns w^e ri^, smnetimes, on humans. They hstd been known to send hearts into wild runalways. They had no defibrillator here. A moment more and Muller was forced to his knees. "'Pisarm him,” Boardman said. Ottavio and Davis held him. Reynolds and Greenfield seardied him. From a pocket Greenfield pulled forth the deadly little windowed globe. “That’s all he seems to be carrying,” Greenfield said. “Che^ carefully.” They checked. Meanwhile Muller remained motionless, his face frozen, his eyes stony. It was the posture and the exfvession of a man at the headsman’s block. At length Greenfield looked up again. “Nothing.” Muller said, “One of my left upper molars contains a secret compartment full of carriphage. I’U count to ten and bite hard, and I’ll melt away before your eyes.” Greenfield swung around and grabbed Muller’s jaws. Boardman said, “Leave him alone. He’s jddng.” “But how do we knew — ” Greenfield began. “Let him be. Step back.” Boardman gestured. “Sti^ five meters away from him. Don’t go near him unless he move^.” They stepped away, obviously grateful to get back from the full thrust of Muller’s field. Boardman, fifteen meters frmn him, could feel faint strands of pain. He went no closer. “You can stand up now,” Boardman said. “But please don’t try to move. 1 regret this, Dick.” Muller got to his feet. His face was black with hatred, but he said nothing, nor did he move. “If we have to,” Boardman said, we’ll ta^ you in a webfoam cradle and carry you out of the maze to the ship. We’ll keep you in foam from then cm. You’ll be in foam when you meet the aliens. You’ll be absolutely heh’less. 1 would hate to do that to you, Dick. The other choice is willing cooperation. Go with us of your own free will to the ship. Do what we ask of you. Help us this last time.” “May your intestines rust,” said Muller almost casually. “May you live a thousand years with wcmxds eating you. May you choke on your own smugness and never die.” “Help us. Willingly.” Muller’s reply was dose to a snarl. Boardman sighed. This was an embarrassment. He looked toward Ottavio. “The webfoam,” he said. Rawlins, who had been standing as though in a trance, burst into sudden activity. He darted forward, seized Reynold’s gun from its holster,, ran toward Muller and pressed the weapon into his hand. “There,” he said thickly. “Now you’re in charge.” M uller studied the gun as though he had never seen one before, but his surprise lasted only a fraction of a second. He slipped his hand around its comfortable butt and fingered the firing stud. It was a familiar models only sUgfhtly changed from the ones he had known. In a quick flaring burst he could kill them Or himself. He stepped back so they could not come upon him from the rear. Then he moved the gun in an arc of some 270 degrees, taking them all in. “Stand close together,” he said. The six of you. Stand one meter apart in a straight row and keep your hands out where 1 can see them at all times.” He enjoyed the black glowering look that Boardman threw at Ned Rawlins. The boy seemed dazed, flushed, confused, a figure in a dream. Muller waited patiently as the six men arranged themselves according to his orders. He was surprised at his own calmness. “You look unhappy, Charles,” he said. “How old are you now, eighty years? You’d like to live that other seventy, eighty, ninety, I guess. You have your career planned, and the plan doesn’t include dying on Lemnos. Stand still, Charles. And stand straight. You won’t win any pity from me by trying to look old and sagging. I kngw that dodge. You’re as healthy as 1 am, beneath the phony flab.” Boardman said raggedly, ”lf it’ll make you feel better, Dick, kill me. And then go aboard the ship and do what we want you to do. I’m expendable.” “1 almost think you mean that,” Muller said wonderingly. “You crafty old bastard, you’re offering a trade. Your life for my cooperationi But where’s the quid pro quo? I don’t einjoy killing. It won’t soothe me at all to bum you down. I’ll still have my curse.” “The offer stands.” “Rejected,” Muller said. “If I kill you, it won’t be as part of any deal. But I’m much more likely to kill myself. You know, Fm a decent man at heart Somewhat unsta:ble, yes, and who’s to blame me for that? But decent I’d rather use this gim on me than on you. I’m the one who’s suffering. I can end it” “You could have ended it at any time in the past nine years,” Boardman pointed out “But you survived. You devoted all your ingenuity to staying alive in this murderous place.” “Ah. Yes. But that was different! An abstract challenge: man agtdnsi the maze. But if 1 kill myself now, thwart you. 1 put the thumb to the nose with all of mankind watching. I’m the indispensable man, you sa^ What better way, then, to pay, mankind back for my pain?” “We regretted your suffering,” said Boardman. “I’m sure you wept bitterly for me. But that was all you did. You let me go creeping away, diseased, corrupt. unclean. Now comes the release. Not really suicide: revenge.” Muller smiled. He turned the gun to finest beam and let its muzzle rest against his chest. A touch of the finger, now. His eyes raked their faces. Rawlins looked deep in shock. Only Boardman was animated with concern and fright. “1 could kill you first, I suppose, Charles. As a lesson to our young friend: the wages of deceit is death. But no. That would spoil everything. You have to live, Charles. To go back to Earth admit that you let the indispensable man dip throu^ your grasp. What a blotch on your careerl” His finger tightened on the stud. “Now,” he «ud. “Quickly.” “iVo/” Boardman screamed. “For the love of — ” “Man,” said Muller, and laughed, and did not fire. His arm relaxed. He tossed the weapon contemptuoudy toward Boardman. It landed almost at his feet. “Foam!” Boardman cried. “Quick! “Don’t bother,” said Muller. “I’m yours.” xvn F eeling that he was in disgrace, Rawlins k^t away from the others on the nearly silent outward march. He conddered his career in mins. He had Jeopardized the lives of his companions and the success of die missioa. Yet it had been worth it, he felt. A time comes when a man his stand against what he believes to be wrong. The simple moral pleasure that he took in that was balanced and over balanced by the knowledge that he had acted naively, romantically, foolishly. He could not bear to face Boardman now. He thought more than once of letting one of the deadly traps of these outer zones have him. But that too, he decided, would be naive, romantic, and fooli^. He watched Muller striding ahead, tall, proud, all tensions resolved, all doubts crystallized. And he wondered a thousand times why Muller had given back the gun. Boardman finally explained it to him as they camped for the ni^t in a precarious plaza near the outward side of Zone G. lx>ok at me,” Boardman said. “What’s the matter? Why can’t you look at me?” “Don’t toy with me, Charies. Get it over with. The tonguelashing. The sentence.” “It’s all right, Ned. You helped us get what we wanted. Why should I be angry?” “But the gun — I gave him the gun — “Confusion of ends and means again. He’s coming with us. He’s doing what we wanted him to do. Thaf s counts.” Floundering, Rawlins said, “And if he had killed himself? Or us?” “He wouldn’t have done either.” “You can say that, now. But for the first moment, when he held the gun — ” “No,” Boardman said. “I told you earlier: we’d work on his sense of honor. Which we had to reawaken. You did that. Look, here I am, the brutal agent of a brutal and amoral society, right? And I confirm aU of Muller’s worst thoughts about mankind. Why should he help a tribe of wolves? And here you are: young and innocent, full of hope and dreams. You remind him of the mankind he once served, before the cynicism corroded him. You demonstrate sympathy, love for a fellow man, the willingness to make a dramatic gesture for the sake of rigihteousness. You show Muller that there’s small hope in humanity. See? You defy me and give him a gun and make him master of the situation. He could do the obvious and bum us down. He could do the slightly less obvious, and bum himself. Or he could match your gesture with one of his own, top it, commit a deliberate act of renunciation, express his revived sense of moral superiority. He does it. He tosses away the gun. You were vital, Ned. You were the instrument through which we won him.” Rawlins said, “You make it sound so ugly when you speU it out that way. As if you had planned even this.” Boardman smiled. “Did you?” Rawlins demanded suddenly. “No. You couldn’t have calculated all those twists and turns. Now, after the fact, you’re trying to claim credit for ha^g en^eered it all But I saw you in the moment I handed him the gun. There was fear on your face, and anger. You weren’t at ^ sure what he was going to do. Only when everything worked out could you claim it went according to plan. I can see right through you, Charles!” “How delightful to be transparent,” Boardman said gaily. Carefully they traced their outward path, but they met few challenges and no serious dangers. Quickly they went toward the ship. They gave Muller a forward cabin, well apart from the quarters of the crew. He was withdrawn, subdued, self-contained; an ironic smile often played on his lips, and his eyes displayed a glint of contempt much of the time. But he was willing to do as they directed. He had had his moment of supremacy; now he was theirs. Hosteen and his men bustled through the liftoff preparations. Muller remained in his cabin. Boardman went to him, alone, unarmed. He could make noble gestures too. They faced each other across a low table. Muller waited, silent, his face cleansed of emotion. Boar^an said after a long moment, “I’m grateful to you, Dick.” “Save it.” “I don’t mind if you despise me. I did what 1 had to do. So did the boy. And now so will you.” He sat quite close to Muller. The emanation hit him broadside, but he deliberately remained in place. That wave of despair welling out to him made him feel a thousand years old. The decay of the body, the crumbling of ih& soul, the heat-death of the galaxy . the coming of winter... emptiness . ashes. ... “When we reach Earth,” said Boardman crisply, . “I’ll put ypu through a detah^ briefing. Yop^ come out of it knowing as much about the radio people as we do, which isn’t saying a great deal. After that you’ll be on your own. “Is there anyone you’d like me to have waiting for you when we dock Earthside?” “No.” “1 can send woid ahead. There are people ^o’ve never stopped loving you» Dick. They’ll be Aere if 1 ask them.” Muller said slowly, “1 see the strain in your eyes, Charles. You feel the nearness of me, and it’s ripping you apart. You feel it in your gut In your forehead. Back of your breastbone. Your face is going gray. Your cheeks are sagging. You’ll sit here if it kills you, yes, because that’s your st)1e, but it’s hek for you. If there’s anyone on Earth who never stopped loving me, Charles, the least 1 can do is spare her from bell. I don’t want to meet anyone. 1 don’t want to see anyone. 1 don’t want to talk to anyone.” “As you wish,” said Boardman. Beads of sweat hung from his bushy brows and dn^>ped to his cheeks, “^eihaps youll change your mind when you’re close to Ear&.” “I’ll never be close to Earth again,” Muller said. He spent three weeks absorbing all that was known of the giant CKtragalactic beings. They gave him quarters in a bunker on Luna and he lived quietly beneath Copernicus, moving like a robot through steely gray corridors lit by warm gbwing torches. They showed him all the cubes. They ran off a variety of recoostructs in every sensory mode. Muller listened. He absorbed. He said very little. They kept well away from him, as they had on the voyage from Lemnos. Whole days passed in which he saw no human being. When they came to him, they remained at distances of ten meters and more. The exertion was Boardman, who visited him three times a week, and made a point always of coming well within the pain range. Muller found that contemptible. Boardman seemed to be patroniziqg him with this voluntary and wholly unnecessary submissbn io discomfort. “1 wish you’d keep away,” Muller said to him on the fifth visit. “We can talk by screen. Or you could stay by the door.” “1 don’t mind the close contact.” “1 do,” said Muller. “Has it ever occurred to you that I’ve begun to , find manViivI SiS odioUS as fpa qkind ' finds me? The redr of your meaty body, Charles — it goes into my nostrils like a spike. Not just you, all the others. Sickening. Hideous. Even the look of your faces. The pores. The stupid gaping mouths. The ears. Look at a human ear closely some time, Charles. Have you ever seen anything more repulsive than that pink wrinkled cup? You all disgust me!” “I’m sorry you feel that way,” Boardman said. The bii^ng went on and on. Muller was ready after the first week to undertake his assignment, but no, they had to feed him all the data in the bank, first. He absorbed the information with twitchy impatience. A shadow of his old sdf remained to find it fascinating, a challenge worth accepting. He would go. He would serve as before. He would honor his obligation. At last they said he could depart. From Luna they took him by iondrive to a point outside the orbit of Mars, where they transferred him to a warp-drive ship already programmed to kick him to the edge of the galaxy. Alone. From the cabin of his small sleek ship he watched the technicians drifting in space, getting ready to sever the transfer line. Then they were returning to their own ship. Now he heard from Boardman, a final message, a Boardman special, inspirational, go forth and do your duty for mankind, et cetera, et cetera. Muller thanked him graciously for his words. The communications channel was cut. Moments later Muller entered warp. T he aliens had taken possession of three solar systems on the fringes of the galactic lens, each star having two Earth-settled planets. Muller’s ship was aimed at a greenish-gold star whose worlds had been colonized only forty years before. The fifth planet, dry as iron, belonged to a Central Asian colonization society that was trying to establish a series of pastoral cultures where nomad virtues could be practiced. The sixth, with a more typically Earthlike mixture of climates and environments, was occupied by representatives of half a dozen colonization societies, each on its own continent. The relations between these groups, often intricate and touchy, had ceased to matter within the past twelve months, for both planets now were under control of extragalactic overseers. Muller emerged from warp twenty light-seconds from the sixth planet His ship automatically went into an observation orbit, and the scanners began to report. Screens showed him the surface picture; via template ovttlay he was able to compare the configurations of the outposts below with the pattern as it had been prior to the alien conquest. The amplified images were quite interesting. The original settlements appeared on his screen in violet, and the recent extensions in red; Muller observed that about each of the colonies, regardless of its original ground plan, there had sprouted a network of angular streets and jagged avenues. Instinctively he recognized the geometries as ^en. In orbit, seven thousand kilometers above the sixth planet, was a glistening capsule, slightly longer on one axis than on the other, which had about the mass of a large interstellar transport ship. Muller found a similar capsule in orbit about the fifth world. The overseers. It was impossible for him to open communications with either of these capsules, or with the planets beyond. All channels were blocked. He twisted dials fitfully for more than an hour, ignoring the irritable responses of the ship’s brain, which kept telHng him to give up the idea. At last he conceded. He brought his ship close to the nearer orbiting capsule. To his surprise the ship remained under his control. Destructive missiles that had come this close to alien overseers had been commandeered; but he was able to navigate. A hopeful sign? Was he under scan, and was the alien id>le to distingifLsh him from a hostile weapon? Or was he being ignored? At a distance of one million kilom^ers he matdied velocities with the alien satellite and put his ship in a poking orbit around it He mitered his drop-capsule. He ejected himself and slid from his ship into darkness. N ow the alien seized him. There was no doubt The drop-capsule was pro gramme d for a minimumexpenditure orbit that woidd bring it skimming past the alien in due time, but Muller swifdy discovered that he was debating from that orbit Deviations are never accidental. His capsule was acoebcadJag beyond the program, whidi meant diat it had teen grasped and was being drawn forward. He accepted that. He was Idly calm, expecting nodiing and prepared for everything. The drop-capsule eased down. He saw the gleaming bulk of the alien satelUte show. Skin to metal skin, the vehicles met and toudied and joined. A hatch slid open. He drifted within. His capsule came to rest on a broad platform in an immense cavernous room hundreds of meters long, high, and broad. Fully suited, Muller stepped from it. He activated his gravity pads; for, as he antidpated, gravity in here was so dose to null that the pull was imperceptible. In the blackness he saw only a faint purplish glow. Against a backdrop of utter silence he heard a resonant booming sound, like an enormously amplified sigh, shuddering through the struts and trusses of the satellite. Despite his gravity pads he felt dizzy; beneath him the flo(^ rolled. Through his mind went a sensation like the throbbing of the sea; great waves slammed ragged beaches; a mass of water stirred and groaned in its global cavity; the world shivered beneath the burden. Muller felt a chih that his suit could not counteract. An irresistible force drew him. Hesitantly he moved, relieved and surprised to see that his limbs still obeyed his commands, though he was not entirely their master. The awareness of something vast nearby, something heaving and pulsating and sighing, remained with him. He walked down a night-drowned boulevard. He came to a low railing, a dull red line against the deep darkness, and pressed his leg against it, ke^ang contact with it as he moved forward. At one point he slipped and hit the railing widi his dbow and heard the dang of metal traveling through the entire structure. Blurred edioes drifted back to him. As though walking the maze he passed through corridors and hatches, across interloddng compartments, over bridges that spanned dark abysses, down sloping ramplike debouchments into lofty chambers whose ceilings were dimly visible. Here he moved in blind confidence, fearing nothing. He could barely see. He had no vision of the total structure of this satellite. He could scarcely imagine the purpose of these inner partitions. From that hidden giant presence c^e silent waves', an ever-intenrifying pressure. He trembled in its grip. Still he moved on, until now he was in some central gallery, and by a thin blue glow he was able to discern levels dwindling below him, and far beneath his balcony a broad tank, and within the tank something sparkling, something huge. “Here I am,” he said. “Richard Muller. Earthman.” He gripped the railing and peered downward. Did the great beast stir and shift? Did it grunt? Did it call to him in a language he understood? He heard nothing. But he felt a great deal. He felt bis soul escaping through his pores. The drain was unrelenting. Down in the pit the monster tapped his spirit, opened petcocks of neural energy, drew forth, demanded more, drew that too. “Go on,” Muller said, and the echoes of his voice danced around him. “Drink! What’s it like? A bitter brew? Drink!” His knees buckled. He sagged forward. He pressed his forehead to the cold railing. He yidded himself in glittering droplets. He gave up first love and first disa^^intment, April rain, fever and ache, pride and hope, the scent of sweat and the touch of flesh, warmth and ccdd, sweet and sour, the thunder of music, the music of thunder, silken hair knotted between his fingers, lines scratched in spongy soil, snorting stallions, glittering schools of tiny fish, the towers of Newer Chicago, the brothels of Under New Orleans, know, milk, wine, hunger, fire, pain, sleep, sorrow, apples, dawn, tears, Bach, sizzling grease, the laughter of old men, the sun on the horizon, the moon on the sea, ecstasy, grief, salt, artichokes, green fields, the light of other stars, soft thighs, whirling dancers, vision cubes, traaq>ortation pods, cold gin, crumbling l^ks, Sunday mornings, the fumes of rodcet fuel, summer flowm on a glacier’s flank, and much more. He gave it all. He waited for an answer, and none came to him, and when be was wholly empty he lay face downward, drained, hollow, staring blindly into the abyss. When he was able to leave, he left The hatch opened to pass his drop-capsule, and it rose toward his ship. Shortly he was in warp. He slept most of the way. In the vicinity of Antares he cut in the override, took command of the ship^ and filed for a change of ccuise. There was no need to return to Earfli. The monitor staflon recorded bis request, checked ;rbu1inely to see thai the channel was clear, ahH allowed him to proceed at pnce' to L^nnos. Muller entered waip again instantly. When he emerged, not far from Lemnos, he found another ^p already in orbit and waiting for him. He started to go about his business anyway, but the other ddp insisted on mal^g contact. Muller accepted the communication. “This is Ned Rawlins,” a strangely quiet voice said. “Why have you changed your flight plans?” “Does it matter? I’ve done my job.” “You haven't filed a report” Tm reporting now, then. I visited the alien. We had a pleasant^ friendly chat. Then it let me go home. Now Fm almost home. End of report.” “What are you going to do now?” “Go home,” I said. “This is home.” ‘Xemnos?” “Lemnos.” “Dick, let me come aboard. Give me ten minutes with you — in person. Please don’t say no.” “I don’t say no,” Muller replied. Soon a small craft detached itself from the other ship and matched velocities with his. Patiently Muller allowed the rendezvous to take place. Rawlins stepped into his ship and shed his helmet. He looked pale, drawn, older. They faced one another for a long silent moment. Rawlins advanced and took Muller’s wrist in greeting. “I never thought I’d see you again, Dick,” he began. “And I wanted to tell you — ” He stopped. “Yes?” Muller asked. “I don’t feel it,” said Rawlins. “/ dont feel Ur “What?” “You. Your field. Look, I’m right next to you. I don’t feel a thing. All that nastiness, the pain, the despair — it isn’t coming throughi” “The alien drank it all,” said Muller calmly. “I’m not surprised. My soul left my body. Not all of it was put back.” “What are you talking about?” “I could feel it soaking up everything that was within me. 1 knew it was changing me. Net deliberately. It was just an incidental alteration. A byproduct.” Rawlins said slowly, “You knew it, then. Even before I came on board. And yet you want to return to the maze. Why?” ‘It’s home.” “Earth’s your home, Dick. There’s no reason why you shouldn’t go back. You’ve been cured.” “Yes, said Muller. “A happy ending to my doleful story. I’m fit to consort with humanity again. My reward for nobly risking my life a second time among, aliens. How neatly done! But is humanity fit to consort with me?” “Don’t go down there, Dick. You’re being irrational now. Charles sent me to get you. He’s terribly proud of you. We all are. It would be a big mistake to lock yourself away in the maze now.” “Go back to your own ship, Ned,” Muller said. “If you go into the maze, so will I.” “I’ll kill you if you do. I want to be left alone, Ned, do you understand that? I’ve done my job. My last job. Now I retire. Purged of my nightmares.” Muller forced a thin smile. “Don’t come after me, Ned. I trusted you, and you would have betrayed me. Everything else is incidental. Leave my ship now. We’ve said all that we need to say to each other, I think, except good-bye. Remember me to Charles.” “Don’t do thisl” “There’s something down there I don’t want to lose,” Muller said. “I’m going to claim it now. Stay away. All of you. Stay away. I’ve learned the truth about Earthmen. Will you go now?” Silently Rawlins suited up. As he stuped tluoiigh the hatch. Mallei said, 'Tm ^iad you wei» the last one 1 saw. Somehow it was easier that way.” Rawlins vanished through the hatch. A short while laler Muller programmed his ship for a hypertolic orbit on a twenty-minute di^y, got into his drop<i4>itde, and re^ed himself for the descent to Lemnos. It was a quick drop and a good landing. He came down right in the impact ^ea, two kitomctere from the gateway to the maze. The sun was high and bright. MoUer walked briskly toward the maze. He had done what they wanted. Now he was going home. 44 T Tes still making gestures,” -TX Boardman said. “He'll come out of there.” “I don’t think so,’ relied Rawlins. “He meant that.” “You stood nest to him, and you felt nothing?” “Nothing. He doesn’t have it any more.” “He’ll come out, then,” Boardman said. ^'We’U watch him, and when he asks to be taken off Lemnos, well take him off. Sooner or later hell need other pec^le again. He’s been throii^ so mudi that he needs to think everything throng and 1 guess he sees tte maze as the best place for that He isn't ready to fdunge back into normal life again. Give him two years, three, fom. Hell come out. The two sets of aliens have cancried each other’s work on him, and he’s fit to rejoin society.” “1 don’t think so,” Rawlins said quietly. “I don't think it cancried out so evenly. Chades, 1 don’t think he’s human at all, any more.” Boardman lau^ied. ^hall we bet? ni o^er five to one that Muller comes out of the maze voluntarily widun five years.’ "Wefl — • “It’s a bet, then.” Rawlins the older man’s office. Night had fiiUen. He crossed the bridge outside the building. In an hour he'd be dining with someone warm and soft and willing, who was awed beyond measure by her liaison frith the famous Ned Rafriins. She was a good listener, who coaxed him for tales of daring deeds and nodded gravriy as he ^ke cA the challenges ahead. S^e was ribo good in bed. He paused on the bridge to look upward at the stars. A million million blazing points of Ught shimmered in the sky. Out there lay Lemnos, and Beta Hydri IV, and the wodds occupied by the radio beings, and all man’s dominion, and even, invisible but real, the home galaxy of the o/Aers. Out there lay a iabyrinth in a broad plain, and a forest of spongy trees hundreds of meters high, a thousand planets {Wanted with the young cities of Eardunen, and a tank of strangeness orbiting a conquaed world. In the tank lay somethiog unbearably alien. On the thousand Janets lived worried men fearing the future. Under the spongy trees walked graceful siksrt creatures with many arms. In the maze dweUed a . man. Perhaps, Rawlins thou^t, I’ll visit Muller in a year or two. It was too early to tell how the patterns would form. No one yet knew how the radio people were reacting, if at all^ to the things they had learned from Richard Muller. The role of the Hydrans, the efforts of men in their own ^fense, the coming forth of Muller from the maze, these were mysteries, shifting, variable. It was exciting and a little frightening to think that he would live through the time of testing that lay ahead. He crossed the bridge. He watched starships shattering the darkness overhead. He stood motionless, feeling the pull of the stars. All the universe tugged at him, each star exerting its finite power. The glow of the heavens dazzled him. Beckoning pathways lay open. He thought of the man in the maze. He thought too of the girl awaiting him. S uddenly he was Dick Muller, once also twenty-four years old, with the galaxy his for the asking. Was it any different for you, he wondered? What did you feel when you looked up at the stars? Where did it hit you? Here. Here. Just where it hits me. And you went out there. And found. And lost And found something else. Do you remember, Dick, the way you once felt? Tonight in your windy maze, what will you think about? Will you remember? Why did you turn away from us, Dick? What have you become? He hurried to the girl who waited for him. They sipped young wine, tart, electric. They smiled through a candle’s flickering glow. Later her softness yielded to him, and still later they stood close together on a balcony looking out over the greatest of all men’s cities. Lights stretched toward infinity, rising to meet those other lights above. He slipped his arm around her, put his hand on her bare flank, held her against him. She said, ‘‘How long do you stay this time?” “Four more days.” “And when wii you come back?” “When the job’s done.” “Ned, will you ever rest? Will you ever say you’ve had enough, that you won’t go out any longer, that you’ll take one planet and stick to it?” “Yes,” he said vaguely. T suppose. After a while.” “You don’t mean it. You’re just saying it. None of you ever settle down.” “We can’t,” he murmured. “We keep going. There are always more worlds . new suns. ...” “You want too much. You want the whole universe. It’s a sin, Ned. You have to accept limits.” “Yes,” he said. “You’re right. I know you’re right.” His fingers traveled over satin-smooth flesh. She trembled. He said, “We do what we have to do. We try to learn from the mistakes of others. We serve our cause. We attempt to be honest with ourselves. How else can it be?” “The man who went back into the maze — ” “ — is happy,” Rawlins said. “He’s following his chosen course.” ““He must hate us terribly to turn his back on the whole universe like that.” “He’s beyond hate,” Rawlins said. “Somehow. He’s at peace. Whatever he is.” ^^Whateverr “Yes,” he said gently. When I see you again, Dick, I have much to tell you, he thought. She said, “Why did he lock himself into the maze again, Ned?” “For the same reason that he went among aliens in the first place. For the reason that it all happened.” “And that reason was?” “He loved mankind,” Rawlins said. It was as good an epitaph as any. He held the girl tightly. But he left before dawn. END