Q^Uxv The Best in Pertinent Science Fiction June, 1970 Im mac 
• • 
THE PLAYER AT 
MAYER •SILVERBERG*BUDRYS 
YELLOW SKENCE 
1 '"J. ■» * '• 
W- : 
! ■ ' ’ "■ ' 
Carl Jacobi 
THE MOON OF THIN REALITY 
OUT OF MlNDSHOT 
• Duncan iunan 
John Brunner 
Whatever happened fo 
DIANETICS? 
In May 1950, a brilliant American writer, philosopher and 
Scientist shattered forever the myths and barriers surrounding the 
unknown territory of the Human Mind. 
L. Ron Hubbdrd's Dianeiics: 'The Modern Science oj Mental Health 
struck the English-speaking world like a thunderbolt. This best 
selling book heralded the breakthrough sought by Man for over 2000 
years, the discovery and identification of the source of psychosomatic ills, human aberration, unhappy interpersonal relationships 
and the technique to eradicate it! 
Many promises were made. Man could rid himself of all unwanted 
emotions, conditions and aberrations. He could attain higher states 
of existence and ability only dreamed about for centuries. 
Man could be totally free. 
Today, all the promises have been kept. 
ABOVE: the 19th edition of 
'Oianetics: the Modern Science 
of Mental Health' by L. Ron 
Hubbard. 42B pgs. S5.00 at 
most book stores and local 
Scientology Churches . 
Send mail orders with coupon 
BELOW: many are familiar 
with original book jacket. 
DIANETICS IN 1950 
Dijnelics was firsl announced to the 
public in a popular science fiction magazine in 19.S0. Without formal training or 
an organizalion, the superior technology 
in the first book made Dianetics tremendously popular. Informal groups mushroomed all over the country and hundreds of thousands actively applied Dianetic techniques with amazing results. 
Mental upset and psychosomatic ills 
vanished and miracles were commonplace. 
L. Ron Hubbard continued his research to improve the already excellent 
results from Dianetic technology and 
went far beyond. He created training 
methods far superior to existing systems 
and founded an organization to service 
the huge demand for the first truly workable technology of the human mind. 
Finally in 1966 he completed his research on the full route to the slate of 
CLEAR and TOTAL FREEDOM. 
Clip the coupon on the right and 
mail your name and address for more 
information sent you at no obligation. Don't delay, do it now. 
L. Ron Hubbard presents Scientology's 
GRAND NATIONAL CONVENTION OF THE 20TH 
ANNIVERSARY OF DIANETICS & TOTAL FREEDOM 
July 3rd, 4th and 5th at the west's most beautiful and modern convention center, The LONG BEACH ARENA, Long 
Beach California. 
Here is the complete story of the tremendous growth of 
Dianetics and its evolution into Scientology, its amazing 
technology and the culmination of 20 years of "miracles 
beyond belief." Plan now to attend this event. 
DIANETICS TODAY 
Today we have Scientology (study of 
knowledge) which was the inevitable result of L. Ron Hubbard's advanced research into the mind. Scientology goes 
beyond the mind into the realm of the 
human spirit. 
Dianetics was only part of the answer 
and now, with Scientology techniques, 
Dianetics is 1 00% workable. 
Dianetics takes a person up to a well 
and happy human being. Scientology 
goes beyond to higher stales of existence. 
Scientology is far more popular than Dianetics ever was alone. 
Today hundreds of Scientology Centers and organizations circle the globe 
and Scientologists number in the millions. 
Scientology doubles every year. 
Get all the answers! Send in your 
name and address for more information 
about Modern Dianetics, Scientology and 
our 20th Anniversary Convention. 
Get more exciting, vital information about Dianetics, Scientology 
and the Grand National Convention. Send your name and address 
to: 
DEPARTMENT G 
Church of Scientology 
916 South Westlake 
Los Angeles, Calif. 90006 
Name 
Address 
State Zip 
I I Enclosed is S5 for a copy of Dianetics: 
' — ^ the Modern Science of Mental Health. 
Galaxy is published in French, German, Italian, Japanese and Spanish. 
The U. S. Edition is published in Braille 
and Living Tape. 
GALAXY 
June, 1970 
Vol. 30, No. 3 
SHORT STORIIS 
THE PLAYER 
AT YELLOW SILENCE 4 
Carl Jacobi 
OUT OF MINDSHOT 15 
John Brunner 
SHIP ME TOMORROW 24 
William Rotsler 
OIL-MAD BUG-EYED MONSTERS ... 30 
Hayden Howard 
THE MOON OF THIN REALITY 43 
Duncan Lunan 
CHILDREN'S CRUSADE 61 
Lawrence Mayer 
SERIAL (Conclusion) 
THE TOWER OF GLASS 56 
Robert Silverberg 
FEATURES 
EDITOR'S PAGE 2 
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 27 
Algis Budrys 
GALAXY STARS 158 
Cover by GAUGHAN, suggested by 
THE MOON OF THIN REALITY 
EJLER JAKOBSSON 
Editor 
FREDERIKPOHL 
Editor Emeritus 
DONALD H. MENZEL 
Science Editor 
LESTER DEL REY 
Feature Editor 
JUDY-LYNN BENJAMIN 
Managing Editor 
FRANC L. ROGGERI 
Art Director 
JACK GAUGHAN 
Associate Art Director 
ARNOLD E. ABRAMSON 
Publisher 
BERNARD WILLIAMS 
Associate Publisher 
GALAXY MAGAZINE is published monthly by Universal Publishing & Distributing Corporation, Arnold E. Abramson, President. Main offices: 235 East 45 
Street, New York, N.Y. 10017. 60c 
per copy. 12-issue subscription: 
S6.00 in the United States, elsewhere J7.00. Second class postage 
paid at New York, N.Y. and additional mailing offices. Copyright 
^ 1970 by Universal Publishing 8, 
Distributing Corporation under 
International, Universal and PanAmerican Copyright Conventions. 
All rights reserved. The publisher 
assumes no responsibility for unsolicited material. All stories 
printed in this magazine are fiction and any similarity between 
characters and actual persons is 
coincidental. Title registered U.S. 
Patent Oftice. Printed in U.S. A. 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
Read that any way you like. 
Taste it, smell it, savor it and say 
it. Then clamp your teeth on it and 
hang on. Make up your mind that 
you’ve just promised to brace 
most of what is constantly around 
us, often masquerading as good — 
and what pursues us from the past 
and rains on us from all foreseeable tomorrows. 
Evil. 
Explore it. Chaq’un a son gout. 
Your evil may not be my evil but 
there’s enough to go around. Most 
of us have at one time or another 
been conditioned to beware of nonos ranging from sex to sacraments, youth to age, innocence to 
wisdom, love to hate, fresh air to 
pollution and birth to death. Inclusive. 
I have no idea of whether Robert A. Heinlein began his latest 
work — first to appear in print in 
the next issue of GALAXY — with 
its title: I WILL FEAR NO EVIL. 
But the book is a fearless book. It 
is also an impossible book — in the 
sense that many of today’s scientific realities were once “impossible.” 
Here is a novel that delivers, 
page by page, the thundering 
promise of its title. Mr. Heinlein, 
I am convinced, fears no evil. I 
like to think of myself as reasonably inured to the standard shivers 
but I found myself even more so 
after turning the last page. Don’t 
miss that feeling. It’s a good one. 
Try it this way: I Will Fear NO 
Evil. Then imagine a sometimes 
boisterous, sometimes sedate but 
always lively and lusty romp 
through tomorrow’s medical headlines, scare stories of crime, violence, polarization and joy peddlers — and through the secret tunnels of your mind where fear and 
evil may lurk side by side, sometimes unexpectedly. And get ready 
for some surprising laughs and 
equally surprising mental acrobatics. 
If fear of evil is the strength of 
evil, this new work by Heinline is 
magnificent. If one of the functions of science fiction is to provide insights into pending as well 
as current realities, then I WILL 
FEAR NO EVIL is a science-fiction masterpiece. 
You may or may not say to 
yourself — as I did while reading — 
that not even Heinlein can do what 
he is doing, write what he is writing, say what he is saying and 
make you go along with him. But 
make you go along with him he 
does. 
And you will fear less evil. 
— JAKOBSSON 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL, by Robert A. Heinlein 
Probably the healthiest, boldest, most entertaining and pertinent 
imaginative writing of the year! GALAXY is proud to bring you this 
superbly evocative novel— one, surely, that could have been told only in 
science fiction. Starting in the next issue! 
SnANGt 
The Dark Continents 
of 
Your Mind 
DO YOU struggle for balance? Are you forever trying to 
maintain energy, enthusiasm and the will to do? Do your personality 
and power of accomplishment ebb and flow — like a stream controlled by some unseen valve? Deep within you are minute organisms. From their function spring your emotions. They govern your 
creative ideas and moods — yes, even your enjoyment of life. Once they 
were thought to be the mysterious seat of the soul — and to be left 
unexplored. Now cast aside superstition and learn to direct intelligently these powers of self. 
Let the Rosicrucians, an age-old fraternity of thinking men and women (not 
a religion), point out how you may fashion life as you want it — by making the 
fullest use of these little-understood natural faculties which you possess. This is 
a challenge to make the most of your 
heritage as a human. Write for the Free 
Book, “The Mastery of Life/’ Address: 
Scribe M.S.B. 
ROSICRUCIANS (AMORC) 
San Jose, California 951 14 U.S.A. 
Scribe: M.S.B. 
The Rosicrucians (AMORC) 
San Jose, California 95114, U.S.A. 
Please send copy of booklet, 
“The Mastery of Life” which I 
shall read as directed. 
N ante 
Address 
City 
State 
Please Include Your Zip Code 
L 
YELLOW 
SILENCE 
CARL JACOBI 
Unconquerable man meets 
unbeatable alien— in a 
match for human souls! 
H e came out of nowhere like 
a summer storm and like thunder he went bowling down the fairways, breaking record after record. A gallery materialized about 
him, though this was no tournament, and word Hew ahead into 
the clubhouse that an unknown 
marvel was burning up the course. 
Someone recalled his name 
from the register: Forbes — Joseph 
Forbes. But nobody had seen him 
before. 
On the thirteenth, a 1,325-yard 
hole, with a dogleg to the right, he 
took a number-five trajectoryiron and, after a moment’s gaze 
through the telescopic, lofted his 
shot over a stand of cedars. He 
made an easy birdie. On the fifteenth it was thought he was too 
short, but the automated ball 
rolled down the incline and trickled across the green to drop into 
the cup — for an ace. He was 58 
at the end of the second nine. 
Though the day was hot and humid, he looked fresh as a daisy. 
I called the newspapers myself. 
As top pro at Yellow Silence 1 
thought I owed it to the press 
boys to put them on to a good 
thing. Joseph Forbes was sitting in 
a fan-back chair on the clubhouse 
veranda when the sports writers 
arrived. He answered their questions in a quiet abstract manner, 
as if he were thinking of something else. 
“No, 1 can’t recall that I ever 
made an ace before. Yes, I like 
the Yellow Silence course very 
much.” 
There was a melodious quality 
to his voice that made me think of 
distant cattle bells in the summer 
dusk. 
One of the newsmen edged closer. “And what do you think of the 
Yansis, Mr. Forbes?” 
Now there was a stupid question to put to a player. There are 
no Yansis courses in Australasia 
or in any other part of Earth, for 
that matter. Yansis don’t go in 
for self-enjoyment. But ever since 
their “migration” from the Monoceros galaxy in ’84 they have attempted, bit by bit, to take over 
this planet. 
It was the prize case of infiltration and, as we know, it very nearly succeeded. When they first arrived in their spaceships they were 
so benign in manner and appearance nothing suspicious was 
thought about them. They seemed 
the epitome of friendship. 
But you know the terrible 
struggle that followed. For twenty 
years now, since their defeat and 
retreat to their antipodes stronghold, they have been content to remain on earth and lick their 
wounds, biding their time. Now, 
day by day, they are becoming 
bolder again. 
Nevertheless it was a stupid 
question to put to a player. 
Whatever he thought, Forbes 
made no reply. 
N ext day the stranger showed 
definitely that he was no fluke. 
In a driving rain, in slicker jacket 
and waterproof cap, he went 
around the upper eighteen in fiftynine. And, mark you. Yellow Silence is no easy course. Laid out 
in what formerly was a Chippewa 
reservation, it presents a labyrinth 
of magnetic traps, fair.jvay warps 
and dimensional checkmates that 
all but confuse the average player. 
The evening papers were out 
when I got back to the clubhouse. 
The sports pages were full of the 
man. There was grimmer news 
too. The papers bristled with war 
rumors. Demands, warnings, 
threats on both sides. Political 
tempers were at the breaking 
point. War was imminent, the papers said. It was only a matter of 
time. 
About five o’clock of that same 
day what threatened to be major 
tragedy occurred in the clubhouse. 
Two robot caddies carried in a 
young girl who had been run down 
by a speed maniac as he roared 
out of the parking area. Her face 
was white as wood ash and there 
was a terrible wound on her temple where the skull was all but 
crushed in. We stood around helplessly with that feeling of awe that 
sweeps over one when confronted 
by sudden disaster. The ambulance 
doctor finished his examination. 
“She’s gone,” he said. 
And then the crowd parted a little as Forbes pushed his way 
through and bent over the silent 
figure. 
He gazed into her eyes for a 
long moment. He drew from his 
pocket a small pyxis with a hinged 
cover. Inside was a miniature panel of crystal keys and what appeared to be a minute oval of silver tape that whirled rapidly. His 
fingers touched one of the keys, 
then moved across to drift over 
the girl’s face. The tape slowed, 
then sped faster. A soft hum issued from the box. 
Moments later a flush entered 
the pallid flesh. One of the eyelids 
fluttered almost imperceptibly. 
Then her lids moved and she sat up 
with a groan while the ambulance 
doctor stared as if he had seen a 
ghost. 
The wound on her temple 
seemed to fade away. 
Without any trouble the newspapers made a story out of that, 
too, and almost overnight Forbes 
became a legend. His easy stance 
and supple gait were watched with 
envy and his beautiful electronic 
clubs were examined and stared at. 
Quiet and unassuming, he seemed 
to possess a subtle magnetism that 
attracted friends instantly. 
But it was several weeks before 
he played again. Meanwhile he 
drifted in and out of the clubhouse, sitting by the window, staring out over the course. Then, two 
days before the Trans-Federatal 
was scheduled to open at Yellow 
Silence, he joined a threesome of 
Tony Loretto, Chad Hartridge 
and Dick Benbow who had come 
ahead on their tournament tour to 
try out the Silence course. Loretto was top pro in the Federated 
States and Hartridge and Benbow 
had grabbed first and second winnings in the Matto Grosso Open 
earlier in the year. Their disgust 
was evident as they left the eighteenth and compared scorecards. 
“The man’s a wizard,’’ Loretto 
said. “He didn’t miss a putt.’’ 
The summer wore on. With the 
tournament coming on and with 
the accompanying end-season 
crowds, 1 was kept pretty busy 
those hot days of August. As a 
matter of fact 1 didn’t see much of 
Forbes again until the Carewe incident took place. 
You might say Julian Carewe 
was the father of Yellow Silence. 
He was responsible for getting the 
land grant from the government 
and he had designed and laid out 
the course. Carewe had been a 
“Three star’’ player himself until 
he had contracted Paldring’s Disease which had left him confined 
to a wheelchair. 
He had his wheelchair drawn up 
beside the settee occupied by 
Forbes when I entered the clubhouse lounge toward the close of 
what had been a blazing, humid 
day. The two men appeared to be 
in animated discussion. Carewe 
was talking earnestly and from 
time to time pointed to his useless 
legs. 
THE PLAYER AT YELLOWSILENCE 
1 chose a chair in the corner of 
the room and picked up a magazine. From time to time my eyes 
drifted across the room toward 
the two men. Carewe seemed to be 
pleading with Forbes in an argumentative sort of way. 
Presently Forbes nodded, 
reached into his pocket and drew 
out that same small box. Even at 
that distance I could see what appeared to be cuneiform writing on 
its outer surface. Fie moved a 
small dial in the box, lifted a tiny 
staff and proceeded to run it back 
and forth over Carewe’s calf and 
thighs. A light flickered in the box 
— red, then green. Presently he restored the box to his pocket, rose 
and walked away. 
Carewe sat in his wheelchair, an 
expression of puzzlement on his 
face. An instant later he braced his 
hands on the armrests and clutched 
there a moment. His feet came 
down to support him; he took a 
tentative step. 
And then he was walking across 
the lounge floor, step by step to 
the veranda. 
N ext day the club was abuzz 
with Carewe’s miraculous recovery. That it was complete was 
attested by his playing around the 
practice nine and doing it without 
aid of any kind. Color entered his 
face, a smile supplanted his usual 
scowl and his air of confidence returned. As for me, I was so disturbed by what I had seen 1 almost 
forgot about the business-andmembership banquet scheduled for 
the following night. I planned to 
show a number of instruction 
slides on the handling of the new 
double-mashie which had been approved for tournament play by the 
NGA. 
The dinner was the usual affair. 
A financial report was read and an 
election of officers was held. 
Saved for the last was the eulogizing of this man called Forbes 
and his shattering of course records. 
But then, like an electric charge 
passing across the tables, came the 
whispered rumor: Forbes was an 
alien. An undesirable. Even now 
he was under security investigation 
in Federation City. 
In normal times, of course, 
such gossip would have been relegated to the scrap-heap where it 
belonged. But these weren’t normal times. These were days of 
planetary patriotism and fearcharged suspicion. The Yansis 
were on the verge of war. The 
Yansis were known to have a highly technocratic culture on their 
home planet. Perhaps they had 
evolved a method whereby their individual identity could be hidden 
beyond visual detection. 
It’s a damned shame, I thought. 
The man is no more an alien than 
I am. Yet even I had to admit 
there was an oddness about him 
that puzzled me. 
Nor was my curiosity relieved 
the next night when I returned to 
the clubhouse to do some remodeling work. I had promised to give 
a member’s trajectory-wood my 
personal attention and to have it 
ready the next morning. Climbing 
the veranda steps, I saw Forbes 
sitting in the gloom. 
“Hullo,” I said. “It’s a fine 
night.” 
He answered and I passed on into the clubhouse. I found the club 
to be repaired, got some sandpaper and a bolin-screwdriver and 
went to work. Perhaps five minutes passed; then the sound of 
footsteps came through the open 
window. In the glow of light from 
within Forbes passed by, carrying 
his bag. 
1 laid down the club and made 
my way down the corridor to the 
veranda in time to see a shadowy 
figure step onto the first tee. He 
bent down, placed something on 
the turf; not an ordinary ball but a 
yellowish ovoid that gleamed with 
a kind of phosphorescence of its 
own. 
As if he were doing the most ordinary thing in the world, he addressed the ball, drove it into the 
pitch-blackness of the fairway. An 
arching streak of orange marked 
the passage of the ball as if some 
of its radiant pigment had embossed its path against the night 
sky. As if it were some kind of signal to the stars above. 
Forbes picked up his bag of 
clubs and strode off in the direc
fT pi Ballantine 
Books 
PURSUED by the horrors of DDT 
and pesticide-infected foods (evoked 
by the recent environmental teachin), May is the month when normally 
cerebral types will have found themselves digging, raking and planting a 
mess of vegetable seeds, which, by 
God, will be organically grown. (Hint 
No. 1 : Household Note for City Dwellers— a fork makes a great rake for 
those pots of herbs.) Before you become entirely exhausted by all this 
unaccustomed physical activity, better go out and buy some good reading 
matter to while away the hours of recuperation you can look forward to. 
(Hint No. 2: Cold beer helps while the 
activity is going on.) (Hint No. 3: Chivas Regal is better for relaxing stiff 
muscles while recuperafing.) 
BOOKSTO BUY 
A THUNDER OF STARS, Dan Morgan and John Kippax. Science fiction 
in the grand old space-operatic tradition— this one the first in a projected series. Downright nostalgic'in 
these days of upside-down type etcetera. (Hint No. 4: Take up yoga. That 
way you can read standing on your 
head. Or, for the medallion effect, do 
a series of cartwheels. Have a friend 
running steadily alongside holding 
THE PLAYER AT TELLOW SILENCE 
the book for you to read. But however 
you do it, read. If fhaf doesn't prove 
we're enthusiasts, Harlan, God 
knows what will.) 
• 
DREAM QUEST OF UNKNOWN 
KADATH, H.P. Lovecraft— Introduction by Lin Carter. For some reason, 
Lovecraft is getting to be a big underground author. Not his Cthulhu 
Mythos so much as the undefined 
worid of Kadafh. Or perhaps incomplefe would be a better word, for 
Lovecraft's writing certainly never 
lacked definition. His imagery is brilliantly graphic. In addition to the 
lead novelette, DREAM QUEST contains five sfories from his early Dunsanian period. There appears to be a 
distinct connection in reading interests between adult fantasy, the occult, back-to-nature buffism and conservation. Which could create some 
pretty queer situations. Picture Ron 
Regan standing on his head chewing 
Granola while reading LORD OF 
THE Rl NGS. Now that could win him 
votes. 
(HINT NO. 5: The better to prepare 
all those delicious organically homegrown veg which you'll be harvesting, you can brush up on your cooking 
with our special for May, THE MAFIA COOKBOOK, by one who calls 
himself Joe Cipolla.) (Hint No. 6: 
Italian for onion.) Oy vey. BB 
tion of the first hole. I went down 
the veranda steps and followed. 
The arching streak of light remained over the fairway like a 
glowing ribbon. And when I approached the green the glow combined with the gleaming ball to illumine a wide area. I moved unseen into a tree’s shadow and there 
I watched him select a putter and 
silently tap the ball into the cup. 
He seemed to be playing idly, to 
be waiting for something. 
The second hole was a repetition 
of the first. 
But at the third hole Forbes 
opened a zippered compartment of 
his bag and drew out a collapsible 
rod with tripod legs. He also took 
out a small quadrant with a double row of coronium keys. He 
placed the quadrant next to the rod 
and began to tune the instrument. 
Slowly a mist flowed outward 
from the pelan, rising to form a 
vague screen-like curtain between 
the tree boles. A face began to 
take form there. 
It was the face of a patriarch. 
The white hair fell away from the 
crown of the head and the eyes, under heavy brows, seemed to glitter 
like shards of shiny metal. It spoke 
but the voice was pitched too low 
in the sonic scale for me to understand. 
“They are basically good, needing only guidance,” Forbes said finally. “With your permission I will 
stay longer.” 
With that, the mist-screen 
seemed to melt away. Forbes returned the quadrant and the collapsible rod to his bag and headed 
back toward the clubhouse. 
I N THE weeks that followed interest in war news preempted all 
other activity. An ultimatum had 
been delivered by the Yansis to 
Federation City, following what 
they declared to be an insulting 
diplomatic incident. Now they 
were insisting on more demands. 
Wherever you went people stood in 
groups, discussing the situation. 
War was inevitable, they said. Labor tunnels were doubly guarded 
with security restrictions. Fallout 
compartments were serviced. Automated trunkways were turned 
back to manual roads and waystations were camouflaged. Federation City prepared to move underground. 
The newspapers had a field day, 
going all-out in their vilification of 
the Yansis. The high-speed draft 
began to take men of military age 
and presently you noticed it on the 
course, older men making up a 
greater percentage of the players. 
In the midst of all this the sports 
pages carried one bit of news that 
had nothing to do with the threatened conflict. The old Southview 
course, twenty miles down the 
trunkway from Yellow Silence, 
was being renovated and scheduled 
to reopen as a private links under 
the new name of Tranquillity 
Heights. Funny name for a course 
I thought. And then did a double 
take when 1 read the name of the 
promoter — Joseph Forbes. 
A FEW days later I drove over to 
give the place the once-over. 1 
had expected temporary greens, 
winter rules and hazards in the process of construction. Instead I 
found one of the most beautifully 
laid-out courses I had ever seen: 
the greens composed of the new 
magnetic silver-bent; the waterhazard a mirror-like lake that 
sparkled in the sunlight and fairways tailored to perfection. 
There were lattice bridges over 
picturesque streams, robotic caddies waiting at the first tee and an 
inviting plastic and glass clubhouse 
with an automatic ramp leading up 
from the playing level. A tremendous amount of work had been put 
on the course and it seemed incredible that it could have been completed in so short a time. 
My presence was spotted. The 
door to the clubhouse opened and 
Forbes came down the ramp to 
meet me. 
“Welcome to Tranquillity 
Heights,” he said. “Do you want 
to play a round?” 
I shook my head. 
“What’s that thing?” 
1 pointed to a narrow concrete 
structure with a metal antenna 
above it. 
“It’s a Balance-beam. Contestants pass through it and are 
evened-up to a common denomina
THE PLAYER AT YELLOW SILENCE 
n 
tor of skill, strength and psychological endurance. Come along 
and meet my assistants.” 
Fjorbes’ assistants sat about a 
long table in a clubhouse secondfloor room, eating their meal. 
Forbes called names. Each man 
nodded as his was spoken. The 
wine — pre-Atomic 44, I guessed — 
was of excellent quality. Forbes 
drank from a goblet. 
Presently I voiced a question; 
“You’ve quite an investment here. 
Do you expect to realize a profit?” 
“The greatest profit in the 
world,” he said. “The profit of 
peace.” 
“I don’t understand.” 
He was silent a moment. 
“Did it ever occur to you to 
wonder why a man plays a relatively simple contest, bolstered with 
only minor technological advancements? Principally because golf is 
about the last participation sport. 
Most others have lapsed into spectator contests. You know that with 
the coming of corn-automation 
and the subsequent increase of leisure, nonprofessional physical ability has fallen out of fashion. 
Hampton’s Second Cycle of Life 
was found to rest upon a minimum 
of cardiac strain.” 
“So?” 
“So the elemental conflict — war. 
An outgrowth of tribal struggle 
and in turn a development of individual or family grievance. Today 
the Yansis are our enemies, 
cloaked in fear and suspicion. I 
propose to reduce the differences — 
between.” 
“Are you trying to tell me you 
expect to settle the conflict between 
us and the Yansis by such a simple 
and unsophisticated device?” I 
said. 
“Yes.” 
“It’ll never work,” I said. 
“There’s too much at stake.” 
“I think it will. Each of the factions has been contacted and has 
agreed to send players. It won’t 
make any difference if they choose 
professional athletes or not. Once 
they pass the beam they will be at 
the same level.” 
He broke off. 
Outside two copters had settled 
down before the clubhouse entrance and a dozen or more figures 
stepped out. They were Yansis. 
Their wafer skulls were concealed 
by blue turbans and their violet 
eyes were hidden behind dark 
glasses. 
Stiff as sticks, they marched up 
the ramp and strode into the lobby 
where they were met by Eorbes. 
I nodded goodbye and passed 
outside. 
But as I headed down the trunkway a question hammered at me. 
Why had there been no security 
watch over the Yansis representatives? With the two races at 
sword’s points — it seemed strange 
that no precautions had been taken 
by either side. 
1 drove down the trunkway and 
the farmland of early Autumn 
stretched away on all sides. Or was 
it farmland? The fields seemed to 
be lying fallow, untilled. Nor were 
any farmhouses in evidence. 
Abruptly it struck me that I had 
not passed a single car, that the 
road was in fact deserted. 
Ten minutes later 1 was staring, 
stunned, at the sign above the gate. 
I was back where 1 had started. 
A figure stepped out of the 
shoulder bushes and leaned in the 
car window. It was Benjamin, one 
of Forbes’ assistants. 
“It’s all right,’’ he said. “We 
didn’t know it was you. Thought 
you were still on the course.” 
“1 must have taken the wrong 
turn,” I said. “But I don’t remem — ” 
“It’s all right. Just keep going 
straight down the trunkway.” 
He waved me on. 
T he newspapers carried nothing 
about the impending tournament at Tranquillity but rumors 
about the Yansis continued. In 
their Australasian lair they were 
said to be making ready a weapon 
a hundred times more frightful 
than the missle-missle. 
Then a new series of events occurred to demand journalistic attention. In twelve cities, on twelve 
outstanding links, a strange duplication of the phenomenon that had 
taken place at Yellow Silence 
transpired. A stranger played with 
a fantastically low score and in 
some unorthodox way performed 
some unusual therapy. What was 
more important, however, was the 
society these strangers organized, a 
national quasi-theology attracting 
members by the score. 
The first chance I got, impelled 
by curiosity, 1 drove back to the 
Heights, arriving in time to see a 
foursome made up of two of 
Forbes’ assistants and two turbaned Yansis drive for the first 
hole. 
I followed them. 
The game ended with the Yansis 
far in the lead. The aliens were 
laughing triumphantly as they left 
the eighteenth hole and made their 
way back to the clubhouse. 1 met 
Forbes on the veranda. 
“1 want to thank you,” he said, 
“for not betraying my confidence. 
The press, though, is getting more 
difficult to hold back.” 
“The tournament, 1 take it, is 
not proving a success.” 
“Why do you say that?” 
“I followed the play today,” I 
said, “and you could have cut the 
silence with a knife. You can’t 
change antagonism to rivalry.” 
“You forget all Yansis don’t 
speak our language.” 
“You could have used a Transladian.” 
“If they agreed to, yes. So far 
the tournament is a draw. We’re 
even-up in the number of holes 
played and the number won.” 
1 thought that over. 
“Who plays next?” 
( Please turn to page 150) 
OUT 
OF MINDSHOT 
JOHN BRUNNER 
"You're in the country of the 
deaf — and noise can kill. 
O N AN outcropping ledge of 
rock Braden paused for a moment, narrowing his eyes against 
the sun. He glanced back down the 
dusty trail — not that it really deserved that name, since calling it a 
trail implied the previous passage 
of someone or something and there 
were no visible tracks, just a series 
of negotiable footholds rising stairfashion on the face of the hill. 
From this level he could still see 
his car, zebra-striped by the shadow 
of a tall, branching cactus at the 
point where the ground started to 
slant too steeply for wheels to find 
purchase. But only a smudge of 
smoke marked his last stopping 
place, a settlement not so much a 
town as an accident, a wrinkle in 
the sandy ribbon of desert time. 
Because that, though, was the 
place where he had realized he had 
come to the end of his quest, he 
kept his eyes fixed on the blur of 
smoke while he sought the cork of 
his canteen and raised it in a parody 
of a toast. He sipped the contents 
economically and stopped before 
his thirst was satisfied. Water, he 
reasoned, must be his quarry’s chief 
problem in this arid valley. Ultimately possession of it might become a weapon. 
He replaced the canteen in his 
pack and turned to study the going 
ahead of him. By now, he calculated, he must be two-thirds of the 
way to the top. He had hardly expected to find clues indicating he 
was on the right track — if his de
ductions were correct he was dealing with someone desperate enough 
to take every possible precaution — 
but he was optimistic. If he did not 
find what he was looking for on 
this particular hill, there were others beyond which he could explore 
tomorrow. 
After six years of searching, another few days made little difference. 
He shouldered the pack and 
sought the easiest way to go higher. 
From this point on the rocks grew 
craggier and there was no sand, for 
the cold night wind scoured the 
hard stone clean. Stolidly he 
scrambled onward, the sun punishing his back and the sweat vanishing from his skin almost before it 
oozed out of the pores. 
After a while he found himself on 
the edge of a flat space, a miniature 
plateau about thirty yards across, 
flanked by a steep drop into the valley and a nearly vertical cliff forty 
or more feet high. He removed his 
pack and tossed it over the lip of 
the level area, then hauled himself 
up with much panting and cursing. 
As he bent to reclaim the pack 
something caught his attention 
from the corner of his eye. 
A stack of rocks did not quite 
meet the cliff wall. A shadow beyond them looked like the opening 
of a cave. He saw a speck of bright, 
artificial color, a fragment of sun 
caught on a broken bottle. 
While he was still staring the 
quiet voice from behind him said. 
“Put up your hands.” 
Braden strove mentally to quell 
the flush of jubilation which spread 
across his mind with cold contrasting thoughts — ordinary thoughts of 
fear and surprise. When, compliantly, his arms went up in the air 
they trembled unnecessarily. 
“Turn around,” said the quiet 
voice. 
He obeyed and had to repress a 
start of surprise — how efficiently, 
he could not be sure, but it was almost certain that his quarry would 
be preoccupied with alarm at this 
intrusion, so there was some leeway for uncontrolled reaction. He 
had giKpected what pictures had 
shown him: a pudgy, rather ugly, 
self-indulgent child. In fact, behind 
the rifle that was leveled at him 
over a sheltering rock stood a slim, 
wiry figure likely to be taller than 
himself when upright and seeming 
a good deal tougher. 
Though that remains to be decided. 
For a while the two studied each 
other: the hunter in plain sight, clad 
in open shirt, Jeans, heavy climbing 
boots, the quarry almost hidden by 
the rock so that the rifle was like a 
symbol for armor. But the bare 
tanned arms that were visible were 
lean and muscular and the face under the roughly cropped fair hair 
was harsh with enmity. 
“All right.” The quarry gestured 
with the muzzle of the gun. 
“You’re not armed, I guess. Move 
away from your pack, though.” 
N OW that the long-awaited confrontation was upon him, Braden was having trouble controlling 
his excitement. Doing as he was 
told, however, he concentrated on 
simple ideas. 
What’s all this about? Have I run 
into a criminal in hiding? 
But the next words he heard, uttered in a slow drawl of puzzlement, told him that his precautions 
were in vain. 
“Braden — Daniel Braden, is that 
right? But I don’t know anyone 
called Braden. And yet you seem to 
know me.” 
A headshake. A whitening of the 
knuckles that still clasped around 
the stock of the gun. Braden sighed 
and chose a direct onslaught rather 
than further prevarication. 
“You’re not what I expected 
from your pictures, Lesley.” 
“What?” 
“I thought you’d be fat. You 
started out fat. But I guess starving 
in a hole halfway up a mountain — 
and scrambling up and down that 
slope every time you need supplies 
— would take weight off anybody.” 
Bewilderment was coming to his 
aid. Uncertain, letting the gun’s 
threatening mouth move to one 
side, the quarry asked, “Are you 
somebody who used to know me 
when?” 
Hope, hunger — some kind of 
craving after human companionship — whatever it was, she moved 
from behind the protecting rock. 
Braden studied her critically. She 
OUTOF AAINDSHOT 
was quite naked, which was among 
the many things he might have expected but hadn’t thought about, 
because after all who was there for 
at least five miles in any direction 
to complain? Her fair hair had 
been slashed merely to keep it out 
of her eyes and her face was like the 
rest of her, tanned to a wooden color by the merciless desert sunshine. 
But the shape was good — square 
shoulders contrasted with small 
round breasts and wide feminine 
hips — and the lessening of the old 
puppy-fat allowed her fine bone 
structure to show through. 
God damn, she's turned out 
beautiful! 
That thought, welling from the 
animal level of his being, breached 
the careful camouflage beyond repair and his mind bloomed like a 
beacon. The gun snapped back to 
its former aim. 
“You know me,” The words 
were forced out on breath alone, 
with no voice to drive them. 
“Sure I know you,” Braden said. 
“You’re Lesley Wolker, and you 
can read my mind.” 
“Oh God. Oh God.” The sounds 
died on the bare face of the hill like 
seeds cast into crevices among stark 
rock. “How — how — ” 
“How did I find you?” Braden 
supplied briskly, much relieved at 
the girl’s obvious terror. “Why, it 
was pretty simple really. I started 
with the premise that there should 
by now be at least one efficient telepath in the United States — and 
possibly more. It was only logical 
that with the high level of success 
obtained from randomly chosen 
subjects by people like Rhine, 
someone would have been born 
who was endowed with the full talent. And such a person — Well, 
you read Wells’s The Country of 
the Blind? Only you’re not sighted 
among the blind. You’re in a 
country of the deaf — and noise can 
kill.” 
Lesley’s face writhed as though 
he had put a hot iron to the smooth 
mound of her belly. 
“A person like that would either 
go insane or run and hide. And in 
the modern world there aren’t 
many places one can hide. A desert 
or a mountain seemed to me the 
only possible places, and if such a 
person were to be born in the big 
cities where most of our population is now concentrated, then — 
short of finding a usable route up 
to the Canadian backwoods — an 
area like this one would be the 
closest and easiest escape hole. I 
don’t know what kind of torment 
such a person would undergo, but 
it doesn’t take much imagination 
to figure out that it would be so 
bad the victim would flee in panic 
to the nearest lonely spot, without 
taking time to wonder if later on 
there would be a chance of moving 
somewhere else. 
“So I took a map and made 
some measurements — and then 1 
checked the missing persons files 
in every city where they’d let me get 
at them and checked those against 
pertinent genealogical tables and 
— ” Braden snapped his fingers. 
“Five years of that. More than a 
year, now, asking around in every 
hole-in-corner town near the areas 
I’d selected as possibilities. And in 
that particular one over there — ” 
he pointed in the general direction 
of the smoke smudge he had 
toasted earlier — “they told me 
about a mysterious woman who occasionally comes down from the 
hills to buy basic foods, always 
wearing the same overly tight 
blouse and shorts which are now 
pretty well in rags. There’s something to be said for old-fashioned 
prejudices. They talk about your 
legs every time the conversation 
gets dull — di^ you know that? Yes, 
I guess you must know.’’ 
He gave her a girn that turned 
the corners of his mouth into a 
sketch for horns. 
“Also,” he concluded, “you 
must know what it is I came to get 
you for.’’ 
L ESLEY’S face had set into a 
feral mask and the rifle was 
clutched so tightly that not only 
her knuckles but half the backs of 
her hands were white under the sunburn. She uttered a choking gasp 
and jerked as though to fire. 
“One moment,” Braden said — 
and this part of his conversation 
was one he had rehearsed so many 
limes in his mind he genuinely believed it now. “Are you planning to 
kill me?” 
Lesley gave a violent nod, eyes 
locked wide open under her sunbleached lashes. 
“But you daren’t,” Braden said 
with careful cruelty. “Because 
you’d know what I was thinking 
when I died.” 
He relaxed his mind now and he 
had a very real fear of death underneath the glacial calm he outwardly affected. 
“If you kill me, Lesley, you will 
feel the bullet, no matter where you 
put it — unless you hit me in the 
head and destroy my brain instantly. But I doubt you can do that. I 
don’t see how anyone who can read 
minds could bear to learn to use a 
gun so well. You’ve never felt a slug 
tear up your belly or fill your lungs 
with blood but I have. I was out in 
Viet Nam and I was shot three 
times. And later I was bayoneted, 
too. Look inside my head and learn 
how I remember that. And those 
were only wounds, Lesley. They 
weren’t death. Death is big and 
black and final — ” 
All the time he was talking, 
soothingly, almost hypnotically, he 
had been approaching her. Now she 
regained her presence of mind and 
advanced the gun as though to 
skewer him with it. 
“You can’t use a knife either, 
Lesley,” Braden said in the same 
flat tone. “Steel in the flesh feels 
cold and agonizing. You can’t use 
your bare hands because — even 
though you’re probably as strong 
as 1 am after climbing up and down 
OUTOFMINDSHOT 
these rocks — every time you hit me 
you would feel the blow.” 
Another step — and another. The 
outstretched gun was beginning to 
quiver. The girl’s eyes were bright 
with what he confidently took to be 
tears. 
“You can’t give me poison because either it hurts or it takes too 
long. You can’t strangle me while 
I’m asleep, for fear I’d wake and be 
so terrified you’d have to give up. 
So you can’t kill me, Lesley. You 
daren’t kill me. Doing something 
like that would drive you insane. 
You know what suffering does to 
you, Tm sure — you must have been 
around people who were dying, 
maybe after a traffic accident — ” 
His thick fingers lanced out and 
clamped on the barrel of the gun, 
thrusting it aside where its slugs 
would whine harmlessly away. For 
a moment he feared she still had 
enough guts to struggle with him 
for possession of it but abruptly 
she let it go and slapped her hands 
up to her temples. 
Another second and she began to 
cry. 
Contemptuously Braden broke 
the breech of the gun and spilled 
the shells in a metal rain over the 
edge of the plateau. About to whirl 
the weapon itself around his head 
and fling it far away from the 
rocks, he paused. 
“I’m not throwing this down the 
hill in case you think to use it as a 
club and beat me unconscious, by 
the way,” he said. “There isn’t any 
way you could force me to let go of 
you now I’ve tracked you down. 
You can’t torture me or compel 
me. You see. I’ve known for a long 
time that I wouldn’t need to come 
armed against someone like you. I 
had a very strict and puritanical upbringing. It left me conditioned in a 
certain fundamental way. Of 
course, by now you’ve probably 
worked out what I’m going to tell 
you but I’ll say it in words just to 
avoid misunderstandings.” 
He stared at her piercingly. 
“You were a pretty big girl when 
life became too much for you — 
seventeen, weren’t you, when you 
vanished from your family and 
home? So you probably knew the 
facts of life. And I don’t think I 
need to tell you what a masochist 
is!” 
He raised the rifle and hurled it 
as far as he could. Dusting his 
hands, he turned to confront 
Lesley. 
“But a masochist isn’t simply 
someone who likes to be hurt — 
that’s a common error. It’s someone who needs to be hurt, and the 
more he’s hurt the better able he is 
to let go and grab after the gratification that he wants. You can’t 
bear to be near someone who’s being hurt, let alone to be hurt yourself. It’s going to be an unequal 
struggle, isn’t it?” 
Tear-stained, her face rose from 
the shelter of her hands. 
“What do you want from me?” 
she whispered. 
“You have to ask?” Braden gave 
a thick triumphant laugh. “Don’t 
try and fool me. You know very 
well what I want from you. Go on, 
admit it.” 
“You — ” The first attempt at an 
answer died in a gasp, and she tried 
again. “You think that with me to 
read other people’s minds for you 
you could — ” 
“Let’s hear it. Finish the sentence, baby.” 
“You could rule the world.” 
“That’s right,” Braden agreed. 
“Or if you went crazy from the 
pressure — at least I’d have collected enough secrets to buy the 
men who count. You may be a telepath, sweetheart, but in this area 
I’m a clairvoyant. And all I have to 
do now is wait until you see the future the way I do.” ^ 
I T WAS going to be even easier 
than he’d expected, he decided as 
he sat before the small shielded fire 
at the mouth of the cave Lesley 
called home. On a stick he was 
grilling some sausages he had 
brought with him — one of the 
things he had figured out in advance was that someone as 
squeamish as you’d imagine a telepath to be wouldn’t eat the flesh of 
animals. 
The point amused him and for a 
moment he dwelled on the vivid recollection of a slaughterhouse he 
had once visited. From the rear of 
the cave a retching sound told him 
that the thought had had the effect 
he’d hoped for. 
“There, there, baby,” he called. 
“It’s just one of these facts of life!” 
“Bastard,” she said. 
“Sticks and stones, sticks and 
stones — ” 
Braden snuffed at the sausages 
and decided they were cooked 
through. He took slices of bread 
from a loaf he had brought and 
made a crude sandwich. 
A pushover. A goddamn pushover. Why, he’d never imagined he 
would overcome her so easily. 
There she was, lying on the heap of 
torn blankets which served her for 
a bed, her wrists and ankles tied 
and she hadn’t uttered a word of 
protest when he bound her. And 
that must simply be because when 
he thought about fetters and bondage something fierce was let loose 
on the lower levels of his mind, 
emitting a sort of raw animalistic 
violence that her sober detachment 
was vulnerable to. Faced with that 
kind of reaction all she could do 
was whimper and hold out her 
hands for the rope. 
Oh, baby, what I’m going to do 
with you. 
The memory haunted him all the 
while he was munching his food. 
Belly satisfied, he lit a cigarette 
and relaxed into a contented reverie 
against the side wall of the cave. In 
some ways, even if nothing else 
came of what he had done, it was 
an achievement to have actualized 
his favorite fantasy. Tying up a girl 
with no clothes on, wholly and 
completely at his mercy — it was 
OUTOF MINDSHOT 
the other half of his private hell, the 
one in which he was the victim to be 
bound. And because he fundamentally resented the deprivation and 
subservience here implied, no matter how great a thrill it gave him, he 
yearned for the power that control 
over a mind-reader would bring 
him, as though that would set him 
free from the prison in which his 
tyrannical father and cynical mother had enclosed him. He remembered those Saturday night encounters when his parents called him in 
to agree to the total of his week’s 
offenses and to suffer without crying out the lashes that matched the 
number of them. 
He caught himself suddenly. 
Thinking along those lines was 
dangerous. With an effort he 
wrenched his mind back to pleasanter ideas — he pictured a certain 
building in pre-Castro Havana, 
where a girl in high black boots 
with jingling spurs had passed the 
thong of a whip through her fingers and licked her lips lasciviously, ordering him to cringe toward 
her foot and kiss her toe . 
Behind him came a splashing 
sound and he jolted back to full 
awareness. He scrambled to his 
feet. It was no part of his plan to 
have Lesley foul the pile of blankets 
with vomit — he had dumped her 
there for the time being only. Since 
there was nothing else decently soft 
to sleep on he proposed to usurp 
the pile himself and let her sleep on 
the bare stone floor. A few nights of 
that and she would be well softened for him. 
Although, of course, since she 
had shown herself to be so weak already. 
He caught up a brand from the 
fire and used it for a torch to light 
his way back into the shallow cave. 
As he had feared, the thoughts she 
had picked up from his mind had 
nauseated Lesley to the point of revulsion. Luckily she had missed the 
blankets. 
He prodded her with his toe. 
“Clear it up,” he ordered. 
Clasping her arms around her 
body, she looked up at him. “I — 
I’m cold\" she forced out between 
chattering teeth. 
“I don’t care,” he rasped. 
“You’re going to be a hell of a 
sight colder. Come on, clear it up 
before I make you lick it up.” 
Shuddering, awkward for the 
bonds on her wrists and the hobbles 
he had put around her ankles, she 
got to her feet. 
“What — what with?” 
“Should I know?” Braden 
shrugged. “You live here in this 
pigsty. You must have something 
to mop messes up with.” 
“I guess I do,” she said tiredly. 
“Okay, I’ll see to it. But you’d better keep your mind on something 
else if you don’t want it to happen 
again.” 
“It won’t happen again,” Braden 
grunted. “There won’t be anything 
in your belly to bring up, not even 
water.” 
“What?” 
“Not until you start doing as I 
say.” 
She stared at him in the red light 
of the brand he held. For a moment 
her mouth worked but no sound 
emerged. Then she seemed to crurnble in on herself. 
“Oh God. But I can’t do it 
with my hands tied, can I?” 
He started, suspicious of a trick. 
But her wrists were indeed too 
closely bound to let her use her 
hands. He found a ledge to rest his 
brand on and warily slacked the 
rope to a distance of a foot or so. 
“That’s enough,” she sighed and 
headed for the mouth of the cave. 
UE DASHED after her, thinking 
^*that, even if he himself would 
not have dared to face the steep 
hillside in the dark, she who had 
lived here for years on end might be 
willing to risk it to get away from 
him. But she stopped by the screen 
of piled rock hiding the cave mouth 
and took from behind it a plastic 
bucket he had seen earlier and a 
cheap broom with most of the bristles missing, which she must have 
bought in the general store of the 
town where he had heard news of 
her existence. 
He relaxed, letting her go past 
him back into the cave. Not until 
he had seen her clear away the mess 
she had made like a perfect slave, 
however, did he let himself assume 
his former confidence. 
Why, all / need to do to keep her 
on the leash is think about things 
she finds distasteful! / could weaken her past the point of resistance 
and enjoy myself at the same 
time. 
Memories leaped up, not only of 
the house of ill fame in Havana 
which he had once patronized, but 
of another in Los Angeles and another in New York and another 
and another in every city where his 
steadfast quest had taken him. A 
multiple blur of women in provocative scanties and high black leather 
boots wielding whips arose in the 
forefront of his mind. 
“You wicked boy,” Lesley said 
and raised the broom so that its 
shadow wavered across the rock 
wall like the flexible lash of a whip. 
“You wicked boy — you’ve sinned, 
haven’t you? Go on, admit it!” 
The tone was right, precisely 
that of his mother when she weekly 
called him in to face his father and 
the regular beatings he endured. 
The manner was right, the words 
were right — even the fact that the 
girl who spoke them was a decade 
younger than his mother and wore 
no clothes at all could not destroy 
their impact. From the lowest levels 
of Braden’s mind welled the impulse to obey. 
He fought it valiantly but she 
raised the broom, as once his mother had raised one when he tried to 
defy parental orders. He cowered 
down and — in the last instant of 
coherent thought left to him — re( Please turn to page 71) 
OUTOF MINDSHOT 
G eorge ellison took his 
Unicredit card from his worn 
wallet without looking at it. It was 
easy to find. Besides it he carried 
only his Uniworld ident and a 
scratched up holograph of Janice 
taken by her father when he was 
with the General Minerals Mars 
station survey team. 
Ellison’s eyes were on the big 
shiny new Femmikin building 
across the torn-up street. It was 
big, but by no means the biggest 
structure in sprawling Arizona 
City. But it was the Femmikin 
building and that made it important. 
Femmikin. 
Fantasy worlds come true. Paradise within grasp. The dream 
woman there, just for you, custom 
built — exactly. Some dug it, some 
didn’t. It was too easy. Just think 
it out and write down the specs 
and give it to the carefully neutral 
advisers, have them zap your Unicredit tab and give them a few 
weeks to change your life. 
Too easy? 
George didn’t think so. Too 
liard maybe. What do you want in 
(I woman, anyway? They were so 
damned expensive and an ordinary 
algae worker or fabricator or statistician could maybe afford one if 
he saved and cut corners — but even 
then he had to hit it good on the 
numbers to get one before he was 
too old to enjoy her. 
But Ellison could afford it. 
Today he could afford it. Last 
week he couldn’t. But right now he 
had the credit and before it dwindled away he was going to buy 
one. They’d have to live in his remodeled old high rise in the Tucson area but at least he wouldn’t 
have to listen to her complaints. 
But what to get? Big flashy job 
with all the luxury accessories? 
Steady dark one with built-in moxie to back him up? Something in 
between? George shrugged and 
started across the ripped-out 
street. 
He paused halfway across to let 
a gray-haired man in a cream dryfoam suit get across the battered 
plastic plank that bridged the deep 
slot in the street. 
They smiled ruefully at each 
other and George said, “Are they 
ever going to finish mangling the 
streets?” 
“Never,” the man answered. 
“It’s a compulsion. Street-rippers. 
They get together at night and 
laugh over the way Navahoe Boulevard has looked for two years.” 
George snorted wryly and 
walked across the plank and on up 
to the impressive wood door of the 
big building. He paused, looking 
at the big carved women on each 
panel, then ran his tongue across 
his teeth and put a hand against a 
curved-grained buttock and 
pushed. 
“May I help you, sir?” 
Tanned. Blonde, Trim figure. 
Standard Femmikin blue dress. 
Alert blue eyes. Probably called 
SHIP ME TOMORROW 
Secretaire or Efficienette in the 
catalogue. Ellison was short with 
her, faintly embarrassed. 
“Yeah. I’d like to buy a femmikin.” 
“Yes, sir. Do you have your 
specifications with you or would 
you like to talk to one of our advisers?” 
“Uh, are your advisers, uh — ” 
“We have both natural and 
Femmikin advisers. Many people 
have spoken well of our Femmikin advisers, sir. They are used to 
dealing with many types of requests. Some most unusual.” 
Do / look like a guy who'd 
want something unusual? Maybe I 
do. They must get all kinds of 
nuts . 
The femmikin glanced down at a 
electropad on her bare desk. “Our 
Miss Williams can see you now 
or, if you like, our Miss Susan.” 
“Which one is, uh — ” 
The femmikin smiled. “Miss 
Williams is a natural, sir. Miss 
Susan is one of our latest models. 
Both have access to our display 
consoles, of course, and complete 
credit payment plans.” 
“I don’t need that. I’m buying it 
right off.” 
“That’s very nice, sir,’’ she 
smiled. “May I recommend Miss 
Susan, sir? She is a Femmikin, 
you know, and completely experienced in specification recommendations.” 
“Uh, okay, sure.” 
The femmikin pressed a button 
amid a plethora of multicolored 
buttons, smiled, and indicated a 
corridor. “Room seven-four-eight, 
please?” 
“Yeah — thanks.” Ellison turned 
and started down the corridor. 
Why don't I just buy into Harry’s pot farm? Or get superzonked 
at the Eroticon? Or move into a 
better cube and try to meet some 
citizens who aren't groggy or 
creepy-eyed or zapped? Or maybe 
find a natural and have a license 
full of kids? 
Ellison groaned inwardly. Forget that. Fle’d tried that. “Naturals” was such a fabriword. But 
you couldn’t buy femmikin children. At least not yet. Kids you 
had to make yourself. Provided 
you could find a natural you could 
stand to be with for more than an 
evening. 
Must they all play games? Or 
are Just the ones f meet the crazies? Maybe that was what was 
bugging someone at Fabricque d'espace when they designed the first 
femmikin. Or built her. Or grew 
her. Or all those things. A little of 
everything, I guess . 
He stopped before a door. 748. 
Behind it was Miss Susan, he 
thought. Trim and blond, in a blue 
dress. He went in. 
Her hair was dark but otherwise 
she was’ similiar to Miss Receptionist Mark IV. Why don’t they 
make an ugly one — ^just for this 
one job? Or would that be bad 
(Please turn to page 154) 
Alien Island 
T. L. Sherred 
The Steel Crocodile 
D. G. Compton 
Lord Tyger 
Philip Jose Farmer 
I ’LL tell you how I feel about T. 
L. Sherred: when I discovered 
that Ballantine had published his 
novel {Alien Island, 15(., Ballantine 
Book #345.01815.075), I went to 
the newsstand and bought it without waiting for my review copy to 
arrive. 
To my knowledge, this is Tom 
Sherred’s only novel. He’s written 
little science fiction — or aught else, 
for all I know — and he dwells in 
my memory as a soft-speaking fellow who looks like the anchorman 
on a foundry bowling team. But 
that revelation of his psyche — or 
that imposed revelation — seems to 
me to strike to the heart of his importance to us all. For it was T.L. 
Sherred who sprang the first lightning crack of spurting mortar between the hitherto unbreached 
stones of the National Guard armory that science fiction had become. With one story, E for Effort, in the ASF of the wartime 
Forties, he handed the field such a 
knock that many old plinths are 
still loose in their sockets. 
It seems a rather tame if welltold story now. Its beer-drinking 
characters with their non-Anglic 
names and their matter-of-fact 
awareness that the struggle is between Man and Establishment 
seem perfectly acceptable. One 
tends to forget that in the 1940s all 
sf people named Labiada began every sentence with Si, Sehor while 
plotting to feed opium to the 
hero’s girl. As for knowing what to 
do with a soldering iron, or, worse 
yet, with a field theory. Well, 
look, this was in the days when 
people were earning an E for effort, and being justifiably proud of 
it, but the purpose of an engineering education was to give a bright 
boy a leg up into the $10,000-ayear bracket before he reached 
pensionable age and got his gold 
watch from the Corporation. 
And the purpose of science fiction was to elaborate on that 
premise. It was T.L. Sherred — utterly unknown, and previously unheard-of — who through natural wit 
or divine ignorance wrote a coherent, logical, entertaining, believable science-fiction story in which 
an entirely different view of our 
world was taken as a matter of 
course. 
A number of factors conjoined 
to lend his deed its major importance. Not the least of these was 
publication in the very journal 
whose geist he deranged, at the 
hands of the same editor who embodied every bourgeois aspiration 
that Sherred dismissed as being of 
no consequence. It makes a fascinating paradox. A false one, probably — I don’t suppose either Sherred or Campbell are anything like 
what I’ve described. But empires 
have gestated on less, and I’d rank 
E for Effort along with Robert 
Abernathy’s When the Rockets 
Come — also from ASF — as one of 
the two major incursions of the 
middle 1960s into the era of the 
victorious wars. 
Well, in any case Alien Island is 
not E For Effort, or even any of 
the three other stories (published in 
a bunch in the early 1950s), which 
constitute the known body of Sherred’s science fiction to date. In 
fact, about all it has to recommend 
it as a piece of work in its own 
right is the Michigan locale. Not 
many people set romances in Detroit. 
The story itself — about a barfly 
who becomes a galactic civilization’s representative, and who 
dooms Earth simply by serving as 
a focus for human greed and vanity — is potentially noble in exactly 
the same way E for Effort was. 
And its apocalyptic ending evokes 
its predecessor. But it sounds better than it reads. It reads padded, 
uncoordinated, and unintentionally 
whimsical. It could easily have 
been a good, commonsense narrative about essentially likeable people whose lack of complication 
cuts like a scalpel through Man’s 
normal fat of self-service. And I 
believe that’s what it’s intended to 
be, and the kind of book Sherred 
could write, or I wouldn’t be disappointed that it isn’t. 
F ans of D.G. Compton will be 
pleased by the appearance of 
The Steel Crocodile (Ace Special 
^78575, 75(t). Being a Compton fan 
ever since Synthajoy, I was one of 
these fortunate people. 
This is a good and enjoyable 
story about a man and his wife 
coming apart because they cannot 
come to an adequate mutual understanding of technological society as it is convincingly portrayed 
here in the near future. 
One thing that diminishes one’s 
pleasure in this book is the fact 
that this synopsis would describe 
Synthajoy, as well. And if we compare the two. The Steel Crocodile 
is invariably the paler version. In 
Synthajoy, for example, the woman in the insane asylum expresses 
many of her tensions in terms of 
her love for her lover as distinct 
from her husband. In The Steel 
Crocodile a lingering unresolved 
love for a now dead political activ
ity is what leads Abigail eventually 
to desert her husband in favor of 
actions calculated to get her in serious trouble with the prevailing 
political establishment and get herself clapped into a looney bin for 
the rest of her life. 
In fact, as far as story goes this 
book presents no advance over 
Compton’s previous considerable 
standard. Abigail is another of 
Compton’s extremely well-characterized women. He is 1 think without serious exception the very best 
delineator of female characters in 
the science- fiction field, perhaps 
the best we have ever had. But it 
may be that this gift is both intense 
and circumscribed, because Abigail, as noted above, is the weak 
sister of Synthajoy' s heroine. 
The think-tank establishment 
which employs Matthew is, although a publicly chartered corporation, pretty much the private 
province of a hard-driving ruthless 
megalomaniacal director of considerable personal charm — but not 
as much as is displayed by Synthajoy's villain. 
And so on. 
Matthew is one of the world’s 
leading sociologists, and an extremely popular and well-paid consultant to private industry, which, 
as is already the case, is shown 
here to be using all the paraphernalia of social science and pseudoscience in order to increase the efficiency of its product development 
( Please turn to page 155 ) 
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 
OIL- MAD 
BUG-EYED 
MONSTERS 
HAYDEN HOWARD 
Humans are only 
people— as Earth 
exploiters knowl 
T he Pacific Ocean seemed to be 
burning, adding to the smog. 
From the upper level of the piggyback freeway, as he swerved his 
little electric car down the offramp to her beach suburb, he 
glimpsed the fiery finger flickering 
where the offshore oil drilling platform had stood. 
The immense gas flame made 
him think of a certain nebula and 
he winced because he’d been Here 
for eighteen years. By now he 
ought to be reminded of something 
mundane. Earthly, like the gas pilot light in an unlit stove. All the 
way to the horizon the ocean was 
darkening with wasted oil from the 
undersea gusher. 
He swallowed. Waves of oil 
were lapping the beach with gleaming layers like oily — chocolate. 
The thought made his left stomach 
rumble hungrily. His right stomach contracted around the olives 
from the uncounted martinis he’d 
gulped in the metropolitan bar 
while he was getting her husband’s 
signature on the oil lease. 
“She’ll never shine-sign,’’ her 
husband had crooned drunkenly, 
laying his head to rest on the 
quaint mahogany. “She’ll never 
shine-sign. You’re not man enough 
to make her sign. Nobody is.’’ 
Legally the couple owned the 
attractive suburban home in joint 
tenancy, so he needed her signature, too. He was anxious to rescue the oil underneath. 
But he felt unsure of his mo
tives. He remembered her huge 
eyes gleaming with an exciting anger. To his loneliness they had appeared as sensuously hard as the 
carapaces of twin black beetles. 
As beautifully hard-shelled as . 
His emotions became more confused. 
His hearts beat even faster as he 
drove along her street. 
His right stomach squirmed. 
The alcohol had contained quick 
energy but was too insubstantial 
for his inner organism. It lacked 
the essential hydrocarbons necessary for his innermost distillations. 
He attempted a grin but merely 
grimaced. Here most humor 
seemed distorted, unhappy anomaly, as if these people felt alien on 
their own planet. So what did that 
make him, doubly alien? 
At least he was trying to save 
their oil. He glanced at the sky as 
if he could see twenty-two more 
years into the future and rammed 
a wooden barricade in the street. 
He parked. People were evacuating the seashore neighborhood as 
if they feared an oily holocaust. 
He put the half-signed lease in 
his comfortingly hard-shelled attache case. On its plastic carapace, 
with his own daring brand of humor, he displayed new initials in 
debonair fourteen-carat gold italics: B.E.M. 
These people seemed — stupid — 
wasting their most vital natural resource. He thought they deserved 
their future. The woman made him 
feel altruistic. He wanted to preserve her future. 
He strode along the oil-slick 
sidewalk, inhaling the rich scent of 
oil. Delicious! Now that he had 
her husband’s signature he thought 
she should at least let him inside. 
He winked as the sea-breeze 
sprayed aerosol-fine oil droplets 
against his baby-blue eyes. Rubbing them made his hand shiny 
from all the oil droplets smeared 
together on his skin. He sneaked 
a lick. 
Yeah! 
The estate-type tract house had 
an embattled look. She’d pulled 
the drapes together. Last Sunday, 
here on the asphalt driveway, her 
husband had told him to go to hell. 
But the old bluffer had been merely showing off his neighborhood 
integrity in front of his wife and 
hulking son. 
Today, at high noon in the bar, 
that old hero had whined: “Neighbors signed. So I’m forced to get 
mine.” His shaking hand had accepted the extra five hundred in 
folding money under the bar. He 
wouldn’t report that to his wife or 
the I.R.S. “Now 1 should buy you 
a drink — because you won’t be 
able to make her sign. Impossible! 
You been suckered.” 
E KNOCKED on her door. 
He was afraid he would appear 
too boyish for her. In his conservative business suit he still resembled 
the snub-nosed young radio opera
lor from the oil tanker that had 
gone to the bottom eighteen years 
ago. Although he had negotiated 
hundreds of oil leases since then, 
he stilt felt hampered by that 
young man’s startled blue eyes and 
wispy blond hair. Even after eighteen years he felt vulnerable without his body-shell. 
He imagined her standing on the 
other side of the door, obstinately 
letting him wait. She was hardboiled. Then he heard her steelheeled footsteps. For a moment 
his hearts thudded. He pretended 
he was himself, safely back inside 
his carapace but his perverse urge 
toward her increased. She didn’t 
open the door. 
Finally, in his frustration, he 
tapped on it with his attache case. 
She and the Smiths were the only 
ones on this block who hadn’t 
signed. The Smiths were trying to 
hold him up for more money than 
their neighbors had received — but 
this one was an idealist who 
wouldn’t sell out at any price. 
However, she was human. She 
might be waiting to get more than 
the Smiths? 
His blond eyebrows rose as he 
glanced into her open three-car 
garage. It contained an outboard 
motorboat and two empty stalls. 
He realized the garage might be a 
clue to her weaknesses. She didn’t 
have a car? Her husband had driven an expensively wasteful gasoline-burner to the city. Last Sunday the garage had held a four
wheel-drive dune-buggy with a racing stripe and a high-school parking lot permit on its windshield. 
He felt surprised that such a 
formidable woman didn’t have a 
car of her own. Apparently both 
of the men in her family were able 
to take advantage of her. This was 
encouraging. 
He smiled. From the corner of 
his eye he’d noticed a movement at 
the dining-room window. Between 
the dark drapes her fiercely beautiful face glared out at him. He nodded, trying to look suave while he 
opened his hard-shelled attache 
case. He held up the lease-option 
against the glass, confronting her 
with her husband’s signature. 
Her expression changed from 
startled to pained to puzzled to 
enraged. She looked down at him 
so haughtily, he remembered the 
gloriously hard face of that Italian 
actress gleaming through the 
transparent carapace of his teevee. 
Her eyes, glittering behind the window-glass, made him excited and 
disturbed. He was becoming willingly attracted to these angry ones. 
More and more often it was his 
feeling that these seductively fierce 
old ones were encased in invisible, 
chitinous exoskeletons. 
In his frustration and guilty 
hope he had even conjectured that 
he was receiving emanations from 
their gleaming, hardened minds. 
He smiled wryly. He felt so lonely. 
Under her shiny glare through the 
glittering glass he imagined him
OIL-AAAD BUG-EYEDAAONSTERS 
self light-years away. Their shells 
would be gleaming. In passionate 
recognition, their hard carapaces 
would begin banging together with 
the ferocity of their love. 
One of them would crack, he 
thought. Even his human heart was 
pounding. He heard her hard heels 
crossing the floor. She was coming to the front door. He turned 
again to face it. 
The door opened but not 
enough. He saw a gleaming security chain. Above it in the darkness 
of the hall hung her glittering eyes. 
She glared as if he were to blame 
for the underwater oil gusher and 
everything else wrong with her 
world. He felt innocent. Inhuman. 
For a joyous instant he felt as if he 
had regrown his carapace. He was 
handsomely shiny, virilely armored. But even in his excitement 
he remembered not to stridulate. 
He lowered his attache case. 
He said, “Hi,” as if he had forgotten the unpleasantness on Sunday. 
Her voice had a hard, rasping 
edge. 
“I was afraid you’d talk him into—” 
“Bought him a Tom Collins,” 
he interrupted brightly, trying to 
deflect even more of her anger onto her husband. “Slipped him an 
extra hundred for signing but I’m 
— wasn’t supposed to — tell.” He 
imitated a laugh. Their native 
games of false truthfulness seemed 
to him as absurdly useful as their 
humor. “But he’s got it.” 
“Get off our porch.” 
The harshness of her voice reminded him of the stridulations 
preceding love and he glanced at 
the sky. 
I N HIS frustration and loneliness he felt even worse than shellless. He had wanted to remain 
faithful. He had only twenty-two 
more years to wait. But he needed 
to bang against something. He 
glanced shyly at this weird creature 
who was repeatedly emitting repetitious stridulations. 
“I won’t sign. Not even if we’re 
the last family on this block.” 
“You are,” he said. “Did your 
husband telephone you like he 
told me he would?” 
“All of you — you’re ruining 
everything.” 
It was like a love song. He 
fought to keep his head. 
“I don’t have anything to do 
with that mess.” He glanced toward the ocean. “Believe me. I’m 
trying to help you save your property values. This oily fog is soaking into my suit. If you’d let me 
inside — ” 
“Get out!” 
He blinked. He wasn’t even in, 
yet she was telling him to get out. 
He decided to force entry via his 
guilt-by-accusation approach. Because they lacked shells, many of 
these creatures were so vulnerable 
they acted as if the sins of others 
were their own. He had noticed 
they usually surrendered to any 
authoritarian or priestly voice. 
“You’re to blame,” he said 
wildly. “You’re all to blame. You 
didn’t try hard enough a year ago 
when you could have prevented 
off-shore drilling. Now look 
what’s happened because of selfcentered people like you.” He 
added loudly as if broadcasting to 
her neighbors: “Is it because your 
husband works for — ” 
“Shut up. He’s not much more 
than a bookkeeper,” she hissed, 
peeking out of the doorway but 
not unhitching the chain. “He 
wasn’t involved in any way.” 
“Ah, but his clients — ” he retorted, having no idea whose accounts her husband serviced. “You 
know as well as I do that their incomes are dependent on transportation and other vital parts of the 
economy which need oil. It’s your 
lifeblood and mine. Ours?” 
He stepped toward her but she 
started to close the door in his face. 
“At least you’re not afraid,” he 
bleated, hurriedly redirecting his 
approach. “You’re not afraid of 
anything, are you?” he murmured 
humbly as if she’d defeated him, as 
if he were no threat to fair womanhood because he was so endearingly boyish and weak. “Could I 
come inside and rest for a moment?” 
“Get off-my porch!” 
He shrugged. He straightened 
sternly. Like a process-server, supported by the commanding power 
of a government, he flashed his 
lease option. 
“Better read the fine print.” 
“1 won’t sign it.” 
“Read it.” In his business he’d 
discovered the best way to convince women was to confuse them. 
She reached for it. He yanked it 
away. 
“Everybody in your block ^will 
be getting his or her rightful share. 
Are you too proud to accept 
yours?” 
“Mine?” she shrilled. “You’ve 
ruined our town.” 
“Not our company.” He hoped 
a few argumentative maneuvers 
would lead him into her house. 
She might let him in while trying 
to get the last word. He thrust: 
“You’re trying to blame us for 
wanting to help you.” 
She retorted, “You’re trying to 
force us to permit drilling in our 
town.” 
“We’re trying to preserve your 
natural resources,” he exclaimed. 
“I don’t work for an incompetent 
drilling company. Here, look at 
our brochure.” 
His present truthfulness was 
preordained by the ultimate lie. 
“I don’t care who you work 
for.” 
She pressed outward against the 
door so the security chain strained 
and he began to think of it as the 
chastity belt to her house. 
“Listen,” he said, “what I care 
about is conservation and decency 
and freedom. I’m trying to help 
OIL-MAD BUG-EYED MONSTERS 
you save something from your 
property value before it drops below what you owe on your mortgage and you end With nothing 
while the people across the street 
become millionaires.” He pointed 
a finger across the street. “They’ve 
all signed up except for one old 
lady who’s in Europe and they’re 
trying to contact her today. If they 
package that block as a drilling 
site, we won’t need yours. And we 
won’t need your neighbors’ lots 
we’ve optioned.” He pointed his 
finger at her. “Because you waited 
too long we won’t be able to take 
up any of our options in this block. 
Your neighbors’ last chance for 
wealth and happiness will be gone 
because of you. They’ll blame 
you.” 
Her eyes glinted from the darkness. She did not unhitch the security chain. He felt baffled. 
H e was unable to judge the effect of his greed-fright technique but he added ominously: 
“Your block won’t even be a truck 
parking site if you don’t. sign. The 
leasers will tap your oil pool from 
across the street and toss you a 
few dollars. They’ll paint their derricks green and plant a couple of 
trees. They’ll park their big trucks 
where those houses used to be. 
Those people will have moved 
away — rich. Their oil pumps will 
be so loud that you won’t be able 
to sleep. No one will buy your 
house at any price — except me — 
now.” 
“We bought our house with 
rights and covenants. Zoning — ” 
“It’s cracked wide open,” he interrupted. “Your own Town 
Council is selling the dump for a 
drilling site after the Planning 
Board designated it as a future 
park and our latest survey after 
the — ” he Jerked his hehd toward 
the ocean — ” shows the people 
know they’re licked. Because of 
the continuous mess off shore, seventy-six percent of the voters now 
are in favor of controlled drilling 
within the town limits. Then the 
town will begin collecting some oil 
taxes. Unfortunately, the state and 
Federal Governments have been 
getting all the bonuses and royalties from the off-shore leases. 
You’ve been getting nothing,” he 
finished triumphantly, “except 
more and more oil on your beach.” 
“We marched in protest,” she 
blurted. 
“And gave up because you 
know you can’t win,” he said holding out the lease. “You and your 
neighbors will be getting fair recompense if you sign this.” 
She glanced from the maze of 
small print to his face and handed 
the paper back to him. At least she 
hadn’t torn it up. He let his voice 
smile. 
“Now if we could go inside so 
you can study this — ” 
“No.” But oddly she laughed. 
“I could call the police.” 
“Their telephone number is 
nine-nine-nine,” he said and she 
shrugged. 
Although she did not unchain 
the door, neither did she close it. 
He started his penultimate maneuver. 
“Your husband said you 
wouldn’t be able to understand 
any of this anyway.” He turned 
away but did not put the lease 
back into his attache case. He 
heard a metallic sound and knew it 
was the door chain. In his excitement he imagined there were hard 
shells between himself and the 
woman and that they would bang 
together as he entered. 
Her eyes glistened, retreating. 
He took a deep breath as she let 
him into the dark hallway. He 
guessed a bedroom was at the end. 
With his human heart thudding, he 
followed her into the living room, 
laughing, feeling out of breath. 
Sometimes he wondered if the 
radio operator’s body were gradually capturing him. If so, the female ones should seem beautiful 
to him. He looked at her grim 
face. It was her shield, he thought, 
but such an inadequate shell. Her 
resentment and weaknesses seemed 
nakedly exposed. He toyed with 
them, watching her features, savoring the hardness he detected. 
“Your husband told me not to 
tell,” he laughed, “which topless 
bar I left him in.” 
Her expression became even 
more rigid. He established himself 
on the couch, spreading the pages 
of the lease option on the coffee 
table. 
“You’re wasting your time,” 
she grated, not sitting down. “I 
won’t sign. What did my husband — ” 
I T was a dating bar,” he said 
imaginatively, reaching up and 
switching on a standing lamp to illuminate the splendors of the 
lease. Its parchment and engraving 
were the best. “We agree to pay 
you a thousand a month until we 
drill. You can’t lose a thing because you keep living here until we 
pay you twice its appraised value 
as a residence. When this block 
goes into production you’ll begin 
receiving your share of royalties 
and tax advantages just like the 
other millionaires.” 
“What was the name of the bar? 
He was calling me from his office.” 
“You thought.” He laughed. 
“The important thing is — we pay 
you in stock and stock options. 
You’ll be in the oil business too. 
You help yourself tax-wise by 
your share of future exploration 
expense write-offs. You’ll even 
have your own depletion allowance. That’s how millionaires are 
made. Why don’t you phone your 
husband’s office. You’ll find out 
he’s not there.” 
“Get out.” She glared down at 
him. “I won’t believe anything you 
OIL-MAD BUG-EYED MONSTERS 
say. You’re the oil company my 
husband told me appeared out of 
nowhere. Fly-by-night.” 
“Right.” He acted as if this 
were praise — and it was. “Actually 
we’ve been growing for eighteen 
years. Your husband understands 
the growth advantages of the oil 
biz. He knows we’ve been building 
a beautiful corporate structure. 
We find oil, pump oil, store oilwe may never need to sell any.” 
He laughed and what he said was 
almost true. “As our worth increases, we’re able to issue more 
stock. Next time you’re on the 
freeway, look down at View Point. 
It overlooks our tank farm.” His 
human face smiled seductively at 
her. “Domestically produced oil 
has become better than money in 
the bank since the controls on foreign oil imports. In the interests of 
national security and to stimulate 
domestic oil exploration, oil and 
gasoline prices are rising. By simply storing our oil and never selling any our company is doing 
more than its part to improve the 
price of domestically produced 
crude. Do you follow me? Our oil 
in storage is constantly increasing 
in value, so that we’re able to issue 
growing amounts of stock to finance ever expanding operationswe drill and pump more oil and 
build more storage tanks and our 
growth stocks are like money in 
the bank- only better. You see? 
You understand as much about 
the oil business as your husband 
does. Sit down and read the fine 
print.” 
“I don’t care what you’re promising me. There’s oil all over our 
beach.” 
“Not our oil,” he insisted. 
“We’re very careful about waste.” 
But she was listening to her feelings rather that to his voice. 
She murmured, “We moved to 
this town because it’s nearer the 
beach. Now it’s ruined.” 
“True,” he agreed somberly. 
“The truth is, this town is ruined 
as a good place to live. And I’m 
trying to help you save yourself.” 
“Like rats leaving the sinking 
ship?” 
“We’re helping conservation,” 
he replied. “When we buy your 
house you’ll receive enough to 
move to another beautiful town 
where there are no underlying oil 
strata. -The value of your stock 
certificates will keep going up — 
and you must appreciate that 
we’re rescuing oil for future generations.” 
“That doesn’t make sense. Get 
out.” 
“By increasing the domestic 
cost of oil,” he pleaded, becoming 
a supplicant, “we’re truly encouraging the development of better 
sources of power, atomically powered electric generator plants, battery-electric cars. I don’t sound 
like other oil company men because my thinking — our thinking 
is far ahead of theirs.” 
“Then go out and drill for for
GALAXY 
eign oil. Allow us to burn theirs, 
not ours. Get out of our town.” 
“And let our nation’s oil needs 
become dependent on foreign 
whims? Our national security — ” 
“Get out or I’ll phone my husband to throw you out.” 
H e managed to keep a 
straight human face, though, he 
could not believe she was serious. 
His voice became soothing. 
“Phone him? If you find him 
he’ll say to sign the lease. He’s a 
man, so he understands that by 
pumping oil into tanks we’re conserving it. He knows irreplaceable 
oil mustn’t be destroyed by fire 
and end as smog. He knows it 
should produce more important 
things, such as petrochemicals and 
plastics and pharmaceuticals and 
food. Your husband drank — ” 
He didn’t know why she was 
laughing but her gleaming teeth 
made him imagine a seductive 
carapace of glossy chitin and he 
listened raptly to the harshness of 
her voice. 
“I know what you want.” she 
pointed at the lease. “Get out.” 
Her voice sagged. “Don’t just sit 
there.” 
He spread five one-hundred-dollar bills on the excitingly hard coffee table. “No need to tell your 
husband,” he laughed. “Start your 
own Swiss bank account. Buy 
yourself a little green — ” 
“Get out. What do you think I 
am?” 
She was looking at him instead 
of the money and he felt more 
confused. 
He began to wonder whether her 
expression was haughtiness or stupidity. Money might be too abstract. She needed something more 
tangible, he thought. 
“Why don’t you choose a car,” 
he began. “For yourself.’’ He 
laughed, watching her expression. 
“Your husband and your son race 
around in theirs, leaving you trapped at home. Listen — you’ll look 
beautiful in a little sports car with 
your hair streaming in the wind. 
I’ll — we’ll buy you a cute car, 
your bonus for signing. It’ll be 
yours, all yours.” 
Watching her grim expression, 
he began describing an electric 
sports car like his own. There was 
such fondness in his voice he might 
have been describing a baby and 
she — smiled. 
“1 had an accident,” she murmured, “a few years ago but — ” 
She sat down on the other end of 
the couch while he described its 
wire wheels. 
“Electrics are so easy to drive,” 
he said. 
“You mean you’re only offering me an electric car?” she complained. “Like thanks — but 1 don’t 
feel I’m an old lady yet.” 
“You’re quoting oil company 
propaganda.” He laughed. “Not 
my oil company. We’re financing 
research for- better electrics — our 
subsidiary builds them. Ninety 
OIL-MAD BUG-EYEDMONSTERS 
miles an hour fast enough for 
you?” 
She squinted. “I thought they 
weren’t allowed on thruways.” 
“They are this year — we’ve been 
buying politicians too.” He sobered. “I’ll show you my runabout. It’s yellow with a vinyl top. 
You’ll have your choice of interchangeable fiberglass bodies.” He 
spread out a sales brochure. 
“Cute, huh? Picture your hair 
streaming back.” He couldn’t really. As she looked down at the pictures of electric cars he imagined 
her encased in fiberglass. Then she 
was invisible in an excitingly shiny 
chitinous carapace, drumming and 
clacking with passion. 
He moved toward her shimmering carapace. 
“Think of yourself encapsulated,” he murmured, “in your 
cute little car. You’ll be giving of 
yourself patriotically by conserving irreplaceable oil and gliding 
electrically and soundlessly and 
smoglessly — ’’ he paused for a 
long, quivering breath — “while future generations revere you.” He 
had learned whatever he said to 
women during his sales pitch was 
less important than his tone of 
voice. “Your oil is too wonderful 
to be burned while millions are 
starving. Sign here if you believe 
in conservation. The anciently 
formed molecules of oil must not 
be burned, because millions of 
years are needed for oil to be born 
again. Oil doesn’t regenerate dur
40 
ing one man’s lifetime like a pine 
forest. It can’t renew itself every 
year like a field of wheat. Yet it 
can provide protein for the starving — that is, there are bacteria that 
feed on oil — an intermediate step.” 
He sighed, moving nearer to her. 
“Anaerobic bacteria, needing no 
air, are able to do this deep in the 
Earth — they sometimes clog oil 
wells. Here’s my pen.” 
H e moved closer, making 
soothing noises'. “You’ll be saving oil for starving babies. On the 
surface, airy-aerobic — bacteria 
can be fed oil if air and moisture 
are bubbled through with infinitely 
small quantities of salts essential 
to growth. How fast they grow! 
You’ll be glad to know that every 
pound of aerobic bacteria multiplies so fast that every day it produces ten more pounds of nutritious protein. The lives of millions 
of malnourished children can be 
strengthened if you’ll sign on this 
line.” 
He grimaced, inwardly hating 
children and feeling that anaerobic 
and aerobic bacteria were equally 
disgusting little competitors, less 
efficient than he was— but at least 
their oil wasn’t wasted as smoky 
exhaust fumes. These people were 
insane! 
He watched her unpleasantly 
flexible fingers moving the pen. 
Above her lengthening signature 
gleamed the pen’s plastic hardness, 
arousing him so that he imagined 
again a shiny round carapace, so 
chitinously beautiful that he 
wanted to bang — 
“Hey, what’s the matter with 
you?” Her voice rasped, although 
he had barely touched her distressing softness. She lurched up from 
the couch. She laughed uneasily. 
“Am I supposed to be flattered or 
feel grateful at my age? You’re don’t get any ideas just because 
you’ve promised to buy me a car.” 
Her eyes gleamed so confusingly as he rose that he saw her encased in transparent chitin. She sidled away, trying to watch him 
while she lit a cigarette with trembling hands. Although he flinched 
from the flash of flame, her silvery 
lighter made him think of a beautifully metallized carapace and he 
advanced. The proper approach 
would have been a couple of quick 
symbolic taps of his carapace 
against hers. Then they could begin banging until one of them 
cracked. But she dodged and he 
kept glimpsing her distractingly 
human face. She seemed ready to 
scream. He realized he’d better 
start with a ritual more familiar to 
her. Whichever way he twisted his 
head, as she backed away, his lips 
were confronted by the dangerously hot tip of her cigarette. 
As he bumped her against the 
wall, she gasped and shoved back. 
This seemed encouraging. But she 
elbowed his unshielded right stomach and he felt a hydrogen gas 
bubble rising from his earlier con
tac-tac-tae! 
Spandau bullets raved past G-8's 
Spad as its mighty Hisso whined the 
plane into a turn, bringing his guns 
to bear on the hapless Fokker. 
Well, space opera it wasn’t, but G-8 
AND HIS BATTLE ACES-coming this 
month from Berkley— hit a lot of the 
same nerve-ends as did the livelier 
pulp SF of those bygone years And 
anyhow, what about Herr Doktor Kreuger and those giant bats ... or the 
good Doktor's notion of transplanting 
cobra eyes into pilots’ heads, they 
should see in the dark? There’s science 
for you! 
Berkley April releases 
G-8 AND HIS BATTLE ACES #1, THE BAT 
STAFFEL, Robert J. Hogan (X1734, 600 
THE TWILIGHT MAN. Michael Moorcock 
(S1820, 750 
RETIEF: AMBASSADOR TO SPACE, Keith 
Laumer (S1829, 750 
If your newsstand or bookstore is out of 
stock, order any of these (fist price pius a 
dime postage) from; 
BERKLEY PUBLISHING CORP. 
200 Madison Ave., New York, N.Y. 10016 
Purchasers of our books have coorplete freedom of choice in pricing these books for resale 
to others. 
OIL-AAAD BUG-EYEDAAONSTERS 
version of martinis. Like a balloon 
it pressed against his throat’s biway valve. For an instant he feared 
ignition from her cigarette. As he 
turned his head away to eructate 
discreetly she ducked under his 
arm and escaped through the dining room. 
Muttering apologies, he pursued 
her into the kitchen. She jerked 
open a drawer. He glimpsed her 
hand gripping something attractively metallic. His amorous excitement converted it to a shiny, 
protective carapace and he continued his advance. 
“Keep away,” her human voice 
gasped. 
But she glittered. 
In his passionate confusion he 
was unable to decide whether he 
was seeing a steely-bright carapace 
where she had been or a stainlesssteel carving knife in her human 
hand. He clacked inquiringly. 
His legs weakened as he advanced. It was if some conscious 
remnant of the young radio operator were aware of the knife — he 
hardened his human stomach mus- cles. She gleamed so gorgeously 
that he began to stridulate with 
fierce joy. He felt invulnerable to 
the thrust of steel within his handsomely gleaming shell, even 
though his body was quivering. If 
he turned out not to be knifeproof the autopsy would expose 
everything. He reached for her. 
Across space, separated by 
light-years from the carapaces of 
their oil-hungry wives, he and his 
kind had come. Their little twelvecarapacer had scouted an oil slick. 
In their excitement they had rammed the tanker, splattering delicious oil. 
Belatedly they had recovered comatose bodies of its crew. Because 
he was the youngest Shieldwiper he 
had been relegated to the smallest 
body — that of the snub-nosed 
young radio operator. 
fPHAT had been eighteen years 
ago. He lunged at her. As she 
dodged she seemed to fluctuate between a breast-heaving woman 
with a knife and a beautifully 
gleaming carapace clacking so 
passionately that she resembled his 
wife. 
It would be twenty-two more 
years before the breeding fleet 
could arrive in this solar system. 
He clacked imploringly as he 
groped for her. They had removed 
his carapace surgically. Concealed 
in seamen’s bellies he and the other 
eleven had managed to infiltrate 
this outrageous world. They had 
seen its shell-less bipeds squandering irreplaceable oil. Oil had to be 
saved for posterity — his. 
He grabbed at her as if he were 
a man. 
Pooling the first meager earnings of their new identities, all 
twelve had bought oil stocks. They 
had operated shrewdly. When they 
(Please turn to page 72) 
DUNCAN 
LUNAN 
THE 
MOON 
REALITY 
Interface relays bod o|>ened the 
Universe to Man — and his betters! 
M CKAY was on his way back 
from the U.N. when the emergency broke. The Sasarenn RLV, 
his badge of office as Earth planetary agent, was cruising on ramjets 
high in the stratosphere, peaceful 
in the afternoon sunlight. He could 
have set up an Interface, now that 
the orbital relays were in position, 
and flown through a hole in the sky 
straight from the coast to the 
spacefield in Montana for further 
details but Air Traffic Control had 
flatly refused to wear it. Nevertheless, some agreement on the use of 
Interface would shortly be needed: 
now that Earth was firmly connected into the interstellar communications net, McKay suspected 
that the sky would fill with starships seeking profit of one kind or 
another. Any or all of the member 
races of the Interface could now 
descend on Earth to seek — hopefully, in some instances, to confer 
— whatever advantages there might 
be in this new link-up. Furtherance 
teams, the survey force of the Interface, were working through the 
solar system right now, planting 
relay satellites at places of interest. 
To keep any kind of control over 
the development of the system’s 
resources Earth would need quickthinking and decisive, action — 
whereas a directive “to conform to 
local ordinances Interface is not to 
be used within the planetary atmosphere — ” would be a good start to 
making Earth a primitive reservation. 
But, the emergency: 
Alerted by the receiver implanted in the back of his skull, 
McKay said, “Acknowledge — ” 
to the ship’s computer/autopilot 
and got back through the ship’s 
perception circuits a display readout from the stricken Furtherance 
vessel. Moments later Devlin, in 
the copilot’s seat, got a more conventional warning from the field in 
Montana. 
“Walt’s in trouble,” Devlin told 
McKay. “Seems he just stopped 
with a bang in mid-transmission.” 
“Just when they started retrofire, something lit nearby and 
homed in,” said McKay. The Sasarenn, in a few weeks’ skirmishing 
with the Furtherance, had left 
Earth other souvenirs besides the 
RLV. “I’m setting up for immediate rendezvous.” 
Walter Slazeck, their Apollo 
teammate in the era three months 
dead, had left Montana hours before as observer on a Furtherance 
ship mapping the Earth/Moon system. Walt and the alien crew had 
gone to the moon the hard way, 
charting magnetic-field / solar-wind 
interaction, and as they neared 
their destination some Sasarenn 
leftover had wakened and hit them. 
The RLV — Recovery and Liason 
Vehicle — was built for aerospace 
rescue and Traffic Control could 
shelve the proeedural problem. 
“1 am about to leave your control area,” MeKay warned them 
courteously. 
The computers had the orbital 
parameters of the falling Furtherance ship, which couldn’t possibly 
have been worse. They had acquisition of the Earth relay, exit code 
for the lunar relay and the instruction to match orbits. 
“Up Interface.” 
A circle of blue terrestrial sky 
before the cruising jet shimmered 
and became black, airless space, 
spread with the faint suspicion of 
stars. Even before they reached it 
the lunar horizon rolled into view, 
it and the blackness beyond replacing more arid more of the sky 
ahead. 
The REV went smoothly 
through the disc and the streaming 
contrails stopped dead in a last 
puff of ice crystals. The air 
intakes closed automatically as 
the blue window behind the ship 
receded and snapped shut. 
And there McKay and Devlin 
were, suddenly moved a quarter of 
a million miles, plunging headlong on to the surface of the moon 
at about twenty-five miles a second. All the RLV’s fuel wouldn’t 
make enough retrofire to save the 
Eurtherance ship — which itself 
would make no maneuvers to 
judge from the mess it was in. 
McKay didn’t even glance directly at the lunar surface rushing 
into greater and greater detail beyond the broken wreck. If he had 
he would have been hypnotized 
like a rabbit. He still had a mile to 
close up with Slazeck, thanks to 
the statistical uncertainty of that 
rushed computation. The REV 
computer was already set for rendezvous. 
He fired the rocket motor, 
said, “Implement — ” and the ships 
came closer in a surge of acceleration. 
“Slazeck to McKay.” Detachment in a crisis was that man’s 
outstanding characteristic. “By 
our clock we hit in forty seconds. 
You can’t possibly make docking 
and transfer. Turn over and slow 
up.” 
“Haven’t enough fuel for that, 
Walt,” said McKay over the 
sound of the rocket. 
Eull secondary boost was eating 
the distance between the two ships 
while adding to the REV’s appalling velocity toward the moon. In 
five seconds they would overhaul 
Slazeck — in eight they would 
strike. The computer/autopilot, 
without pulling its favorite trick 
of grabbing control away from 
McKay, had put all systems on 
full emergency and could take 
over at any moment. The radio 
was a-babble with voices from 
Earth and from other ships telling 
him this was a wasteful sacrifice 
and that he must leave the cripple 
to its fate. Couldn’t anybody see 
what he was going to try? 
“Up Interface — ” 
A S THE Furtherance ship came 
alongside, the familiar circle 
broke open ahead, embedded as it 
THE MOON OF THIN REALITY 
seemed right in the face of the 
moon, though it must still be 
miles above the surface. Its resemblance to a bottomless crater was 
destroyed by its low velocity relative to the ships — as the disc of 
unbroken blackness floated gently 
toward them, lunar features 
whipped ever faster out from behind it. What would happen if the 
disc touched the surface McKay 
had no idea— had there been time, 
he would have selected an Interface at rest with respect to the 
Moon. As it was, he hadn’t even 
picked an exit code and had no 
idea what the disc faced into. 
The disc itself gave no clue as it 
loomed up. Nothing at all was to 
be seen in it. 
Not even stars. 
“Where the hell are we going?” 
shouted Devlin. 
The moon’s faee became twodimensional, a boulder-strewn 
disc, with them going down the 
hole in the middle into unrelieved 
blackness. McKay thought wildly 
of the medieval character who 
broke through the shell of the 
Universe into the unfathomable 
workings beyond. Out of the 
known fell the two ships — sun and 
Earth behind them were blotted 
out, then the stars themselves as 
the Interface closed. 
“Good grief, Mac,” said Devlin, recovering. “Where?” 
Nothing was visible, not even 
Slazeck’s ship — there was no light 
source. On the radar the Further
46 
ance ship was slowly receding; it 
was all there was on the radar. 
Without that blip to relate to McKay might really have believed 
himself out of the physical universe altogether. 
“Walt,” he said urgently. 
“Still here, Mac. But 1 can’t see 
where — all visual sensors have 
gone dead.” 
Now there was a thought. 
“We have no visual input either, 
Walt. Watch for our jet as we 
correct for rendezvous.” 
Normally the RLV’s “eyes” cut 
out the blue glare of the fusion 
motor but this time he made sure 
of getting it. Reassuringly it was 
there as they headed for Slazeck. 
The Furtherance ship was too far 
to reflect it but Slazeck reported 
he could see the burn. So the 
properties of space were normal 
here — it just happened to be empty. To the limits of visibility? Impossible. McKay deployed the 
RLV’s full bank of search devices 
and gave the problem to the computer, which could run through 
the channels much faster than the 
human brain. 
“We’ve got something,” he announced moments later. “A speck 
in the infra-red — barely visible to 
the eye. Tm going to higher magnification. What do you make of 
that, Dev?” 
“Out of radar range — it can only be a star, Mac.” 
“You’re right, Dev,” said McKay after a pause, studying the 
enlarged image. (The RLV’s computerized perception circuits gave 
complete head-up display from 
any of the sensors). “With that diameter and luminosity it can only 
be a red dwarf, so we must be well 
within its gravity field, after all.” 
“We have a radar echo on the 
other side, Mac.” 
It was on the other side, exactly 
— radially opposite to the minute 
spark of a sun — so faint and diffuse an echo that only the computer could have edited it from the 
background. Background was surprisingly high, in fact. 
“That has to be what brought 
us here.” 
“Interface brought us here, 
surely.” Slazeck was listening but 
still wasn’t fully informed. 
“Tm afraid not, Walt. We came 
through blind. Tve no idea where 
we are and whatever delivered us 
here, it wasn’t an Interface satellite. According to our scanners 
there’s no such thing within millions of miles.” 
“All our Interface equipment 
went out in the missile hit, so I 
can’t check. Are you sure yours is 
functioning?” 
“All systems go, Walt.” 
“Then I suggest we match orbit 
and get out of here,” Devlin put 
in. “Whatever that is, we’re receding from it at nearly thirty miles a 
second and if it’s like an Interface 
relay, we’ll be out of range in minutes.” 
“Right,” said McKay. “All the 
recorders are running. We can 
puzzle out what this place may be 
once we’re safely out of it.” He 
corrected again, bringing the RLV 
in towards the mangled Furtherance ship. The RLV lights flicked 
on, found broken metal all up the 
hull. “Don’t worry, Walt, we’ll 
have you out of there minutes after we get back.” 
“Sure, Mac, just as soon as 
you can.” McKay wasn’t fooled, 
he knew that detachment of old. 
“Are you hurt, Walt?” 
“Ah, there’s something in my 
leg. I’m sealed into my acceleration capsule and the medic tape’s 
taken care of it. Can’t raise the 
Furtherance boys on the intercom, 
though.” 
“Okay, Walt, here we go.” The 
RLV was in position, exit code 
for the Earth satellite selected. 
“General access, up Interface.” 
Nothing. 
“Try again,” said McKay, aiming a tight-beam signal at the elusive radar echo. “Up Interface — 
Not even an acquisition pulse.” 
L aser communication was no 
more effective. Wherever they 
might be, there was no easy escape. Leaving the puzzle aside, 
McKay and Devlin went to work 
on the rescue. Here they were on 
familiar ground — the RLV systems were designed for this. Even 
the absence of external light was 
no handicap — the Sasarenn had 
allowed for rescue in planetary 
THEMOONOFTHIN REALITY 
shadow. With work lights deployed, both men opened an emergency hatch into the Furtherance 
ship. 
The missile bad done massive 
damage. Of the crew only four, 
counting Slazeck, were still alive. 
The cabin was so badly damaged 
that the sealed acceleration capsules had to be cut free before they 
could be maneuvered out of the 
hatch. Here the RLV systems 
were no substitute for hard labor, 
made worse by the lighting difficulties. One of the Furtherance 
team showed signs of regaining 
consciousness by the time the capsules were brought in through the 
RLV’s recovery hatch. The RLV 
could carry six but the closed 
shields left very little room in the 
cabin. The injuries might be light 
enough for them to be opened in 
due course but even so, movement 
would be difficult from here on. 
Three hours later the medic 
tapes had done enough to allow 
two of the shields to be opened. 
Slazeck and the alien stayed in 
their couches to allow McKay into the main cabin for a conference. Devlin stayed at the controls, with the hatch open. The 
other aliens were seriously injured 
and would not wake till several 
programs were completed. 
“There’s still nothing in detector range except the dwarf and 
that faint blip astern,” McKay 
summarized. “We are traveling 
rapidly toward the sun, which is 
evidently of point nine solar mass 
and in the final stages of contraction and cooling. It has a very 
slow rotation, so we might expect 
a planetary system —but we can’t 
find anything except the mystery 
echo, which is in circular orbit a 
hundred million miles out. And 
whatever it is, it’s far too small to 
be called a planet. It’s not visible 
at any magnification we have.” 
“That can’t be right, Mac,” 
said Devlin from up front. 
“Yes? Go on.” 
“Well, if that blip were in orbit 
we’d no longer be directly between 
it and the sun. We’re on a hyperbolic path and moving pretty fast 
— but it’s still radially opposite 
the sun.” 
“Meaning it’s not following a 
circular orbit but a projection of 
our path on a sphere?” 
The cabin speaker came on. 
“Perhaps — ” it said tonelessly. 
It was, of course, a computer 
translation of what the alien had 
said into his mike. The Furtherance officer was about four feet 
six, built for high gravity — the big 
flat head, sunk into the shoulders, 
was covered with heavy folds of 
gray skin, between two of which 
shone brilliant eyes. Slazeck had 
introduced him as Kiliath. 
“Please go on,” McKay said. 
Off their own ships, the Furtherance astronauts were often painfully self-conscious. 
“1 had thought, hitherto, that 
we saw no stars because we were 
deep in some dark nebula. But 
perhaps we are in a stranger place. 
Why should space itself reflect our 
radar, unless there be no further 
space?” 
The alien’s own voice, a mere 
whisper, was drowned out by the 
computer translation. But the machine translated only words, not 
logic — obviously several jumps 
had been missed. 
“No further space? You mean, 
we’re in another cosmos, one with 
only one star to hold it open?” 
“We are nowhere in the Interface net. Perhaps we have come to 
a place the Furtherance could never reach.” 
T he logic of that one was easier. 
The Furtherance had the honorable task of widening the Interface 
by carrying the first relays across 
interstellar space to new stars. A 
place the Furtherance could never 
reach would be out of contact with 
ihe known universe altogether. 
“Before we get too scared,” said 
McKay, “Our counters are still 
picking up high-energy cosmic 
rays. That seems to me to indicate 
that space goes on outside the 
shell — figuratively speaking — and 
there are other stars out there.” 
“Figuratively?” Slazeck queried. “If there were a physical shell 
around us our radar sweep would 
only reflect back to us from one 
pont — the one radially nearest to 
us. And wasn’t there some astronomer who suggested — yeah, that’s 
it!” Slazeck’s voice took on an 
unaccustomed edge. “Break up 
the planets around a dying star 
and build a shell to conserve its 
radiation output, the man said. 
A deal like that would explain this 
whole bit. So if we send out directional radar pulses — it won’t be 
perfectly smooth — we should get 
some sort of echo back wherever 
we point the dish. Get to it, Dev. 
Even one echo will confirm it. We 
don’t need to wait hours for pulses 
— minutes, I suppose, not hoursbut some infra-red scanning 
should settle the point. You were 
talking before about background 
noise being high.” 
“Okay, modify that search program,” McKay said. 
Within minutes they had adequate confirmation. So far from 
being isolated beyond sight of other stars, they were falling toward 
the center of a finite sphere not 
much larger than the orbit of the 
Earth, though the sun was only a 
red spark and looked fantastically 
remote. 
“Now it’s plain how we came 
here,” said Kiliath. “To reorganize the very planets — something 
here must have capability to manipulate matter.” 
Reconstruct that one. McKay 
tried. The building of the shell 
must have involved matter-transmission much more advanced than 
the Interface. The planets must 
have been systematically broken 
down, fed through transmitters on 
THE MOON OF THIN REALITY 
their own surfaces into the shell — 
how could it have been assembled 
in parts? It must have been suspended in space, component atom 
by component atom, and materialized as a unit. It still must be 
under some such control or surely 
it would break up. For the shell 
was stationary — orbital forces 
would not keep it from folding 
sunward. McKay doubted if any 
forces could have held so huge a 
structure together, spinning. So 
something kept the sun in the center even now. Some free-fall arrangement — constantly monitored, 
perhaps? And some configuration 
of forces, perhaps a side-lobe of 
what held the shell in place, had 
isopotential with that freak Interface which must, after all, have hit 
the surface of the moon. 
“Fantastic,” said McKay, 
studying the geometrical patterns, 
more intricate with every increase 
of magnification, revealed all over 
the “heavens” by the scanners. 
“So we’re surrounded not just by 
matter but by a ‘capability to manipulate matter — ’ suggesting life 
and intelligence? In vast numbers 
— or quantity — if all the inner 
face reflects sentience. We must 
contact it — if it can reconstruct 
how we got here no doubt it can 
send us back.” 
“Immediate action is recommended,” the Kiliath “voice” put 
in. “Already we are a half-million 
miles from the shell and accelerating all the time.” 
“That’s no problem. This ship’s 
communication equipment can 
bridge the shell if need be.” 
“The limitations of the propulsion system give greater cause for 
concern.” 
“We don’t need propulsion, do 
we?” Devlin asked, puzzled. “I 
don’t think we need worry about a 
scorching from that sun and we 
don’t go near anything else — ” 
“Not the point,” said McKay 
grimly. “We come back to the 
shell itself at the velocity with 
which we left it — thirty miles a 
second. With full tanks, if we expend all the fuel we have, we can 
cut that down by maybe twelve 
mps — ” 
“We might just get a circular 
orbit out of that,” said Slazeck. 
But a check with the computer 
showed they could not, from their 
present position, make any orbit 
that did not intersect the shell. 
They could come down to circular 
orbital speed within the confines 
of the shell but the ship would 
then be on a very long ellipse — the 
major component of their velocity 
would still be directed outward. 
“A circular orbit wouldn’t be 
much good to us anyway,” McKay concluded. “We’d be buzzing 
like a fly around the inner face of 
the shell at eighteen miles a second and the inhabitants — or whatever shaped this space — might just 
think it funny to leave us there. If 
ever we attracted their attention in 
the first place.” 
“Surely they know we’re here 
already,” protested Devlin. 
“I’ve seen no evidence of it,” 
said McKay. “Take another scan 
of the shell, Dev.” He plugged in 
himself to make his point more 
clearly. “Did we know anything 
was there until half an hour ago? 
Even now the smallest shell section we can scan is more than a 
mile across. You wouldn’t detect 
much human activity on that scale 
unless you watched through the 
seasons.” 
“I’m talking about their ability 
to detect a ship — if anyone’s out 
there. A ship isn’t easily missed 
even if it came through on the Interface. And wouldn’t the Interface cast a shadow?” 
“Too far out to cast a shadow 
. but, a half-mile across . 
should have been visible against 
the sun even to the naked eye if 
anyone happened to be looking.” 
“You’re forgetting the apparent 
diameter of the sun,” said Sla/.eck, who was doing the same calculation in his head. “It’s only a 
point source here.” 
“Right, by God! So the Interface would have blotted out the 
sun over a measurable area. So on 
the shell they could calculate 
where it was in space — if they 
knew the diameter of the disc.” 
“They’d get that by triangulation from the edge of the shadow.” 
“Right. Now, could they figure 
out what it was? If they got a tele
scope in time they’d see stars — ” 
“Not from this side. They’d see 
lunar craters if anything. If they 
flashed an alert across — what's 
blocking off our sun ? — people on 
the other side would see stars in 
it.” 
“Total duration of the Interface 
was less than thirty seconds,” said 
Kiliath. “Very fast reaction — on 
both sides of the shell — to effect 
such observation. Communication 
impossible.” 
“True. But then — they’d see the 
fusion burn.” 
“They’d see that from two 
thousand miles, all right, against a 
black background.” 
“Ergo, they know we’re here.” 
“If so,” said Slazeck, “they are 
not doing very much about it.” 
“True,” said McKay, after a 
slight pause. “Get the computer to 
start pushing out a contact program, Dev. Of course, we’re still 
only speculating that anything sentient is there. The assumption may 
be arrogant. Keep it in mind.” 
“Right, Mac. Where do you 
want the contact aimed?” 
“Ah,” Slazeck said. 
“Now, there’s a question,” McKay said. “Aim it at the point 
nearest us when we emerged. If 
they’re still trying to figure out 
the Interface back there we might 
be able to explain it to them.” 
A fter twelve hours, however, 
McKay began broadcasting to 
larger segment of the shell. The 
a 
THEAAOONOFTHIN REALITY 
first attempt hadn’t conclusively 
failed but possibly there were no 
suitable receivers in the area originally covered — and the longer 
they waited, the weaker signals to 
a larger area would become. They 
widened the beam until a quarter 
of the shell was covered by it — 
surely something in that large an 
area would pick it up if sentience 
were there. But two full days later, 
with ever more of the shell’s geometry lost in the distance, there 
was still no acknowledgment. 
“I don’t know what to do next,” 
said McKay. They had discussed 
moving the communications laser 
out from the center of the radio 
receiving area but had no more 
obvious target for it. “They may 
not yet have cracked the code 
— though I would expect a sentience advanced enough to create 
the shell to get it in a couple of repeats at most. But it should be obvious to them that we’re trying to 
communicate, so why don’t they 
at least acknowledge?” 
“They themselves,” said Kiliath, “no longer communicate by 
by such channels. We detect no 
traffic in radio or in light across 
the shell. Either they communicate 
around the shell or by means we 
cannot detect.” 
“Scare us some more,” said 
Devlin. “How far ahead of us are 
they likely to be?” 
“That sun was once like your 
own. Being less massive, it will 
have left the main sequence sooner 
— intelligence may have appeared 
here early or late or even come 
from elsewhere. But they were 
able to survive the sun’s departure 
from the main sequence and to 
build the shell once cooling began. 
This may have been a titanic effort, stretching the race to its fullest capacity, or it may have been 
a momentary distraction, ensuring 
future comfort while applying the 
mind to greater things. Probably 
the latter — for surely they could 
have crossed space to new worlds 
had they wished.” 
“We don’t know what’s outside 
the shell, of course,” said Slazeck. 
“This star might really be isolated. Or maybe they built the shell 
— not to keep solar energy in but 
to keep something worse out. We 
could have a galactic nucleus exploding around us out there.” 
“Perhaps,” said Kiliath. “But it 
might be more aptly phrased, ‘We 
had a galactic nucleus exploding 
out there.’ We may suppose from 
the reduced output of the star that 
the shell is many millions of years 
old.” 
“So you think,” said Devlin 
slowly, “that having built the 
shell casually to supply their 
wants, between night and morning, 
they have then been advancing millions of years from that stage?” 
“You compared us before to a 
fly trapped in here, Mac,” said 
Slazeck. “Insects communicate 
by sound and scent and sight — but 
we don’t heed any of it.” 
“I’ve never believed in that kind 
of superintelligence,” said McKay. “I’m inclined to think their 
apparent lack of interest when a 
couple of spaceships materialize in 
here on the bounce is evidence that 
they’ve regressed over that time.” 
"Communicate around the 
shell," mused Slazeck. “Could 
they have regressed so far that 
their outlook has become wholly 
two-dimensional?” 
“I should think that would depend on their physical structure 
initially,” said McKay. “They 
might come to think of themselves, 1 suppose, as dwelling in a 
finite two-dimensional universe 
warped back on itself through a 
third spatial dimension, as abstract to them as the fourth dimension is to us. Sunlight falls 
vertically on every part of the 
sphere. The level of incident solar 
energy is the same everywhere. 
There’s nothing to bring the sun to 
their attention as being outside the 
surface, so to speak.” 
“We’ll never communicate from 
off the surface, that’s for sure,” 
said Devlin. “Not after we ‘communicate’ with it at thirty miles a 
second.” 
O N THE other hand,” said the 
Kiliath translation. “Unlikely 
that their computers, at whom our 
contact program is initially aimed, 
will have lost the depth concept. 
Even if the inhabitants think of 
them as arbitrarily determining 
the shell in relation to abstract 
flow of energy, the machines must 
have sensors of some kind relating 
to the physical sun. Some kind of 
investigation should follow their 
receipt of coherent patterns of energy from our laser. Mere possession of our code should lead to 
contact.” 
“But — no contact.” 
“No contact indeed, either by 
living intelligence or by their 
thinking constructs. At the level of 
advance postulated, we may find it 
difficult to make the identification.” 
“First we have to make the contact,” McKay insisted. “If they 
no longer use our means and we — 
obviously, by now — don’t respond 
to theirs, their next logical move 
would be to intercept us.” 
“If they still have any physical 
spacecraft,” said Slazeck. “If they 
do, they’re probably powered for 
scarcely more than fine guidance 
— all they’d have to do would be 
drop off the shell and swing 
around the sun to the destination 
point. They’d come back to the 
shell at exactly the speed with 
which they left it.” 
“And we haven’t seen any such 
free-fall boats to date. If we did 
pass near one we’d still be thirty 
mps faster — and nothing launched 
from the shell since we came 
through could catch us even without that.” 
“Precisely. So to intercept us, 
THE MOON OF THIN REALITY 
they’d want to match course and 
speed by something analagous to 
Interface. And since we knew that 
they’re a long way ahead of us in 
matter transmission, and probably 
use m-t fields to maintain the shell 
structure, 1 dare say they move 
things from point to point in the 
same fields and never come into 
inner space here at all. So now, if 
they want to intercept us, chances 
are they won’t have any physical 
craft for the purpose.” 
“Shouldn’t take them long to 
knock something up if they have 
to have spacecraft at all,” said McKay. 
“But,” Kiliath asked, “how 
long since last any invention or 
improvisation was required of 
them?” 
Day after day, nothing. The fall 
into the shell was taking on the 
duration of a major interplanetary 
voyage. If they had to do it the 
hard way, it would take a month 
to cross the shell from side to side. 
Fair enough in normal conditions 
— during the Sasarenn affair McKay had been to Mars and back 
in the RLV without undue discomfort. But the RLV was not intended for long trips under rescue 
conditions. It was partly for this 
reason that McKay decided to 
part from the Furtherance derelict. 
The burn, left to the last possible moment, was long and slow. 
McKay wanted to give any possible shell inhabitants plenty of 
chance to detect the fierce pinpoint 
creeping near the shrunken sun. 
Though it moved periastron out 
from the sun the burn didn’t slow 
them down much — McKay had 
formed a plan so morally dubious 
that he wouldn’t share it with the 
others meantime. Separating from 
the Furtherance wreck put all 
their tempers on edge, for the receding ship, slowly drawing sunward and ahead, was still carrying 
fuel the RLV had no tanks for. 
The motors of the other ship were 
hopelessly beyond repair — so, 
when the RLV had burned enough 
for their parting it would be separated, by precisely so much fuel, 
from further supply. 
The mathematical perfection of 
the irony had sickened them all 
for days before but after commitment the atmosphere improved 
again. Another day reduced the 
tension still more when one of the 
Furtherance astronauts recovered. 
Though still wrapped in various 
casts and dressings the alien was 
well enough for the acceleration 
shielding to be withdrawn, leaving 
the rest much more room. The 
other survivor remained in a 
coma, sealed in at optimum temperature and pressure and better 
off there than in the sticky discomfort of the cabin. They used 
the space regained for a big cleanup and the new freedom of movement made the rest of the trip 
more comfortable. The passing of 
the sun was without incident. The 
sun itself was wholly quiet, not a 
flare or a flicker varying its even 
glow. 
T hey fell for days through 
great tranquillity — days of 
mounting boredom, discomfort 
and frustration. No visual clues 
existed to the size or distance of 
the shell. “I could be bounded in 
a nutshell and count myself a king 
of infinite space, were it not that 
1 have bad dreams.” In one near 
the end Plato himself, unobtrusively changing his tunic for a 
spacesuit, took McKay out of the 
ship to show him elusive shadows, 
huge and unrecognizable, moving 
on the dark face of the shell. 
There was no explanation. Perhaps great disembodied intelligences, unknowable to human 
senses, thronged the space around 
them and would never answer the 
RLV’s call for help. But something had to be controlling the 
shell and McKay woke more determined than ever to force a response from it. 
Awakening, he was plunged 
headlong into the crisis he had 
been heading off for days. 
Argument raged on watch. 
“. how do we know any of 
this is real?” Devlin was shouting. 
“Maybe when the Interface hit the 
shell’s surface we changed scale 
and all this is a tiny cavity inside 
the moon someplace — or even inside an atom! What we see as a 
solid shell could be an electron 
probability smear — ” 
“All right!” At moments like 
this McKay was glad to be the 
oldest man aboard. A sudden hush 
fell, though he had scarcely raised 
his voice. “How did we get into 
this crazy discussion?” 
No immediate answer. “Walt?” 
“I don’t immediately remember, skipper. I think it was basically a question of whether the failure to make contact might not 
mean we had misinterpreted our 
whole environment here.” 
McKay swore. “Four weeks in 
space and you start shouting like 
children over that? Indestructible 
Slazeck of all people — I should 
have thought I could rely on you 
to keep Dev on the rails.” 
“Yeah, Mac. Sure.” 
“Okay. What time is it? No reply to the new program?” 
“New program?” 
McKay’s blood ran very slightly 
cold. “I ordered you two and a 
half hours ago to begin beaming a 
new contact program into the impact area of the Furtherance derelict.” 
“Sure you did,” said Devlin, as 
if recalling a minor chore. “I 
guess we didn’t get around to it.” 
“You guess what? We’ve only 
six hours to impact!” 
“What the hell, Mac?” said Slazeck. “If there’s anyone down 
there to get the message they’ll 
get it plain enough when Kiliath 
(Please turn to page 152) 
THE MOON OF THIN REALITY 
-■ "T. 
CONCLUSION 
WHAT HAS GONE BEFORE 
SIMEON KRUG, industrialist, 
master of life through genetics, 
creator of a world-wide subculture 
of androids to serve man, is driven 
by an overwhelming hunger to talk 
to the stars. 
To this end he has begun the 
construction of an enormous glass 
tower in the Canadian Arctic, west 
of Hudson Bay. The tower will 
house tachyon-beam ultrawave 
communications equipment capable of reaching farther out than 
man has ever reached before. 
Thousands of androids work constantly on the project, headed by 
Thor Watchman, an Alpha an- life being in danger. The situation 
droid who is probably closer to backfires sharply when Krug 
Krug than any other human. simultaneously is accosted by two 
Unknown to Krug, androids members of the Android Equality 
worldwide worship him as god. A Party, a militant organization that 
secret temple at the towersite is has lost faith in Krug as a deity, 
nearly discovered — Thor Watch- Krug's secretary, misunderman manages to divert attention by standing the scene, shoots and kills 
inventing an alarm about Krug's the female android. Watchman 
cools the ensuing imflammable situation. The secret chapel is moved 
to a new location — but suddenly 
around the Earth the A ndroids are 
uneasy. 
IX 
1 AM Nick Ssu-ma Lloyd Tennyson Cadge Foster Will Mishima 
Jed Guilbert and maybe Manuel 
Krug, maybe. Maybe. A week in 
the shunt room. You come out, 
you don’t even know who you are. 
Manuel Mishima? Cadge Krug? 
Anyway you can’t be sure. Walk 
like Lloyd, laugh like Nick, shrug 
like Will. So on and so on. Everything a blur, a lovely golden haze, 
sunrise on the desert, like that. 
Their heads inside your head. 
Yours inside theirs. Only a week. 
Maybe that’s why I like it so 
much. To stop being only me for a 
while. Stop. Stop. Stop. Stop. 
Open the box. Jump out. Into 
them. 
Full of funny ideas, now. 
Bouncing in the stasis net for 
168 hours. Twong and they split 
you open and you jump out and 
look for a place to land and you 
land blong and you’re Nick Ssuma, eating roast dog on Taiwan. 
At dawn in the fog with your aunt. 
Both naked. She says, touch itie 
here, you do, she laughs, you shiver. Touch me again. Now you 
laugh, she shivers. Tiny breasts, 
like Clissa’s. This is our wedding 
night. With this ring I you do wed, 
Mrs. Ermine Tennyson, silken 
thighs, mole in small of back. He 
sleeps with an android, did you 
know that? Imagine Manuel doing 
that. He loves her, so he says. 
Look. Look here, he loves her, it’s 
right here. You find your love 
where you can find it. An android? 
Well, at least he’s not ashamed or 
he wouldn’t be in here shunting 
with us. An android. I almost had 
one once but I couldn’t. At the 
last moment. What does it feel going into one? Just like anyone else. 
They aren’t plastic, you know. 
Even though there isn’t any hair 
on it. Sort of incest, though. How? 
Well, Manuel’s father makes the 
androids, doesn’t he, so in a way 
she’s his sister. Very clever. Very, 
very clever. Cruel bastard. But 
you like doing it? Of course I do. 
I’ll show you. Here. Here. Shunt 
and see. 
And he jumps across the net and 
slides into the slot. Who is he? Jed 
Ssu-ma? Will Tennyson? We are 
all one. Prowling my memories of 
Lilith. I don’t mind. How can I 
want to keep secrets? My friends. 
My true friends. 
When 1 was nine years old I 
Cadge Foster took a toad and 
cooked it and ate it, 
When I was thirteen years old I 
Will Mishima pissed on the transmat floor because 1 was scared I 
wouldn’t get there, 
I Lloyd Tennyson put my finger 
in my sister’s thing she eleven I 
eight 
Jed Guilbert fourteen years old 
pushed a gamma off a loading 
rack fell eighty meters died 
squashed I told my father he 
slipped 
1 was ten Nick Ssu-ma a male 
beta at the back window said to 
mother he watched you and father 
in bed my father just smiled my 
mother had them kill him 
I Manuel Krug almost thirty 
58 
years old deceive my wife Clissa 
w'ith Alpha Lilith Meson whom I 
love whom I love whom 1 love of 
Stockholm she lives on Birger 
Jarlsgaten Alpha Lilith Meson 
with breasts and thighs and teeth 
and elbows with rosy skin whom I 
love whom I love whom 1 love no 
hair on it at all Lilith 
And we shunt and shunt and 
shunt we hang dangling in the stasis net looping easily from mind to 
mind, floating, changing skulls as 
often as we please even though it 
runs up the charges, and 1 taste 
Cadge’s toad and I wet Will’s 
transmat and 1 smell Lloyd’s sister on my finger and I kill Jed’s 
gamma and 1 lie about Nick’s beta and all of them go to bed with 
Lilith and they tell me afterward, 
yes, yes, we really ought to investigate these alpha women, you’re a 
lucky bastard, Manuel, a lucky 
lucky lucky bastard 
And I love her 
Whom 1 love 
And I see all the little hates and 
dirtinesses in their souls, my 
friends, but 1 see the strengths too, 
the good things, for it would be 
awful if we shunted and saw only 
the cooked toads and the puddles 
on the transmat floor. I see secret 
favors and modesties and loyalties 
and charities. 1 see how good my 
friends really are and I worry and 
1 wonder — what do they see in me? 
Maybe they’ll hate me when we 
come out of this. We shunt some 
more. We see what they see in us 
what we see in us in them. 
A week is used up so fast! 
Poor Manuel, they say, 1 never 
knew it was so bad for him. With 
all that money and he still feels 
guilty because he’s got nothing to 
do with his life. Find a cause, 
Manuel. Find a cause. Find a 
cause. 1 tell them I’m trying. I’m 
looking. 
They say what about the androids? 
Should 1? What would my father say? If he doesn’t approve. 
Don’t worry about him. Do 
what you think is right. Clissa is 
in favor of equal rights for androids. If he blows up — let Clissa 
talk to him before you do. Why 
should he blow up? He’s made his 
pile out of androids, now he can 
afford to let them vote. 1 bet 
they’d vote for him. You know all 
the androids are in love with your 
father? Yes. Sometimes I think it 
must be almost like a religion with 
them. The religion of Krug. Well 
it makes a sort of sense to worship 
your creator. Don’t laugh. But I 
have to laugh. It’s crazy androids 
bowing down to my father. To 
idols of him, I bet? 
You’re getting off the track, 
Manuel. If it worries you that you 
aren’t doing anything important, 
become a crusader. Equal rights 
for androids. Up the androids! 
You bet, up the androids! That’s 
unworthy of you. You’re probably 
right. 
We hear the gongs and we know 
our time is up. 
We drop out of the net. We slide 
into our own heads. I’m told they 
do this part very, very, very, carefully, getting everybody into his 
own head. 
As far as I know I am Manuel 
Krug. 
They ease us out. There is a readaptation chamber on the far side 
of the net. We sit around for three, 
four hours, getting used to being 
59 
individuals again. We look at each 
other strangely. Mostly we don’t 
look at each other at all. Someone 
has been laughing too much with 
my mouth. 
In the re-adaptation chamber 
they have more of those new toys, 
the blunt-edged cubes. Mine sends 
me a series of messages. 
THE TIME IS NOW 0900 HOURS IN 
KARACHI 
IS THIS THE FIRST TIME YOU’VE 
MET YOURSELF? 
YOUR FATHER PROBABLY WOULD 
LIKE TO HEAR FROM YOU 
ONLY THE TRUE ANSWERS ARE 
FALSE 
THEY HAVE SETTLED THE CASE 
OUT OF COURT 
ONCE WE WERE ALL A GREAT 
DEAL WISER 
The machine bores and frightens 
me. 1 hurl it aside. 1 am almost 
certain that I am neither Cadge 
Foster nor Lloyd Tennyson but I 
worry about the toad. I will go to 
Lilith as soon as I leave here. Perhaps I should speak to Clissa first. 
My father must be at his tower. 
How is that great erection coming 
along? Will he soon have messages 
from the stars to read on the winter nights? 
“Gentlemen, we hope you’ll 
shortly return,” the smiling alpha 
tells us. 
We go out. I am they. They are 
I. We are we. 
We clasp hands solemnly. We 
head for the transmats. Virtuously, dutifully, I go to Clissa. 
T he lawyers met three times in 
the week following the destruction of Alpha Cassandra Nucleus. 
The first meeting was held in the 
offices of Krug Enterprises, the 
second in the headquarters of Labrador Transmat General, the third 
in the board room of the Chase/ 
Krug Building, Fairbanks. The 
Labrador Transmat people had 
suggested that Krug simply supply 
a new alpha, paying the costs of 
training her. Lou Fearon, acting as 
counsel for Krug, objected that 
this might expose his client to expenses of an amount that could 
not be determined in advance. Labrador Transmat recognized the 
justice of this position and a compromise was reached under the 
terms of which Krug Enterprises 
transferred to Labrador Transmat 
the title to one Duluth alpha female, untrained, and agreed to pay 
the costs of her training to a maximum of $10,000 fissionable. The 
total time consumed in these three 
meetings was two hours and twenty-one minutes. A contract was 
drawn and the civil suit was voided. Leon Spaulding initialed the 
agreement on behalf of Krug, who 
had gone to Luna to inspect a newly completed gravity pond for 
hemiplegics at Krug Medical Center in the Sea of Moscow. 
November 17, 2218. 
A delicate tracery of windblown 
snow lightly covers the area 
around Krug’s tower — beyond the 
construction zone, the snow lies 
deeply mounded, iron-hard. A dry 
wind buffets the tower. Well ahead 
of schedule, it has topped five hundred meters and now is overwhelming in its crystalline splendor. 
The eight-sided base yields im( Please turn to page 74) 
CHILDREN’S 
CRDS/SDE 
LAWRENCE MAYER 
It could have been air pollution, 
bomb-testing, population explosion, 
anything. But it's time to ask: 
What kind of world ore we making? 
G ladys green, of west los 
Angeles, had her baby on a sunny day, exactly on target. In the 
early afternoon she felt labor 
pains, called her mother and her 
husband, went to the hospital and 
in due course gave birth. Sidney 
Ginsburg, her doctor, delivered the 
child. 
At her mother’s insistence 
Gladys had a private room. She 
lay there, half-dozing. Her mother 
sat by her side, knitting a sweater. 
There were flowers everywhere. 
Dr. Ginsburg said, “It’s a beautiful baby, a beautiful boy.” 
She said, “Oh, yes, it’s a darling 
baby, Sidney. 1 can’t wait to hold 
him.” 
“There’s just one small thing,” 
Sidney said. “A slight anomaly. 
You can’t call it a defect. It’s got 
two teeth. Rather strange ones — 
fairly sharp, actually. We’ll pull 
them, of course. Tomorrow. Very 
routine. No reason for alarm.” 
When he left her mother said, 
“I don’t like those teeth. That must 
be Herman’s side. The babies on 
our side were perfect.” 
To Gladys’s mother Herman 
was nothing but a side. But to 
Gladys he was a husband and he 
had given her a child. She was 
grateful. But she let her mother 
talk. 
They brought in the baby, red 
and wriggling. It was cute, she 
thought, but it did have odd-looking teeth. When it cried they were 
plain to see. She put the baby to 
her breast. It bit her quite savagely. 
She started bleeding and the baby’s little tongue seemed to want 
to lick up the blood. 
Gladys cried out from the pain. 
Her mother was grumbling about 
breast-feeding. 
“It’s a crazy idea. We used bottles in my day. What are you, a 
cow?” 
But the baby would not drink, 
not from the breast, not from the 
bottle. They went ahead and pulled 
the teeth. Then the baby took no 
nourishment at all. It shriveled 
away. They fed it intravenously 
and called in specialists. The baby 
steadily lost weight. A few weeks 
later it died. 
To his amazement, Sidney 
found this was no isolated case. All 
the other doctors had similar stories. 
“Hundreds of babies have those 
teeth,” said Dr. Hillman. “We pull 
them; they don’t eat; then they 
die.” 
“It’s an epidemic of teeth.” 
“What happens if you leave the 
teeth in? Do they live?” asked Dr. 
Schwartz. 
The answer came quickly 
enough. Max Gold called from the 
clinic. 
“Sidney, you won’t believe it,” 
he said. “You know, we have 
mothers that give birth in their 
homes. Well, they’ve been coming 
in later, complaining — the babies 
don’t eat right. But the babies are 
okay. It’s the mothers. You should 
see them — breasts, arms, legs all 
chewed up — it’s the damnedest 
thing I ever saw in forty years of 
practice. Those babies drink 
blood.” 
“Max, is this possible? Vampires?” 
“See for yourself. I don’t know 
what to do. The mothers are frantic. Some of them are bleeding to 
death. They get infections— 1 mean 
it’s horrible.” 
“Max, will they outgrow it? This 
habit?” 
“How should I know? Ask Bela 
l.ugosi,” Max said. 
G ladys went home to an empty house and cried. She went 
from room to room crying. She 
looked at the empty crib and cried. 
Herman had to come home from 
work. She was beyond consolation. 
Sidney prescribed tranquilizers 
and another child, the sooner the 
better. To get over the trauma, he 
said. 
“In her weakened condition?” 
asked her mother. 
But nobody listened. 
“Sidney, will my baby have teeth 
if I have another one?” Gladys 
asked. 
He shrugged. The papers were 
full of the problem now— nobody 
knew what to do. As far as anyone 
could tell the epidemic was centered in Los Angeles, with some 
outbursts in the desert southwest. 
There were isolated cases in Oregon and among the Navajos and 
about as far east as Denver. 
“It’s the atom bomb. They’re 
testing near Las Vegas. It’s got to 
be,” Herman said. 
The men he played poker with 
agreed. And all their wives were 
deathly afraid. 
O NE thing was concurred in at 
all levels of government. The 
babies could not be left to die. That 
was murder. The very mention 
drew black words from the Catholic Church. A soul was a soul. Besides, the mothers loved these children, teeth and all. 
Could the children be weaned 
away from blood? The answer was 
no. Autopsies showed that these 
babies had long, narrow stomachs, 
highly specialized, fit only for digestion of blood. Anatomically, it 
looked like a permanent arrangement. There was no question of 
outgrowing the taste. 
Was there an alternative to human blood? The babies turned out 
to want nothing else. They had no 
desire for cow blood, goat’s blood, 
monkey blood, any blood but their 
own. Force feeding was tried but, 
as it happened, non-human blood 
made the babies deathly ill. For 
short periods they could be fed intravenously but that was no longrun solution. So they went on, 
draining their parents of blood. On 
this diet they survived and grew. 
Many doctors insisted on vitamin 
pills as a supplement. The pills 
were dissolved, of course, in blood. 
CHILDREN'SCRUSADE 
Without pills the babies were pale 
and prone to flu. 
G LADYS’S baby, another boy, 
was born slightly premature. 
It was an easy labor. But the news 
was bad. It was another one with 
teeth. 
Her mother was all for extraction. 
“You’ll adopt a baby, look at 
cousin Norma, you’d never know 
her Lisa was adopted, it even looks 
like her.’’ 
But Gladys was adamant. 
“I won’t kill my baby. It’s 
mine.” 
Her mother shouted. Herman 
wavered back and forth. While the 
debate raged the baby was fed with 
needles. It grew noticeably weak. 
In the end Gladys won. They 
named the baby Mark, after her 
father, whose name was Morris; he 
was dead. Gladys drank extra milk 
and took iron pills. She was like a 
tiger. All her maternal instincts 
came to the fore. When she felt 
strong enough she demanded that 
the baby be brought in. It was a 
shriveled little thing — it looked 
half alive. She put it to her breast 
and sobbed as it sucked her blood. 
“Oh, it’s the image of Herman,” 
she said. “I’m going to love it to 
my last ounce of life.” 
After a week they took it home. 
It was considerably more plump. 
At home life was difficult. They 
had no woman to help out, though 
Gladys’s mother offered to pay. At 
first Gladys nursed her baby in secret, out of a vague sense of 
shame. The effort was wasted — the 
neighbors knew all. The truth was 
plain from one look at Mark’s 
teeth. At any rate, vampires were 
no rarity by now. There were several on Gladys’s block. Actually, it 
helped to know that they were 
there, that the city was full of other vampires. The parents were beginning to form clubs, to meet and 
discuss their mutual problems. 
The first meetings seemed awkward and strained — Gladys came 
home with sick headaches. But in 
the end it lessened the pain to talk 
to other suffering mothers and fathers. And they did exchange helpful hints. 
A Mrs. Willoughby, for instance, explained that parents in 
their position were not really 
forced to stay around the house 
even when their babies were wee 
little ones. She kept a quart or two 
of fresh sterile blood in the refrigerator, in clean containers. Then, 
she and her husband felt free to go 
out to the theater or for dinner or 
to peoples’ houses for supper or 
cards. She left the baby with sitters, 
the same as anybody. Her little girl 
seemed perfectly willing to lap 
good clean blood from a bowl or 
dish. It had to be slightly warmed, 
though — at least to room temperature. Some sitters were squeamish, but they soon located others 
who were not. 
“The big thing is to get over the 
embarrassment, the shame,” Mrs. 
Willoughby said. “Are you going 
to keep your child hidden forever? 
Bring him out in the open! The 
chances are the neighbors already 
know your secret. And they have 
blood-children of their own. You’d 
be surprised at how many vampires 
there are, here in L.A.” 
Another mother advised them 
not to be depressed. 
“Buy a new hat. Go dancing. 
Stay alive!” 
Dr. Argon from Cal. Tech, 
spoke on the causes of vampirism. 
It was a mutation, he explained 
and told them about genes and genetic change. As to what caused 
this mutation, no one yet knew. 
Perhaps something in the air. It 
was their bad luck to live in Los 
Angeles. 
“But think of the sunshine and 
the orange juice,” Dr. Argon said, 
smiling grimly. 
Gladys thought that was terrible 
taste but the group leader, Mrs. 
Elsa Darling, said they had to learn 
to live and laugh. 
“Look at the bright side,” Elsa 
said. “No bottles, no nipples, no 
baby food to buy. We’re going to 
have more babies, John and 1, as 
soon as we can. And if they want 
blood we’ll give them blood.” 
But it was easier said than done. 
Child-raising is a tiresome job under the best of circumstances. It 
was no joke, to give blood four 
times a day to a voracious infant. 
Despite the fluids and the iron pills, 
Gladys was constantly exhausted. 
CHILDREN'S CRUSADE 
The littlest thing made her tense, 
upset. One night her cousin Edna 
came over for bridge. They stayed 
up past one. Gladys crawled into 
bed and fell instantly asleep. The 
baby woke up at four, as usual, 
and began its loud howling for 
food. 
“Herman, I just can’t do it!” 
She felt she had come to the end 
of her rope. He climbed out of bed, 
half in a daze. He picked up the baby and rocked it in his arms. 
“Herman,” Gladys wailed, “he 
doesn’t want love — he wants 
blood.” 
He stared at the baby, then at 
Gladys. The baby screamed. Gladys screamed. Herman sighed. He 
unbuttoned his pajama tops and 
put the baby’s mouth to his breast. 
Mark’s lips brushed against that 
fat, hairy breast and he turned 
away. Gladys sobbed loudly from 
her bed. Herman cradled the baby 
in his arms, made shushing noises, 
then put the baby’s mouth to the 
flabby flesh of his upper forearm. 
The wailing stopped in an instant. 
With a mixture of pleasure and disgust Herman felt his son’s teeth 
slice at his skin till the blood flowed 
freely. They he heard the soft gurgling noise of ingestion. He looked 
away. 
A ETER that Herman regularly 
helped. But the burden was 
mostly on Gladys. 
“It’s a mother’s job,” she said. 
Besides, Herman had to work — 
he needed strength. Gladys grew 
pale. She lost weight. She caught 
colds easily. She aged noticeably. 
She stopped doing her hair. But 
she persevered. 
The years went by. One by one, 
hopes dropped away. Science 
proved powerless to help them. 
Government labs experimented 
with artifical blood but without 
success. The only breakthrough 
was the use of blood drawn from 
one type of chimpanzee, fortified 
with drugs and antibodies and 
specially processed. The trouble 
was, no more than ten thousand of 
these chimpanzees existed in the 
world. The blood cost a hundred 
dollars a pint. It was more costly 
than truffles or the finest caviar. 
Only the very rich could dream of 
using it. For the Greens, it was out 
of the question. 
Their whole life altered. Originally they had wanted many children. But now even one was too 
much. They had no energy left for 
a second child, even a normal one, 
and another vampire would surely 
kill Gladys. Herman gave up his 
dream of a houseful of daughters 
and sons. He was an only child 
himself and his parents were dead 
— the dream died hard. 
Herman’s relationship with 
Gladys, too, was different. The 
business of living overwhelmed 
them. Once they had been sweethearts, then husband and wife. 
Now they were slaves of a single 
master. At the core of their life to
gether was the child — and the teeth. 
When Mark was five they were 
forced to hire a wet-nurse. Herman’s business was in trouble. 
Money was tight. But they had no 
choice. The child ate and ate; its 
needs for nourishment were more 
than its mother and father could 
supply. They scraped some cash together, refinanced their house — 
then they went to a lawyer they 
knew, who arranged things on a 
black-market basis. A prospect 
was flown in from South America. 
She was a young Indian girl named 
Maria. Her father was a Bolivian 
tin-miner, now dead — she was one 
of ten children. She was succulent 
and seventeen. She spoke no English. They agreed to pay, in addition to her plane fare and the lawyer’s fee), a salary of sixty dollars 
a week, with one day off and room 
and board. In addition to feeding 
Mark she was to clean and dust the 
house when she could. 
With her first sixty dollars she 
bought a portable phonograph, two 
rock-and-roll records, a bracelet 
and a dress. With her second 
week’s pay, she bought a ticket on 
a Greyhound bus and ran away. 
Mark screamed. Gladys cried. 
Herman wrung his hands. The ticket from Bolivia and the lawyer’s fee 
had bled them white. 
It was the first of many bitter experiences. Costs mounted — the 
women came and went. Some of 
them lied about their health and infected the child. Some of them re
fused to go on with the feedings — 
some were slovenly and neglected 
the house. Life was a constant 
heartache. 
Teeth or no teeth, the boy was 
hard to handle. He was an attractive child physically, with his Buddha-belly, his pink cheeks, his chocolate eyes, his curly hair. But how 
difficult he was! He toilet-trained 
late. He wet his bed. He screamed 
and had tantrums. He kicked and 
spat at people. He refused to say 
thank you and please. And he 
learned how to irritate his mother 
-most of all, most horribly of all 
- by leaping at aunts or at company or at strangers, biting their legs 
and lapping maliciously at their 
flowing blood. 
Every moment of the day, every 
day of her life, Gladys pondered 
her tragedy. Why am I cursed, she 
asked. She had no answer. She sent 
him off to a special day school. 
This cost her fifty dollars a week. 
When he was out the door and into 
the schoolbus, she would collapse 
in bed again, totally exhausted. She 
would nap fitfully, then read a 
magazine and wonder — why was 
she cursed. And she would call her 
mother or her sister or a friend and 
cry on the phone. If only he would 
eat a hamburger, candy even, drink 
Coca-Cola — if he were only like 
regular children . 
M ark played exclusively with 
others of his kind. Normally 
behaved children were not allowed 
CHILDREN'SCRUSADE 
to go near him — the parents were 
polite, of course, but Gladys knew. 
Her own sister avoided her. Her 
own sister, with her two bucktoothed simpering girl-brats. She 
never came by day with the girls — 
only at night and without them. 
You could invite her for coffee or 
lunch or dinner with the family but 
she always made excuses. 
“Bite her, bite her, the bitch!” 
Gladys moaned to herself — she almost hoped that Mark would eat 
her or her brats alive. The nerve of 
her, not understanding her own sister’s affliction, the nerve of her 
treating her own sister and her 
nephew as if they were filth. Fortunately there were parents down the 
block with vampire children. Not 
that she considered these children 
proper playmates for Mark. They 
were all simply horrible. Along 
with the teeth, it seemed, went a 
ferocious disposition. And when 
these children got together in 
somebody’s yard or the family 
room they made the most fearful 
din, kicking and screaming and biting. The biting was not usually for 
the sake of food. It was plain aggressive biting. Food biting was different and rather horrible. It was 
associated, not with aggression but 
with love. When two of the children 
were especially attracted to each 
other they would hold hands, put 
their faces, one at a time, to each 
other’s neck, gently slit the skin 
and drink some of the slowly oozing blood. It was almost like a kiss. 
This reaction was discovered quite 
early by one of the hordes of psychologists and psychiatrists that 
descended on the vampire children, 
observing, asking, watching, writing in notebooks. The day school 
was positively filled with them 
every day. They trooped in and out 
solemnly, constantly taking notes. 
Nothing seemed to fascinate them 
quite as much as this bite of love. 
Vampires were on everybody’s 
mind. There was always something 
in the newspaper about them. They 
were more and more common and 
spreading — north to San Francisco, as far East as Omaha, Nebraska. An isolated pocket of vampires 
broke out in the Pittsburgh area. 
But the central focus was still Los 
Angeles, where, in the peak year, 
one out of every three births was a 
vampire child. Then, quite suddenly, the situation stabilized — it even 
began a slight decline. 
“They stopped testing those 
bombs, that’s what,” people said. 
It was cold comfort to Herman 
and Gladys. 
“Who needs a man on the 
moon?” Gladys would say, “They 
could spend that money on our 
boy.” 
And Herman would add: “We 
give money to all those foreign 
countries when we need it right 
here.” 
They watched the evening news 
and sighed. 
“They throw away more money 
in a day than we see in ten years.” 
She said, “In a lifetime.” 
No matter how long the years, 
the hurt remained. Each time 
Gladys fed the boy her heart was 
broken — Herman’s too, though 
he never complained. He grew silver and passive and fat. Gladys was 
paler and thinner and more and 
more ailing. Her mother died and 
she felt even more alone. They sat 
in front of their TV night after 
night after Mark had gone to bed. 
And Herman ate and Gladys cried 
until they went to bed. 
A t five he was naughty. At ten 
he was wild. At sixteen he was 
impossible to control. He wore 
sideburns. He had girls. He flunked 
in high school. He bought a motorcycle with his father’s credit card. 
He was in with a terrible crowd. 
There was no question, the vampires were different from other 
people — deeply and desperately 
hostile to the world. Normal people could hardly manage them. 
There were some exceptions. Gladys observed with hope and jealousy 
how nicely Melinda, a girl down 
the block, was doing. 
“She plays the piano, she’s on 
the honor roll. She’s got the teeth 
but she’s as sweet as can be. She’s 
a joy to her mother and dad.” She 
and Herman never said vampire. 
They always walked around the 
word. They used phrases like “the 
children with the teeth.” Mark had 
no such reluctance. He flung the 
word in their faces. He taunted 
Ihem with it. He jeered at them and 
tortured them. 
His crowd was a vampire crowd, 
of course. It was a gang — they 
called themselves the Demons of 
Blood. On long dusty evenings they 
got on their motorcycles and went 
tearing up and down the streets, 
screaming and laughing. They beat 
up other young people who got in 
their way and sucked their blood. 
They broke one boy’s glasses and 
bled him until he fainted. They 
broke into stores and smashed windows. They swaggered about, 
shouting filthy language, scratching dirty words on billboards. 
Discipline had no effect. Speeches and tears were useless. Mark 
slammed the door and ran out 
when they tried to reason with him. 
He told them to drop dead. Gladys 
said she would — he was killing her 
by inches. As it was, she was bedridden half the time. Didn’t he 
care? He shrugged. 
At seventeen Mark dropped out 
of high school and spent his days 
hanging around the house, sleeping 
till noon, then roaming the streets 
at night. They threatened him with 
starvation, their ultimate weapon. 
He went back to school, more or 
less. In his senior year he got a girl 
in trouble. Herman paid for the 
girl’s abortion. The incident took 
years off Gladys’s life. Somehow 
he was graduated from high 
school. College was out of the 
question. 
“What will you do, what kind of 
CHILDREN'S CRUSADE 
Job?” his father asked. 
Mark shrugged. 
Even the Army had no use for 
vampires. 
At eighteen he ran away and 
roamed the country with a gang of 
vampires, boys and girls. They 
must have stolen and terrorized 
their way from state to state — 
somehow, they were never caught. 
After a while Mark came back, 
borrowed money from his father, 
drank and gambled it away. He 
worked in a gas station for a while 
— until he had money for a fancier 
motorcycle. Then he quit his Job. 
When he was twenty he brought 
home a girl named Lisa and said 
they were going to get married. 
Neither Gladys nor Herman liked 
the looks of her — dirty and unkempt and she smoked and drank 
a lot. She was a vampire, of course. 
They wanted to know: Who were 
her people — what kind of folks 
were they? Mark refused to answer. They looked into it on their 
own. They found out her parents 
were people like themselves, ordinary people, suffering quietly and 
deeply with the pain. They all four 
decided it was good — maybe — if 
the children got married. Responsibility might bring them to their 
senses. The girl was probably pregnant, too. 
Gladys’s strength was ebbing 
now. But she rallied and made him 
a wedding in her home, a wedding 
to be proud of. The bride wore 
white. A few close relatives and 
friends from both sides were invited. Mark and his bride came in 
an hour before the ceremony, 
drunk and disheveled — it was 
ghastly. Gladys put the best face on 
the matter she could. 
After the words, I now pronounce you man and wife — Mark 
bent over, bit Lisa on the neck and 
gently lapped at her blood. 
She giggled. 
“In public, in public,” Gladys 
wailed and clutched at Herman in 
her agony. 
Outside, a raucous gang, uninvited friends of the bride and 
groom, shrieked, drank whiskey 
and raced their motors. 
Six months later the baby was 
born. It had two wicked teeth in the 
front of its mouth. That was happening now all over — vampires 
bred true. They tried to give the baby up for adoption but no one 
would take it. 
“They’re too spoiled to feed it,” 
Gladys said. 
“Maybe they’re smart,” Herman said. “What did it do to our 
lives?” 
“If 1 had the strength I’d take 
it,” Gladys said. 
Lisa was no fit mother — she hit 
the baby, fed it only once in a while, 
left it at home while she went out to 
the bars with Mark and his friends. 
He, Mark, was even more indifferent. And he quarreled constantly 
with Lisa. 
One day he walked out on her — 
for almost a year he stayed away. 
“What kind of world is this?” 
Gladys asked anybody who would 
listen. 
She was too sick to leave the 
house for weeks at a time. Nothing 
consoled her any more, not even 
cards. But she doted on her poor, 
scrawny grandchild, begged Lisa 
to bring it around and fed it secretly when she could, despite the 
strenuous opposition of her doctor. 
One winter day, Herman came 
home and found Gladys stretched 
on the floor, unconscious. She was 
taken to the hospital immediately. 
She had the best of care but, despite all, she died the following 
week. 
Mark came to the funeral, fidgeted and had nothing to say to his 
old man. 
They buried Gladys under a 
dark, blustery sky. When they left 
the cemetery Mark said to Herman, “I’ll see you around.” 
Then he went away. 
H erman sat in the house all 
alone, watching TV. The announcer said a new epidemic of 
vampires had broken out. This 
time in New York. A dim light 
flickered in Herman’s eyes. It was 
an uncanny thing, this race of beings, people who could only live by 
the blood of their very own kind. It 
was beyond his comprehension. 
But if everybody lived that way the 
whole human race would die out. 
The voice on TV droned on. 
Science was still searching (it said) 
for the secret of artificial blood. 
Congress was pouring in money. 
There had to be some better answer, Herman thought. Better than 
artificial blood. Keep them from 
happening — that was better. They 
should ask me. Herman sighed and 
thought of his anguished, wasted 
life. Had he done something wrong? 
His arms were still scarred from 
his long ordeal. All his hopes had 
been buried. And where was Mark 
now, his son? Whose blood was 
nourishing him now? 
He shook his head sadly. He 
turned back to the set. After a 
while his eyes clouded over — he began to snore. Loud TV music 
blared in the empty house. ★ 
SUBSCRIBE IMOWTOTHE NEW 
The Magazine of Alternatives 
OUT OF MINDSHOT 
alized the fearful truth: that to 
someone who could read minds 
not only his ambitions but his worst 
weaknesses were like an open book. 
So that, in fact, it was he himself, through his desire to suffer 
pain and humiliation, who gave 
Lesley the power she would never 
otherwise have possessed — to bring 
the broom slamming down on the 
nape of his neck and drive him into 
unconsciousness. 
W HEN she had overcome the 
repugnance occasioned by her 
reaching into Braden’s mind and 
sharing the distorted instincts there, 
Lesley freed herself from her bonds 
and tied him securely with the same 
( Continued from page 23 ) 
rope. Having made him into a kind 
of parcel, she set off awkwardly to 
negotiate the side of the hill. 
It was a long slow job but she 
made it with dawn purpling the sky, 
found his car where it had been left. 
She searched him for his keys, 
pushed him into the back seat and 
drove bumpily away. 
Apparently without reason she 
stopped a couple of miles away 
among a ring of boulders and got 
out, leaving the engine running. 
She raised the hood and found the 
inlet of the oil supply. Carefully 
she scooped up sand and measured 
it into the pipe until the engine 
ground to a halt. 
Then, just to make certain, she 
hunted for and found the drain
cock of the radiator, allowed the 
water to seep into the thirsty earth. 
She took Braden’s own pocket 
knife and stabbed at each of the 
tires. Then she took a pencil from 
his pocket and wrote something on 
a scrap of paper. 
He stirred and began to wake 
and she threw the paper and pencil 
blindly down on the seat near him 
and ran. 
Much later that year a rambling 
prospector found what he had 
found a dozen times before — a 
clean-picked human skeleton in the 
dry sand. He shook his head and 
muttered the usual “Poor fella!” 
to his burro. A short distance further on he came across a car with 
its tires flat and the driver’s door 
open and approached to see if it 
would give any clue to the identity 
of the dead man. But there was 
nothing except a scrap of paper lying on the seat with a few words 
scrawled on it in the sort of script 
one would expect from a poorly 
educated child. 
Scratching his head, he read it 
aloud to the burro as if requesting 
an explanation. 
“1 don’t care what happens to 
you here. My range is less than a 
thousand yards.” ★ 
OIL-MAD BUG-EYED MONSTERS (Continued from page 42} 
had learned more about being men 
they incorporated, leased some desert land, issued stock and, joy and 
calamity, struck oil. 
He heard her screaming for 
help. 
They were trying to save oil, not 
sell it — and the answer was the 
tank-farm gimmick. Paying for 
the erection of more storage tanks 
by issuing more growth stocks, 
they discovered tax angles so acute 
that they purchased an electric car 
manufacturing company in order 
to acquire its paper losses. As the 
years passed they became a conglomerate. 
He cornered her between the 
gleaming dishwasher and the glittering refrigerator and heard her 
human voice gasping; “Don’t look 
at me like that.” 
By this time the other eleven had 
become remote chairmen of 
boards of directors. Because he 
was the only one who continued 
direct contact with the public as a 
lease-man the unfriendly eleven 
had accused him of un-shell-like 
urges. They were afraid he might 
crack before they controlled the 
planet’s oil, before the breeding 
fleet arrived. They said he took 
human risks, even driving on the 
freeway. If he were killed in an accident his autopsy might lead to 
their exposure. 
He heard her gasp. 
He felt the soft struggling of her 
body. Her carving knife clattered 
to the floor with an excitingly hard 
sound. 
Her human voice was saying, 
“Damn — damn — I can’t stick you 
like a pig. So kiss me if that’s 
what you’re trying to do.’’ 
With his eyes closed he tried. 
She was so soft — the opposite of 
truly armored love — so horribly 
soft. He shrank back in normal revulsion. He opened his eyes. She 
had no shell at all. She opened 
hers. 
As he fled through the dining 
room he heard her pursuing him. 
In the living room he snatched up 
his reassuringly hard attache case 
and held it in front of himself like 
a carapace which was too small. 
To his dismay, she advanced. 
Smiling oddly she said, “Either 
I’m sorry or you’re — what about 
my car — ’’ 
“Not as sorry as I am,’’ he 
gasped and grabbed the lease from 
her coffee table. “I’ll authorize delivery of your car — ’’ 
Desperately needing his, he 
rushed outside. He scuttled along 
the slippery sidewalk toward the 
shell-like security of his car. 
Shrilly stridulating — he felt so humiliated. He tried to assure himself that her signature on the lease 
was the only important thing. He 
had that. But tears were trickling 
down his hideously human cheeks. 
At least he had seduced another 
drilling site, he thought as he drove 
ninety miles an hour along the 
freeway. He couldn’t wait twentytwo more years for his wife’s hard 
carapace. He pounded his fore
head against the glinting steering 
wheel. His car swerved. He turned 
into the parking area above View 
Point, as if the sight of his oil 
tanks could give him some relief. 
He parked at the brink and tried 
sublimating, pouring himself an 
abstemious reward for getting her 
signature. With trembling hands, 
he opened another can of an adequate little 30-weight, non-detergent oil and sipped, attempting to 
restrain himself. Then he drank 
desperately. But the act only stimulated his loneliness. 
He looked up at the empty gray 
sky, then glared out at the ocean, 
dark with wasted oil. At least he 
was more intelligent than humans, 
he thought, and glanced into his 
car’s mirror at his obscenely huge, 
blue-eyed reflection. These monsters were raping their own world. 
Those bulging eyes stared back 
at him like a madman’s from the 
mirror. But he clacked quietly and 
more confidently to himself because he knew who he was. He felt 
as if he were armored again, secure and restrained. He knew he 
could wait twenty-two more years 
for his wife and the breeding fleet. 
It would be so heavily armored 
that — 
He regained his poise. His gaze 
shifted between the oil-blackened 
ocean, jagged with human drilling 
platforms, and those bulging madblue eyes in the mirror. 
He felt thankful he wasn’t human. ★ 
OIL-MAD BUG-EYED MONSTERS 
THETOWER OF GLASS 
( Continued from page 60 } 
perceptibly to the planes of the 
four-sided trunk. The tower is haloed in light: sunglow rebounds 
from its flanks, strikes the surrounding fields of snow, leaps up 
again to kiss the glassy walls, is 
hurled groundward once more. 
Albedo reigns here — brightness is 
all. 
The lower two-thirds of the existing structure has now been divided into floors and, as the androids assembling the skin of the 
tower pile the glass blocks ever 
higher, those responsible for the 
interior work follow them up. 
Installation of the tachyon-beam 
system has begun. Five giant rods 
of brilliant red copper, sixty centimeters thick and hundreds of meters long will form a quintuple 
spine, rising inside vertical service 
cores that span close to half the 
tower’s height. The lower sections 
of these great busbars are going 
into place now. A circular jacket 
of translucent glastic a meter in 
diameter forms the housing for 
each bar. The workmen slide forty-meter lengths of copper into 
these jackets, then cunningly fuse 
them end to end with quick, dazzling bursts of power from the eye 
of a welding laser. Elsewhere in 
the building hundreds of electricians supervise the spraying of 
conductive filaments into the tower’s gleaming inner walls. Squadrons of mechanics install conduits, 
waveguides, frequency converters, 
fluxmeters, optical guidance accessories, focal plane locators, 
neutron activation foils, Mossbau
er absorbers, multichannel pulse 
height analyzers, nuclear amplifiers, voltage converters, cryostats, 
transponders, resistance bridges, 
prisms, torsion testers, sensor 
clusters, degaussers, collimators, 
magnetic resonance cells, thermocouple amplifiers, accelerator reflectors, proton accumulators, and 
much more, everything carefully 
computer-tagged in advance with 
its floor level and flow-chart designation. Sending messages to the 
stars by tachyon-beam is not a 
simple project. 
The tower is already a thing of 
unparalleled splendor, starkly supple, spectacularly spearing the sky. 
Visitors drive many kilometers out 
into the tundra to get the best view 
of it, for at close range it cannot 
properly be appreciated. Krug enjoys reminding his guests, though, 
that what they see today is merely 
the bottom third of the ultimate 
structure. To visualize the final 
building one must imagine a second tower of the same size piled 
atop this November spire and then 
a third one set atop that. The mind 
rebels. The image will not come. 
Instead, one can bring into view 
only the picture of a slender, impossibly attenuated, terribly frail 
needle of glass that hangs in the 
sky, seeking to put down roots, 
and, failing, topples and topples 
and topples, falling like Lucifer 
through all one long day, and shatters with a faint tinkle in the icy 
air. 
X 
“A NEW signal,” Vargas said. 
A “Slightly different. We began 
getting it last night.” 
“Wait right there,” said Krug. 
“I’m coming.” 
He was in New York. Almost 
immediately he was in Vargas’ 
Antarctic observatory, high on the 
polar plateau, at a point equidistant between the Pole itself and the 
resorts of the Knox Coast. There 
were those who said that the transmat era had cheapened life in one 
way while enriching it in another: 
the theta force allowed one to flick 
blithely from Africa to Australia 
to Mexico to Siberia in a moment’s merry dance, but it robbed 
one of any true sense of place and 
transition, of any feel for planetary geography. It transformed 
Earth into a single infinitely extended transmat cubicle. Krug had 
often resolved to take a leisurely 
tour of the world from the air and 
see desert shading into prairie, forest into bare tundra, mountains into plains. But he had not managed 
to find the time. 
The observatory was a series of 
pleasant glossy domes sitting atop 
an ice sheet two and a half kilometers thick. Tunnels in the ice 
linked dome to dome and gave access also to the outlying apparatus: the vast dish of a radio telescope’s parabolic antenna, the 
metal grid of an X-ray receiver, 
the burnished mirror that picked 
up relayed transmissions from the 
orbiting observatory high above 
the South Pole, the short, stocky 
multiple-diffraction optical telescope, the three golden spikes of 
the hydrogen antenna, the fluttering airborne webwork of a polyradar system and the rest of the devices with which the astronomers 
here kept watch on the universe. 
Instead of using refrigeration tapes 
to insure that the ice would not 
melt beneath the buildings, they 
had employed individual heat-exchange plaques for every structure, so that each building was a 
little island on the great glacier. 
In the main building things 
hummed and clicked and flashed. 
Krug did not understand much 
about this equipment but it seemed 
properly scientific to him. Technicians ran eagerly about; an alpha 
high on a dizzying catwalk called 
numbers to three betas far below; 
periodically there was a crimson 
surge of energy within a glass helix twenty meters long and numbers leaped on a green and red 
counting mechanism at every discharge. 
Vargas said, “Watch the radon 
coil. It’s registering the impulses 
that we’re getting right now. Here 
— a new cycle is starting — you 
see?” 
Krug contemplated the pattern 
of surges. 
** 
4; 4; 4: 4c 4c 
* 
** 
4c 4c 4: 
4: 
4c 4: 
♦ 
“That’s it,” Vargas said. “Now 
a six-second pause, and then it 
starts again.” 
“2-5-1, 2-3-1, 2-1,” Krug said. 
“And it used to be 2-4-1, 2-5-1, 
3-1. So they’ve dropped the 4group altogether, they’ve moved 
the 5-group to the front of the cycle, they’ve completed the 3-group, 
they’ve added a pulse in the final 
group — damn, Vargas, where’s the 
sense? What’s the significance?” 
“We don’t detect any more content in this message than in the 
last. They’ve both got the same 
basic structure. Just a minor rearrangement — ” 
“It’s got to mean something!” 
“Perhaps it does.” 
“How can we find out?” 
“We’ll ask them,” Vargas said. 
“Soon. Through your tower.” 
Krug’s shoulders slumped. He 
leaned forward, gripping the 
smooth cool green handles of 
some incomprehensible device jutting from the wall. “These messages are three hundred years 
old,” he said blackly. “If this planet of theirs is like you tell me it is, 
that’s like three hundred centuries 
here. More. They won’t even know 
about the messages their ancestors 
sent out. They’ll be mutated out 
of all recognition.” 
“No. There has to be continuity. They couldn’t have reached a 
technological level that would allow them to send transgalactic 
messages at all unless they were 
able to retain the achievements of 
earlier generations.” 
Krug swung around. “You 
know something? This planetary 
nebula, this blue sun — I still don’t 
believe it could have intelligent beings living there. Any kind of life 
— no! Listen, blue suns don’t last 
long, Vargas. It takes millions of 
years for the surface of a planet to 
cool enough just to get solid. 
There isn’t that much time, a blue 
sun. Any planets it’s got, they’re 
still molten. You want me to believe signals coming from people 
who live on a fireball?” 
Vargas said quietly, “Those signals come from NGC seven-twonine-three, the planetary nebula 
in Aquarius.” 
“For sure?” 
“1 can show you all the data.” 
“Never mind. But how, a fireball?” 
“It’s not necessarily a fireball. 
Maybe some planets cool faster 
than others. We can’t be sure how 
long it takes them to cool. We 
don’t know how far the home 
world of the message-senders is 
from that sun. We’ve got models 
showing the theoretical possibility 
that a planet can cool fast enough, 
even with a blue sun, to allow — ” 
“It’s a fireball, that planet,” 
said Krug sullenly. 
D efensive now, Vargas said, 
“Perhaps. Perhaps not. Even if 
it is; must all life-forms live on a 
solid-surface planet? Can’t you 
conceive a civilization of high-temperature entities evolving on a 
world that hasn’t cooled yet? If — ” 
Krug snorted in disgust. “Send
ing signals with machines made 
out of molten steel?” 
“The signals don’t have to be 
mechanical in origin. Suppose they 
can manipulate the molecular 
structure of — ” 
“You talk fairy tales to me, 
doctor. I go to a scientist, I get 
fairy tales!” 
“At the moment fairy tales are 
the only way of accounting for the 
data,” Vargas said. 
“You know there’s got to be a 
better way.” 
“All I know is that we’re getting 
signals and they undoubtedly 
come from this planetary nebula. 
I know it isn’t plausible. The universe doesn’t have to seem plausible to us all the time.* Its phenomena don’t have to be readily explicable. Transmat wouldn’t be 
plausible to an eighteenth-century 
scientist. We see the data as best 
we can and we try to account for 
77 
it — and sometimes we do some 
wild guessing because the data 
we’re getting doesn’t seem to 
make sense. But — ” 
“The universe doesn’t cheat,’’ 
Krug said. “The universe plays 
fair.” 
Vargas smiled. “No doubt it 
does. But we need more data before we can explain NGC seventwo-nine-three. Meanwhile we 
make do with fairy tales.” 
Krug nodded. He closed his eyes 
and fondled dials and meters, while 
within him a monstrous raging impatience sizzled and blazed and 
bubbled. Hey, you star people! 
Hey, you, sending those pulses! 
Who are you? What are you? 
Where are you? By damn, I want 
to know! Me. Krug. Krug. 
What are you trying to tell us, 
you? 
Who are you looking for? 
What's it all mean? Suppose / 
die before I find out! 
“You know what 1 want?” Krug 
said suddenly. “To go outside, to 
that radio telescope of yours. And 
climb up into the big dish. And 
cup my hands and shout at those 
bastards with the numbers. What’s 
the signal now? 2-5-1, 2-3-1, 2-1? 
It drives me crazy. We ought to 
answer them right now. Send some 
numbers: 4-10-2, 4-6-2, 4-2. Just 
to show them we’re here.” 
“By radio transmission?” Vargas said. “It’ll take three hundred 
years. The tower will be finished 
soon.” 
“Soon, sure. Soon. You ought 
to see it. Come see, next week. 
They’re putting the gadgets in it 
now. We’ll be talking to the bastards soon.” 
“Would you like to hear the 
audio signal coming in, the new 
one?” 
“Sure.” 
Vargas touched a switch. From 
speakers in the laboratory wall 
came a dry cold hiss, the sound of 
space, the voice of the dark abyss. 
It was a sound like a cast-off 
snakeskin. Overriding that withered sound, seconds later, came 
sweet upper-frequency tones. Bleep 
pleep. Pause. Bleep pleep pleep 
pleep pleep. Pause. Bleep. Pause. 
Pause. Bleep pleep. Pause. Bleep 
pleep pleep. Pause. Bleep. Pause. 
Pause. Bleep pleep. Pause. Bleep. 
Silence. And then again, pleep 
pleep, the new cycle beginning. 
“Beautiful,” Krug whispered. 
“The music of the spheres. Oh, 
you mysterious bastards! Look, 
doctor, you come see the tower 
next week, next — oh, Tuesday. I’ll 
have Spaulding call you. You’ll be 
amazed. And listen, anything else 
new comes up, another change in 
the signal, 1 want to hear right 
away.” 
Bleep pleep pleep. 
He headed for the transmat. 
Bleep. 
K rug leaped northward along 
the meridian, following the 
line of 90° E., looped the North 
Pole and emerged beside his tower. 
He had sped from icy plateau to 
icy plateau, from the world’s bottom to its top, from late spring to 
early winter, from day to night. 
Androids were busy everywhere. 
The tower seemed to have grown 
fifty meters since yesterday’s visit. 
The sky was ablaze with the light 
of reflector plates. The song of 
NGC 7293 sang seductively in 
Krug’s mind. Bleep pleep. Bleep. 
He found Thor Watchman in 
the control center, jacked in. The 
alpha, unaware of Krug’s presence, seemed lost in a drugged 
dream, climbing the precipices of 
some distant interface. An awed 
beta offered to cut into the circuit 
and tell Watchman, via the computer, that Krug had arrived. 
“No,” Krug said. “He’s busy. 
Don’t bother him.” 
Pleep pleep pleep pleep pleep. 
He stood for a few moments, 
watching the play of expressions 
on Watchman’s tranquil face. 
What was passing through the 
alpha’s mind now? Freight invoices, transmat manifests, welding cues, weather reports, cost estimates, stress factors, personnel 
data? Krug felt pride geysering in 
his soul. Why not? He had plenty 
to be proud of. He had built the 
androids and the androids were 
building the tower — and soon 
man’s voice would go forth to the 
stars. 
Pleep pleep pleep. Pleep. 
Affectionately, a little surprised 
at himself, he put his hands to 
Thor Watchman’s broad shoulders 
in a quick embrace. Then he went 
out. He stood in the frigid blackness a short while, surveying the 
frenzied activity at every level of 
the tower. On top they were putting new blocks in place with flawless rhythm. Inside, the tiny 
figures were hauling neutrinosheathing around, joining lengths 
of copper cable, installing floors, 
carrying the heat-cool-power-light 
system higher and higher. Through 
the night came a steady pulsation 
of sound, all the noises of construction blending into a single 
cosmic rhythm, a deep booming 
hum with regular soaring climaxes. The two sounds, the inner 
and the outer ones, met in Krug’s 
mind, boom and pleep, boom and 
pleep, boom and pleep. 
He walked toward the transmats, ignoring the knives of the 
Arctic wind. 
Not bad for a poor man without much education, he told himself. This tower. These androids. 
Everything. He thought of the 
Krug of forty-five years ago, the 
Krug growing up miserable in a 
town in Illinois with grass in the 
middle of the streets. He hadn’t 
dreamed much about sending messages to the stars then. He just 
wanted to make something out of 
himself. He wasn’t anything, yet. 
Some Krug! Ignorant. Skinny. 
Pimpled. Sometimes on holocasts 
he heard people saying that mankind had entered a new golden age, 
with population down, social and 
racial tensions forgotten, a horde 
of servomechanisms to do all the 
dirty work. Yes. Yes. Fine. But 
even in a golden age somebody has 
to be on the bottom. Krug was. 
Father dead when he was five. 
Mother hooked on floaters, sensory scramblers, any kind of 
dream-pills. They got a little money, not much, from a welfare 
foundation. Robots? Robots were 
for other people. Half the time the 
data terminal, even, was shut off 
for unpaid bills. He never went 
through a transmat until he was 
nineteen. Never even left Illinois. 
He remembered himself; sullen, 
withdrawn, squint-eyed, sometimes 
going a week or two without 
speaking to anyone. He didn’t 
read. He didn’t play games. He 
dreamed a lot, though. He slid 
79 
through school in a haze of rage, 
learning nothing. Slowly coming 
out of it when he was fifteen, propelled by that same rage, turning 
it suddenly outward instead of letting it fester within; / show you 
what I can do, I get even with you 
all! Self-programing his education. 
Servotecfinology. Chemistry. He 
didn’t learn basic science; he 
learned ways of putting things together. Sleep? Who needed sleep? 
Study. Study. Sweat. Build. A remarkable intuitive grasp of the 
structure of things, they said, was 
what he had. He found a backer in 
Chicago. The age of private capitalism was supposed to be dead; so 
was the age of free-lance invention. He built a better robot, anyway. Krug smiled, remembering: 
the transmat hop . to New York, 
the conferences, the lawyers. And 
money in the bank. The new 
Thomas Edison. He was nineteen. 
He stocked his laboratory with 
equipment and looked for grander 
projects. At twenty-two, he started 
to create the androids. Took a 
while. Somewhere in those years, 
the probes began coming back 
from the near stars, empty. No 
advanced life-forms out there. He 
was secure enough now to divert 
some attention from business, to 
allow himself the luxury of wondering about man’s place in the 
cosmos. He pondered. He quarreled with the popular theories of 
the uniqueness of man. Went on 
toiling, though, diddling with the 
nucleic acid, blending, hovering 
over centrifuges, straining his eyes, 
dipping his hands deep into tubs of 
slime, hooking together the protein chains, getting measurably 
closer to success. How can man be 
alone in the universe if one man 
himself can make life? Look how 
easy it is! I’m doing it: am I God? 
The vats seethed. Purple, green, 
gold, red, blue. And eventually life 
came forth. Androids shakily rising from the foaming chemicals. 
Fame. Money. Power. A wife; a 
son; a corporate empire. Properties on three worlds, five moons. 
Women, all he wanted. He had 
grown up to live his own adolescent fantasies. Krug smiled. The 
young skinny pimpled Krug was 
still here within this stocky man, 
angry, defiant, burning. You 
showed them, eh? You showed 
them! And now you’ll reach the 
people in the stars. Pleep pleep 
pleep. Boom. The voice of Krug 
spanning the light-years. Hello? 
Hello? Hello, you! This is Simeon 
Krug? In retrospect he saw his 
whole life as a single shaped process, trending without detour or 
interruption toward this one goal. 
If he had not churned with intense, 
unfocused ambitions there would 
have been no androids. Without 
his androids, there would not have 
been sufficient skilled labor to 
build the tower. Without his 
tower — 
XI 
H e entered the nearest 
transmat cubicle and set coordinates in a casual way, letting 
his fingers idly choose his destination. He stepped through the field 
and found himself in the California home of his son Manuel. 
He hadn’t planned to go there. 
He stood blinking in afternoon 
sunlight, shivering as a sudden 
wave of warmth struck his Arctic
tuned skin. Beneath his feet was a 
shining floor of dark red stone; the 
walls that rose on either side of 
him were coruscating swirls of 
light bursting from polyphase projectors mounted in the foundation; 
above him was no roof, only a repellor field set for the blue end of 
the spectrum, through which dangled the fruit-laden branches of 
some tree with feathery gray-green 
leaves. He could hear the roar of 
the surf. Half a dozen household 
androids, going about their domestic chores, gaped and goggled 
at him. He caught their awed 
whispers. “Krug . Krug . .” 
Clissa appeared. She wore a 
misty green wrap that revealed her 
small high, breasts, her sharpboned hips, her narrow shoulders. 
“You didn’t tell me you 
were — ’’ 
“I didn’t know I was.” 
“I would have had something 
ready.” 
“Don’t feel I need anything special. I’m just dropping in. Is Manuel—” 
“He isn’t here.” 
“No. Where?” 
Clissa shrugged. “Out. Business, I guess. Not due back until 
dinnertime. Can I get you^ — ” 
“No. No. What a fine house 
you have, Clissa. Warm. Real. 
You and Manuel must be very 
happy here.” He eyed her slender 
form. “It’s such a good place for 
having children, too. The beach — 
the sun — the trees — ” 
An android brought two mirrorbright chairs, expanding and socketing them with a swift deft twinkle of his hands. Another turned 
on the waterfall on the inland side 
of the house. A third lit an aroma 
spike and the odor of cloves and 
cinnamon unfolded in the courtyard. A fourth offered Krug a 
tray of milky-looking sweets. He 
shook his head. He remained 
standing. So did Clissa. She 
looked uncomfortable. 
She said, “We’re still newlyweds, you know. We can wait a 
while for children.” 
“Two years, isn’t it, you’ve been 
married? A long honeymoon.” 
“Well—” 
“At least get your certificate. 
You could start thinking about 
children. 1 mean, it’s time you — 
time I — a grandchild — ” 
She held forth the tray of 
sweets. Her face was pale — her 
eyes were like opals in a frosty 
mask. He shook his head again. 
He said, “The androids do all 
the work of raising the kid, anyhow. And if you don’t want to get 
yourself stretched you could have 
it ectogenetically, so — ” 
“Please?” she said softly. 
“We’ve talked about this before. 
I’m so tired today.” 
“I’m sorry.” He cursed himself 
for pushing her too hard. His old 
mistake — subtlety was not his 
chief skill. “You’re feeling all 
right?” 
“Just fatigue,” she said, not 
convincing him. She seemed to 
make an effort to show more energy. She gestured and one of her 
betas began to assemble a stack of 
glittering metal hoops that rotated 
mysteriously about some hidden 
axis — a new sculpture, Krug 
thought. A second android adjusted the walls, and he and Clissa 
were bathed in a cone of warm 
amber light. Music trembled in the 
air, coming from a cloud of tiny 
glittering speakers that floated, 
fine as dust, into the courtyard. 
Clissa asked, too loudly, “How 
is your tower going?” 
“Beautiful. Beautiful. You 
should see it.” 
“Perhaps I’ll come, next week. 
If it isn’t too cold there. Are you 
up to five hundred meters yet?” 
“Past it. Rising all the time. 
Only not fast enough. 1 ache to 
see it finished, Clissa. To be able 
to use it. I’m so full of impatiences I’m sick with them.” 
“You do look a little strained 
today,” she said. “Flushed, excited. You ought to slow down 
sometimes.” 
“Me? Slow? Why? Am I so 
old?” He realized he was barking 
at her. He said more temperately, 
“Look, maybe you’re right. 1 
don’t know. 1 better leave now. 1 
don’t mean to be a bother for you. 
1 just felt like a little visit.” Pleep 
pleep. Boom. “You tell Manuel it 
was nothing special, yes? To say 
hello. When did 1 see him anyway? 
Two weeks, three? Not since right 
after he came out of that shunt 
room business. A man can visit 
his son sometimes.” He reached 
out impulsively, drew her to him, 
hugged her lightly. He felt like a 
bear hugging a forest sprite. Her 
skin was cold through that misty 
wrap. She was all bones. He could 
snap her in half with a quick yank. 
What did she weigh, fifty kilos? 
Less? A child’s body. Maybe she 
couldn’t even have children. Krug 
found himself trying to imagine 
Manuel in bed with her and pushed 
the thought away, appalled. He 
kissed her chilly cheek. “You take 
care,” he said. “So will 1. We both 
take care, get lots of rest. You say 
hello to Manuel for me.” 
H e rushed to the transmat. 
Where to next? Krug felt feverish. His cheeks were flaming. 
He was adrift, floating on the 
broad bosom of the sea. Coordinates tumbled across his mind; 
frantic, he seized one set, fed it to 
the machine. Pleep. Pleep. Pleep. 
The scaly hiss of amplified starnoise nibbled at his brain. 2-5-1, 
2-3-1, 2-1. Hello? Hello? The theta 
force devoured him. 
It brought him forth inside an 
immense musty cavern. 
There was a roof, dozens of dim 
kilometers overhead. There were 
walls, metallic, reflective, yellowbrown, curving toward some distant place of union. Harsh lights 
glared and flickered. Sharp-edged 
shadows stained the air. Construction noises sounded: crash, thunk, 
ping, bavoom. The place was full 
of busy androids. They clustered 
close to him, glistening with awe, 
nudging, whispering: “Krug . 
Krug . Krug . Why do androids always look at me that way? 
He scowled at them. He knew that 
perspiration was bursting from 
every pore. His legs were unsteady. Ask Spaulding for a coolpill — but Spaulding was elsewhere. 
Krug was jumping solo today. 
An alpha loomed before him. 
“We were not led to anticipate the 
pleasure of this visit, Mr. Krug.” 
“A whim. Simply passing 
through, looking in. Pardon me — 
your name?” 
“Romulus Fusion, sir.” 
“How big a work-force here. 
Alpha Fusion?” 
“Seven hundred betas, sir, and 
nine thousand gammas. The alpha 
staff is quite small — we rely on 
sensors for most supervisory functions. Shall I show you around? 
Would you like to see the lunar 
runabouts? The Jupiter modules? 
The starship, perhaps?” 
The starship. The starship. Krug 
comprehended. He was in Denver, 
at Krug Enterprises’ main North 
American vehicle-assembly center. 
In this spacious catacomb many 
types of transportation devices 
were manufactured, covering all 
needs that the transmat could not 
meet: ocean-crawlers, sliders for 
surface travel, stratospheric gliders, heavy-duty powerhaulers, immersion modules for use on 
high-pressure worlds, ion-drive 
systemships for short-hop spacing, 
interstellar probes, gravity boxes, 
skydivers, minirailers, sunscoops. 
Here, too, for the past seven 
years, a picked technical staff had 
been building the prototype of the 
first manned stargoing vessel. 
Lately, since the commencement 
of the tower, the starship had become a stepchild among Krug’s 
projects. 
“The starship,” Krug said. 
“Yes. Please. Let’s see it.” 
Aisles of betas opened for him 
as Romulus Fusion ushered him 
toward a small teardrop-shaped 
slider. With the alpha at the controls they slipped noiselessly along 
the floor of the plant, past racks 
of half-finished vehicles of every 
description, and came at length to 
a ramp leading to yet a lower level 
of this subterranean workshop. 
Down they went. The slider halted. 
They got out. 
“This,” said Romulus Fusion. 
Krug beheld a curious vehicle a 
hundred meters long, with flaring 
vanes running from its needlesharp nose to its squat, aggressivelooking tail. The dark red hull 
seemed to have been fashioned 
from conglomerated rubble — its 
texture was rough and knobby. No 
vision accesses were in evidence. 
The mass-ejectors were conventional in form, rectangular slots 
opening along the rear. 
Romulus Fusion said, “It will 
be ready for flight-testing in three 
months. We estimate an acceleration capability of a constant twopoint-four G, which of course will 
bring the vessel rapidly to a velocity not far short of that of light. 
Will you go inside?” 
Krug nodded. Within, the ship 
seemed comfortable and not very 
unusual — he saw a control center, 
a recreation area, a power compartment and other features that 
would have been standard on any 
contemporary systemgoing ship. 
“It can accomodate a crew of 
eight,” the alpha told him. “In 
flight, an automatic deflector field 
surrounds the ship to ward off all 
oncoming free-floating particles, 
which of course could.be enormously destructive at such velocities. The ship is totally self-programing — it needs no supervision. 
These are the personnel containers.” Romulus Fusion indicated 
four double rows of black glassfaced freezer units, each two and a 
half meters long and a meter wide, 
mounted against a wall. “They 
employ conventional life-suspension technology,” he said. “The 
ship’s control system, at a signal 
from the crew or from a ground 
station, will automatically begin 
pumping the high-density coolant 
fluid into the containers, lowering 
the body temperature of personnel 
to the desired degree. They will 
then make the journey submerged 
in cold fluid serving the double 
purpose of slowing life-processes 
and insulating the crew against the 
effects of steady acceleration. Reversal of the life-suspension is just* 
as simple. A maximum deepsleep 
period of forty years is planned. 
In the event of longer voyages, the 
crew will be awakened at fortyyear intervals, put through an exercise program similar to that 
used in the training of new androids, and restored to the containers after a brief waking interval. In this way a voyage of virtually infinite length can be managed 
by the same crew.” 
“How long,” Krug asked, 
“would it take this ship to reach a 
star three hundred light-years 
away?” 
“Including the time needed for 
building up to maximum velocity, 
and the time required for deceleration,” replied Romulus Fusion, 
“I’d estimate roughly six hundred 
and twenty years. Allowing for the 
expected relativistic time-dilation 
effects, apparent elapsed time 
aboard ship should be no more 
than twenty or twenty-five years, 
which means the entire voyage 
could be accomplished within the 
span of a single deepsleep period 
for the crew.” 
Krug grunted. That was fine for 
the crew — but if he sent the starship off to NGC 7293 next spring 
it would return to Earth in the 
thirty-fifth century. He would not 
be here to greet it. Yet he saw no 
alternative. 
He said, “It’ll fly by February?” 
“Yes.” 
“Good. Start picking a crew: 
two alphas, two betas, four gammas. They’ll blast off for a system 
of my choosing early next year.” 
“As you instruct, sir.” 
T hey left the ship. Krug ran his 
hands over its pebbled hull. His 
infatuation with the tachyon-beam 
tower had kept him from following the progress of the work here 
— he regretted that now. They had 
done a magnificent job. And, he 
saw, his assault on the stars would 
have to be a two-pronged effort. 
When the tower was complete he 
would attempt to open realtime 
communication with tht^ beings 
whom Vargas insisted lived in 
NGC 7293; meanwhile, his android-staffed starship would be 
embarked on its slow journey outward. What would he send aboard 
it? The full record of man’s accomplishments — yes, cubes galore, 
whole libraries, the entire musical 
repertoire, a hundred high-redundancy information systems. Make 
that crew four alphas, four betas 
— they’d need to be masters of 
communications techniques. While 
they slept he would beam tachyonborne messages to them from 
Earth, detailing the knowledge 
that he expected to gain from the 
tower’s contacts with the star-folk. 
Perhaps, by the time the starship 
reached its destination in the year 
2850 or so, it would have become 
possible to give its crew access to 
dictionaries of the language of the 
race it was to visit. Whole encyclopedias, even. Annals of six centuries of tachyonbeam contact 
between Earthmen and the inhabitants of NGC 7293! 
Krug clapped Romulus Fu
sion’s shoulder. “Good work. 
You’ll hear from me. Where’s the 
transmat?’’ 
“This way, sir.’’ 
Pleep. Pleep. Pleep. 
Krug jumped back to the tower 
site. 
Thor Watchman was no longer 
jacked into the master control center’s computer. Krug found him 
inside the tower, on the fourth level up, overseeing the installation of 
a row of devices that looked like 
globes of butter mounted on a 
beaded glass string. 
“What are these?” Krug demanded. 
Watchman looked surprised to 
see his master appear so abruptly. 
“Circuitbreakers,” he said, making a quick recovery. “In case of 
excessive positron flow — ” 
“All right. You know where 
I’ve been, Thor? Denver. Denver. 
I’ve seen the starship. I didn’t realize — they’ve got it practically finished. Effective right now we’re 
going to tie it into our project sequence.” 
“Sir?” 
“Alpha Romulus Fusion is in 
charge out there. He’s going to 
pick a crew, four alphas, four 
betas. We’ll send them off next 
spring under life-suspension, coldsleep. Right after we send our first 
signals to NGC seven-two-ninethree. Get in touch with him, coordinate the timing, yes? Oh — and 
another thing. Even though we’re 
ahead of schedule here, it still isn’t 
going fast enough to please me.” 
Boom. Boom. The planetary nebula NGC 7293 sizzled and flared behind Krug’s forehead. The heat of 
his skin evaporated his sweat as 
fast as it could burst from his 
pores. Getting too excited, he told 
himself. “When you finish work 
tonight, Thor, draw up a personnel 
requisition increasing the work 
crews by fifty per cent. Send it to 
Spaulding. You need more alphas, 
don’t hesitate. Ask. Hire. Spend. 
Whatever.” Boom. “1 want the entire construction scheme reprogramed. Completion date three 
months tighter than the one we 
have now. Got it?” 
Watchman seemed a little 
dazed. “Yes, Mr. Krug,” he said 
faintly. 
“Good. Yes. Good. Keep up the 
good work, Thor. Can’t tell you 
how proud. How happy.” Boom. 
Boom. Boom. Pleep. Boom. 
“We’ll get you every skilled beta 
in the Western Hemisphere, if necessary. Eastern. Everywhere. Tower’s got to be finished!” Boom. 
“Time! Time! Never enough 
time!” 
Krug rushed away. Outside, in 
the cold night air, some of the 
frenzy left him. He stood quietly 
for a moment, savoring the sleek 
glimmering beauty of the tower, 
aglow against the black backdrop 
of the unlit tundra. He looked up. 
He saw the stars. He clenched his 
fist and shook it. 
Krug! Krug! Krug! Krug! 
Boom. 
Into the transmat. Coordinates: 
Uganda. By the lake. Quenelle, 
waiting. Soft body, big breasts, 
thighs parted, belly heaving. Yes. 
Yes. Yes. Yes. 2-5-1, 2-3-1, 2-1. 
Krug leaped across the world. 
XII 
I N THE glare of crisp white winter sunlight a dozen alphas pa
raded solemnly across the broad 
plaza that fell, like a giant terraced 
apron, from the lap of the World 
Congress building in Geneva. Each 
of the alphas carried a demonstration-spool; each wore the emblem 
of the Android Equality Party. Security robots were stationed in the 
corners of the plaza; the snubheaded black machines would roll 
instantly forward, spewing immobilizing stasis tape, if the demonstrators deviated in any way from 
the agitation program they had 
filed with the Congressional doorkeeper. But the AEP people were 
not likely to do anything unexpected. They simply crossed the 
plaza again and again, marching 
neither too rigidly nor too slackly, 
keeping their eyes on the holovision hovercameras above them. 
Periodically, at a signal from their 
leader, Siegfried Fileclerk, one of 
the demonstrators would activate 
the circuitry of his demonstrationspool. From the nozzle of the 
spool a cloud of dense blue vapor 
would spurt upward to a height of 
perhaps twenty meters and remain 
there, tightly coalesced by kinesislinkage into a spherical cloud, 
while a message imprinted in large 
and vivid golden letters emerged 
and moved slowly along its circumference. When the words had 
traveled the full 360° the cloud 
would dissipate — and only after 
the last strands of it had vanished 
from the air would Fileclerk signal for the next demonstrator to 
send up a statement. 
Though Congress had been in 
session for some weeks now, it was 
improbable that any of the delegates inside the handsome building 
were paying attention to the dem
onstration. They had seen such 
demonstrations before. The purpose of the AEP group was merely 
to have the holovision people pick 
up and relay to viewers all over the 
world, in the name of news coverage, such slogans as these; 
ANDROID EQUALITY NOW ! 
FORTY YEARS OF SLAVERY IS 
enough! 
DID CASSANDRA NUCLEUS DIE IN 
VAIN? 
WE APPEAL TO THE CONSCIENCES 
OF HUMANITY 
ACTION ! FREEDOM ! ACTION ! 
ADMIT ANDROIDS TO CONGRESS — 
now! 
THE TIME HAS COME 
IF YOU PRICK US, DO WE NOT 
BLEED? 
Thor Watchman kneeled beside 
Lilith Meson in the Valhallavagen 
chapel. It was the day of the Ceremony of the Opening of the Vat. 
Nine alphas were present, with 
Mazda Constructor, who belonged 
to the Transcender caste, officiating. A couple of betas had been 
persuaded to attend, since Yielders 
were needed. This was not a ceremony that required the participation of a Preserver, so Watchman 
played no part in it — he merely repeated to himself the invocations 
of the celebrants. 
The hologram of Krug above 
the alter glistened and throbbed. 
The triplets of the genetic code 
around the walls seemed to melt 
and swirl as the ritual neared its 
climax. The scent of hydrogen was 
in the air. Mazda Constructor’s 
gestures, always noble and impressive, grew more broad, more allencompassing. 
“auu gau ggu gcu — ” 
“Harmony!” sang the first 
Yielder. 
“Unity!” sang the second. 
""Perception," Lilith said. 
“CAC CGC CCC cue — ” 
“Harmony!” 
“Unity!” 
""Passion,” said Lilith. 
“UAA UGA UCA UUA — ” 
“Harmony!” 
“Unity!” 
""Purpose,” Lilith said and the 
ceremony was over. Mazda Constructor stepped down, flushed and 
weary. Lilith lightly touched his 
hand. The betas, looking grateful 
to be excused, slipped out the rear 
way. Watchman rose. He saw Andromeda Quark in the far corner, 
the dimmest corner, whispering 
some private devotion of the Projector caste. She seemed to see no 
one else. 
“Shall we go?” Watchman said 
to Lilith. “I’ll see you home.” 
“Kind of you,” she said. Her 
part in the ceremony appeared to 
have left her aglow — her eyes were 
unnaturally bright, her breasts 
were beneath her thin wrap, her 
nostrils were flared. He escorted 
her to the street. 
As they walked toward the nearby transmat he said, “Did the personnel requisition reach your office?” 
“Yesterday. With a memo from 
Spaulding telling me to send out a 
hiring call at once. Where am I going to find that many skilled betas, 
Thor? What’s going on?” 
“What’s going on is that Krug 
is pushing us hard. He’s obsessed 
with finishing the tower.” 
“That’s nothing new,” Lilith 
said. 
“It’s getting worse. Day by day 
the impatience grows, deepens, becomes more intense, like a sickness inside him. Maybe if 1 were 
human I’d understand an inner 
drive like that. He comes to the 
tower two, three times a day, now. 
Counts the levels. Counts the newly raised blocks. Hounds the tachyon people, telling them to get 
their machines hooked up faster. 
He’s starting to look like something wild; sweating, excited, 
stumbling over his own words. 
Now he’s padding the work crews 
— tossing millions of dollars more 
into the job. For what? For what? 
And then this starship thing. I 
talked to Denver yesterday. Do 
you know, Lilith, he ignored that 
plant all last year and now he’s 
there once a day? The starship has 
to be ready for an interstellar voyage within three months. Android 
crew. He’s sending androids.” 
“Where?” 
“Three hundred light-years 
away.” 
“He won’t ask you to go, will 
he? Me?” 
“Four alphas, four betas,” 
Watchman said. “I haven’t been 
told who’s being considered. If he 
lets Spaulding decide, I’m finished. 
Krug preserve us from having to 
go.” The irony of his prayer struck 
him belatedly and he laughed, a 
thin, dark chuckle. “Yes. Krug 
preserve us!” 
They reached the transmat. 
Watchman began to set coordinates. 
“Will you come up for a while?” 
Lilith asked. 
“Glad to.” 
They stepped into the green glow 
together. 
H er flat was smaller than his, thighs, protecting her against 
just a bedroom, a combination Stockholm’s December winds. A 
sitting-room / dining-room / kit- different setting of the doppler and 
chen and a sort of large foyer- that was gone too. She kept her 
cum-closet. It was possible to see sandals on. 
where a much larger apartment Sinking down easily to the floor, 
had been divided to form several she sat crosslegged before him and 
smaller ones, suitable for androids, toyed with the dials of. her wallThe building was similar to the projections. Textures ebbed and 
one where he lived: old, well-worn, flowed as she made random adsomehow warm of soul. Nine- justments. There was an oddly 
teenth-century, he guessed, al- tense moment of silence. Watchthough Lilith’s furnishings, reflect- man felt awkward — he had known 
ing the force of her personality, Lilith five years, nearly her whole 
were distinctly contemporary, life, and she was as close a friend 
leaning heavily to floor-mounted to him as one android customarily 
projections and tiny, delicate free- was to another. Yet he had never 
floating art objects. Watchman been alone with her before in quite 
had never been at her place before, this way. It was not her nudity 
though they were close neighbors that disturbed him — nudity meant 
in Stockholm. Androids, even al- nothing at all to him. It was, he 
phas, did not socialize much in one decided, simply the privacy of the 
another’s homes — the chapels moment. 
served as meeting-places for most As though we were lovers. As 
occasions. Those who were outside though there were something . 
the communion gathered in AEP sexual . between us .. 
offices or clung to their solitude. He smiled and decided to tell 
He dropped into a springy, com- her about these incongruous feelfortable chair. “Care to corrode ings. But before he could speak, 
your mind?’’ Lilith asked. “I can she did. 
offer all kinds of friendly sub- “I’ve just had a thought. About 
stances. Weeds? Floaters? Scram- Krug. About his impatience to finblers? Even alcohol — liqueurs, ish the tower. Thor, what if he’s 
brandies, whiskeys.” dying?” 
“You’re well stocked with pol- “Dying?” Blankly. An unfamilutions.” liar idea. 
“Manuel comes here often. 1 “Some terrible disease, somemust play hostess for him. What thing they can’t fix tectogenetical
will you have?” ly. I don’t know what — some new 
“Nothing,” he said. “I’m not kind of cancer, maybe. Anyway, 
really fond of corrosion.” suppose he’s just found out that he 
She laughed and moved toward has maybe a year or two to live, 
the doppler. Quickly it consumed you see, and he’s desperate to get 
her wrap. Under it she wore noth- his space signals sent out before 
ing but a thermal spray, light green then.” 
and lovely against her pale scarlet “He looks healthy,” Watchman 
skin; it covered her from breasts to said. 
“Rotting from the inside out. 
The first symptoms are erratic behavior — ^jumping obsessively from 
place to place, accelerating work 
schedules, bothering people to respond faster—” 
“Krug preserve us, no!” 
“Preserve Krug.” 
“I don’t believe this, Lilith. 
Where did you get this notion? 
Has Manuel said anything?” 
“Strictly intuition. I’m trying to 
help you account for Krug’s odd 
behavior, that’s all. If he really is 
dying, that’s one possible explanation for — ” 
“Krug can’t die.” 
“Can’t?” 
“You know what I mean. 
Mustn’t. He’s still young. He’s got. 
a century ahead of him, at least. 
And there’s so much that he still 
must do in that time.” 
“For us, you mean?” 
“Of course,” Watchman said. 
“The tower’s burning him up, 
though. Consuming him. Thor, 
suppose he does die? Without having said the words — without having 
spoken out for us — ” 
“We’ll have wasted a lot of energy in prayer, then. And the AEP 
will laugh in our faces.” 
“Shouldn’t we do something?” 
H e pressed his thumbs lightly against his eyelids. “We 
can’t build our plans atop a fantasy, Lilith. As far as we know, 
Krug isn’t dying and isn’t likely to 
die for a long time.” 
“And if he does?” 
“What are you getting at?” 
She said, “We could start to 
make our move now.” 
“What?” 
“The thing we discussed when 
you first pushed me into sleeping 
with Manuel. Using Manuel to enlist Krug’s support for the cause.” 
“It was just a passing thought,” 
Watchman said. “I doubt that it’s 
philosophically proper to try to 
manipulate Krug like that. If we’re 
sincere in our faith we should 
await His grace and mercy, without scheming to — ” 
“Stop it, Thor. I go to chapel 
and you go to chapel and we all go 
to chapel — but we also live in the 
real world and in the real world 
you have to take real factors into 
account. Such as the possibility of 
Krug’s premature death.” 
“Well — ” He shivered with tension. She was speaking pragmatically; she sounded almost like an 
AEP organizer. He saw the logic 
of her position. All of his faith was 
pinned to the hope of the manifestation of a miracle — but what if 
there were no miracle? If they had 
an opportunity to encourage the 
miracle, should they not take it? 
And yet and yet — 
She said, “Manuel’s primed. 
He’s ready to take up our cause 
openly. You know how pliable he 
is — I could turn him into a crusader in two or three weeks. I’d take 
him to Gamma Town first — ” 
“In disguise, I hope.” 
“Of course. We’d spend a night 
there. I’d rub his face in it. And 
then — you remember, Thor, we 
talked about letting him see a 
chapel — ” 
“Yes. Yes.” Watchman trembled. 
“I’d do that I’d explain the 
whole communion. And finally I’d 
come right out and ask him to go 
to his father for us. He would, 
Thor, he would! And Krug would 
listen. Krug would yield and say 
the words. As a favor to Manuel.” 
Watchman rose. He paced the 
room. “It seems almost blasphemous, though. We’re supposed to 
wait for Krug’s grace to descend 
on us in Krug’s own time. To 
make use of Manuel this way, to 
attempt to shape and force the 
Will of Krug — ” 
“What if Krug’s dying?” Lilith 
asked. “What if he’s got only 
months left? What if a time comes 
when there is no Krug? And we’re 
still slaves.” 
Her words rebounded from the 
walls, shattering him: 
when there is no Krug 
when there is no Krug 
when there is no Krug 
when there is no Krug 
“We have to distinguish,” he 
said shakily, “between the physical man who is Krug, for whom 
we work, and the eternal presence 
of Krug the Maker and Krug the 
Liberator, who — ” 
“Not now, Thor. Just tell me 
what should I do. Take Manuel to 
Gamma Town?” 
“Yes. Yes. Yes. But move one 
step at a time. Don’t reveal things 
too quickly. Check with me if you 
have any doubts. Can you really 
control Manuel?” 
“He worships me,” Lilith said 
quietly. 
“Because of your body?” 
“It’s a good body, Thor. But it’s 
more than that. He wants to be 
dominated by an android. He’s full 
of second-generation guilts. I captured him with sex but I hold him 
by the power of the Vat.” 
“Sex,” Watchman said. “Captured him with sex. How? He has a 
wife. An attractive wife. I’ve heard, 
90 
though of course I’m in no position to judge. If he has an attractive wife why does he need — ” 
Lilith laughed. 
“Did I say ajoke?” 
“You don’t understand a thing 
about humans, do you, Thor? The 
famous Alpha Watchman, totally 
baffled!” Her eyes sparkled. She 
jumped to her feet. The deep 
cones of her breasts swayed and 
jiggled. “Thor, do you know anything about sex? At first hand, I 
mean.” 
“Have I done sex? Is that what 
you’re asking?” 
“That’s what I’m asking,” Lilith told him. 
The change in the conversation’s 
direction puzzled him. What did 
his private life have to do with the 
planning of revolutionary tactics? 
“No,” he said. “Never. Why 
should 1? What could I get from it 
besides trouble?” 
“Pleasure,” she suggested. 
“Krug created us with functional 
nervous systems. Sex is amusement. Sex excites me — it ought to 
excite you. Why haven’t you ever 
tried it?” 
“1 don’t know an alpha male 
who has. Or who even thinks much 
about it.” 
“Alpha women do.” 
“That’s different. You have 
more opportunities. You’ve got all 
those human males running after 
you. Human females don’t run after androids much, except for 
some disturbed women, I guess. 
And you can do sex with a human 
without any risks. But I’m not going to chance entangling myself 
with some human female, not 
when any man who thinks I’m infringing on his rights can destroy 
me on the spot.” 
“How about sex between android and android?” 
“What for? So we can make babies?” 
“Sex and reproduction are separate things, Thor. People have 
sex without babies and babies without sex all the time. Sex is a social 
/orce. A sport, a game. A kind of 
magnetism, body to body. It’s 
what gives me power over Manuel 
Krug.” Abruptly the tone of her 
voice shifted, losing its didactic 
quality, becoming softer. “Do you 
want me to show you what it is? 
Take your clothes off.” 
H e laughed edgily. “Are 
you serious? You want sex 
with me?” 
“Why not? Are you afraid?” 
“Don’t be absurd. I just didn’t 
expect — I mean — it seems so incongruous, two androids going to 
bed together, Lilith — ” 
“Because we’re things made out 
of plastic?” she said coldly. 
“That isn’t what I meant. Obviously we’re flesh and blood!” 
“But there are certain things 
that we don’t have to do, because 
we come from the Vat. Certain 
bodily functions that are reserved 
for the Children of the Womb. 
Eh?” 
“You’re distorting my position.” 
“I know I am. I want to educate 
you, Thor. Here you are trying to 
manipulate the destinies of an entire society and you’re ignorant of 
one of the most basic human motivations. Come — strip. Haven’t you 
ever felt desire for a woman?” 
“I don’t know what desire is, 
Lilith.” 
“Really?” 
“Really.” 
She shook her head. “And you 
think we should have equality with 
humans? You want to vote, you 
want to put alphas in Congress, to 
have civil rights? But you’re living 
like a robot. Like a machine. 
You’re a walking argument for 
keeping androids in their place. 
You’ve closed off one of the most 
vital sectors of human life and tell 
yourself that that sort of stuff is 
only for humans — androids don’t 
have to bother with it. Dangerous 
thinking, Thor! We are human. 
We have bodies. Why did Krug 
give us genitals if He didn’t mean 
us to use them?” 
“I agree with every word you’ve 
said. But — ” 
“But what?” 
“But sex seems irrelevant to me. 
And I know that’s a damning argument against our cause. I’m not 
the only alpha who feels this way, 
Lilith. We don’t talk about it much 
but — ” He looked away from her. 
“Maybe the humans are right. 
Maybe we are a lesser kind, artificial through and through, just a 
clever kind of robot made out of 
flesh and — ” 
“Wrong. Stand up, Thor. Come 
here.” 
He walked toward her. She took 
his hands and put them on her 
bare breasts. 
“Squeeze them,” she said. 
“Gently. Play with the nipples. 
You see how they get hard, how 
they stand up? That’s a sign that 
I’m responding to your touch. It’s 
a way that a woman shows desire. 
What do you feel when you touch 
my breasts, Thor?” 
“The smoothness. The cool 
skin.” 
“What do you feel inside?” 
“1 don’t know.” 
“Pulse rate changing? Tensions? 
A knot in your belly? Here. Touch 
my hip. My buttock. Slide your 
hand up and down. Anything, 
Thor?” 
“I’m not sure. I’m new at this, 
Lilith.” 
“Strip,” she said. 
“It seems so mechanical this 
way. Cold. Isn’t sex supposed to 
be preceded by courtship, soft 
lights, whispering, music, poetry?” 
“Then you do know a little 
about it.” 
“A little. I’ve read their books. 
I know the rituals. The peripherals.” 
“We can try the peripherals. 
Here — I’ve turned down the lights. 
Take a floater, Thor. No, not a 
scrambler — not the first time. A 
floater. Fine. Here’s a little music, 
now. Undress.” 
“You won’t tell anybody about 
this?” 
“How silly you are. Who would 
I tell? Manuel? Darling, I’ll tell 
him, darling. I’ve been unfaithful 
to you with Thor Watchman!” 
She laughed giddily. “It’ll be our 
secret. Call it a humanizing lesson. 
Humans have sex and you want to 
be more human, don’t you? I’ll 
discover sex to you.” She smiled 
archly. She tugged at his clothes. 
Curiosity seized him. He felt the 
floater going to work in his brain, 
lifting him toward euphoria. Lilith 
was right — the sexlessness of alphas was a paradox among people 
who claimed so intensely to be fully human. Or was sexlessness as 
general among alphas as he 
thought? Perhaps, busy with the 
tasks set for him by Krug, he had 
simply neglected to let his emotions develop? He thought of 
Siegfried Fileclerk weeping in the 
snow beside Cassandra Nucleus, 
and wondered. 
His clothes dropped away. 
Lilith drew him into her arms. 
She rubbed her body slowly 
against his. He felt her thighs on 
his, the cool taut drum of her belly 
touching his, the hard nodes of her 
nipples brushing his chest. He 
searched himself for response. He 
was uncertain about what he 
found, although he could not deny 
that he enjoyed the tactile sensations of their contact. Her eyes 
were closed. Her lips were parted. 
They sought his. Her tongue slid 
a short distance between his teeth. 
He ran the palms of his hands 
down her back and on a sudden 
impulse dug the tips of his fingers 
into the globes of her buttocks. 
Lilith stiffened and pushed herself 
more intensely against him, grinding now instead of rubbing. They 
remained that way for some minutes. Then she relaxed and eased 
away from him. 
“Well?” she asked. “Anything?” 
“I like it,” he said tentatively. 
“Did it excite you, though?” 
“I think so.” 
“It doesn’t look that way.” 
“How can you tell?” 
“It would show,” she said, grinning at him. 
H e felt impossibly absurd and 
awkward. He felt cut off from 
his own identity, unable to return 
to or even to see the Thor Watchman he knew and understood. 
From the first, almost from the 
time of leaving the Vat, he had regarded himself as older, wiser. 
more competent, more confident, 
than his fellow alphas — a man who 
comprehended the world and his 
place in it. But now? Lilith had reduced him in half an hour to 
something clumsy, naive, foolish and impotent. 
“How would it show?” he asked 
doggedly. 
“Don’t you understand the 
mechanics of sexual intercourse?” 
“Of course.” 
She put her hand to his loins. 
“Obviously it wasn’t very exciting 
for you when 1 — ” She paused. 
“Oh. Yes. Now do you see?” 
“It happened when you touched 
me.” 
“That isn’t awfully surprising. 
So you like it, then? Yes. Yes.” 
Her fingers moved cunningly. 
Watchman had to admit that he 
found the sensation interesting and 
that sudden startling awakening of 
his maleness in her hands was a 
remarkable effect. Yet he remained outside himself, a detached 
and remote observer, no more involved than if he were attending a 
lecture on the mating habits of 
Centaurine proteoids. 
She was close against him, 
again. Her body moved, sliding 
from side to side, writhing a little, 
quivering with a barely suppressed 
tension. He clasped her in his 
arms. He ran his hands over her 
skin once more. 
She drew him to the floor. 
He braced himself with knees 
and elbows so that his full weight 
would not descend on her. Her legs 
surrounded him; her thighs 
clamped tight against his hips; her 
hand slipped between their bodies, 
seized him, guided him. He caught 
her rhythm shortly, and matched it. 
93 
So this is sex . 
He wondered how a woman felt 
— Lilith was gasping and trembling 
in what seemed like delight. But 
sex struck him as an odd thing to 
covet. Was pushing yourself into a 
woman all that thrilling? Was this 
what the poetry was about — was 
this what men had fought duels 
over and renounced kingdoms for? 
After a while he said, “How will 
we know when it’s over?” 
Her eyes opened. He was unable 
to tell whether there was fury or 
laughter in them. “You’ll know,” 
she said. “Just keep moving!” 
He kept moving. 
The motions of her hips grew 
more violent. Her face became 
twisted, distorted, almost ugly — 
some sort of interior storm had 
broken and was raging within her. 
Muscles throbbed randomly 
throughout her body. At the place 
where he was joined to her, he 
could feel her grasping him with 
playful inner spasms. 
Abruptly he felt a spasm of his 
own and ceased to catalog the effects their union had produced in 
her. He closed his eyes. He fought 
for breath. His heart raced frantically. His skin blazed. He tightened his grip on her and pressed his 
face into the hollow between her 
cheek and her shoulder. A series of 
jolting impacts rocked him. 
She was right — it was easy to 
tell when it was over. 
How fast the ecstasy drained 
away! He could barely remember 
now the powerful sensations of 
sixty seconds ago. He felt cheated, 
as though he had been promised a 
feast and had been given only 
dream-food to eat. Was that all? 
Like the surf trickling away after 
a brief surge of tide? And ashes on 
the beach. And ashes on the beach. 
It is nothing at all, Thor Watchman thought. It is a fraud. 
He rolled free of her. 
She lay with her head lolling 
back, her eyes closed, her mouth 
slack — she was sweat-dappled and 
wan-looking. It seemed to him 
that he had never seen this woman 
before. A moment after he had 
left her, her eyes opened. She 
propped herself up on one elbow 
and smiled at him, almost shyly, 
perhaps. 
“Hello,” she said. 
“Hello.” He looked away. 
“How do you feel?” 
Watchman shrugged. He 
searched for the right words and 
could not find them. Defeated, he 
said, “Tired, mostly. Hollow. Is 
that right? I feel — hollow.” 
“Normal. After coitus every 
animal is sad. Old Latin proverb. 
You’re an animal, Thor. Don’t 
forget it.” 
“A weary animal.” Ashes on the 
cold beach. The tide very low. 
“Did you enjoy it, Lilith?” 
“Couldn’t you see? No, I suppose you didn’t. I enjoyed. Very 
much.” 
He put his hand lightly on her 
thigh. “I’m glad. But I’m still baffled.” 
“By what?” 
“The whole thing. The pattern, 
the constellation of events. Pushing. Pulling. Sweating. Groaning. 
The tickle in the groin, and then 
it’s over. I — ” 
“No,” she said. “Don’t intellectualize. Don’t analyze. You 
must have been expecting more 
than is really there. It’s only fun, 
Thor. It’s what people do to be 
happy together. That’s all. That’s 
all. It’s not a cosmic experience.” 
“I’m sorry. I’m just a dumb android who doesn’t — ” 
“Don’t. You’re a person, Thor.” 
He realized he was hurting her 
by his refusal to have been overwhelmed by their coupling. He 
was hurting himself. Slowly he got 
to his feet. His mood was wintry 
—he felt like an empty vessel lying 
in the snow. He had known a (lash 
of joy, he thought, right at the moment of discharge — but was that 
instant of lightning worth anything 
if this dreary gloom always came 
afterward? 
She had meant well. She had 
wanted to make him more human. 
He lifted her, pulled her against 
him for a moment, kissed her 
glaricingly on the cheek, cupped 
one of her breasts in his hand. He 
said, “We’ll do this again some 
time, all right?” 
“Whenever you say.” 
“It was very strange for me, the 
first time. It will get better.” 
“It will, Thor. The first time is 
always strange.” 
“I think I’d better go now.” 
“If you have to.” 
“I’d better. But I’ll see you 
again soon.” 
“Yes.” She touched his arms. 
“And in the meantime — I’ll start 
moving along the lines we discussed. I’ll take Manuel to Gamma Town.” 
“Good.” 
“Krug be with you, Thor.” 
“Krug be with you.” 
He began to dress. 
XIII 
And Krug said. There shall be 
this one difference forever upon 
you. 
That the Children of the Womb 
shall come always from the Womb, 
and the Children of the Vat come 
always from the Vat. And it shall 
not be given to you to bring forth 
your young from your bodies, as 
is done among the Children of the 
Womb. 
And this shall be so in order 
that your lives may flow only from 
Krug, that to him alone the glory 
of your creation be reserved, world 
without end. 
December 20, 2218. 
At 800 meters the tower dominates and overpowers. There is no 
resisting its immensity. One steps 
from the transmat by day or by 
night and one is struck dumb by 
that vaulting shaft of gleaming 
glass. The solitude of its surroundings lends awesomeness to its 
height. 
It has passed the halfway mark 
now. 
Lately there have been many accidents born of haste. A pair of 
workers fell from the summit; an 
electrician, spraying connectors 
improperly along a partition, sent 
a lethal shock through five gammas hoisting cable; two ascending 
scooprods collided, at a cost of six 
lives; Alpha Euclid Planner narrowly avoided serious injury when 
a power-pool backup sent a monstrous surge of maximum-entrophy data through the main computer while he was jacked in; three 
betas were dumped four hundred 
meters down an interior serviceaccess core when a scaffold collapsed. The construction work thus 
far has caused the destruction of 
95 
nearly thirty androids. But there 
are thousands employed at the 
tower and the work is hazardous 
and unusual; no one considers the 
accident rate extraordinarily high. 
The first thirty meters of the 
tachyon-beam broadcast apparatus is virtually finished. Technicians daily test its structural integrity. It will not be possible, of 
course, to generate tachyons until 
the entire enormous accelerator 
track has been completed. But 
putting together the individual 
components of the mighty system 
has an interest of its own and Krug 
spends most of his time at the 
tower watching the tests. Colored 
lights flash; indicator panels hum 
and whistle; dials glow; needles 
quiver. Krug applauds each positive result enthusiastically. He 
brings hordes of guests. In the last 
three weeks he has come to the 
tower with Niccolo Vargas, with 
his daughttr-in-law Clissa, with 
twenty-nine different members of 
Congress, with eleven leaders of 
industry, with sixteen world-famed 
representatives of the arts. There 
is unanimous praise for the tower. 
Even those who perhaps inwardly 
may think of it as a titanic folly 
cannot withhold their admiration 
for its elegance, its beauty, its 
magnitude. A folly, too, can be 
wonderful, and no one who has 
seen Krug’s tower denies its wonder. Nor are there so many who 
think it is folly -to notify the stars 
that man exists. 
Manuel Krug has not been seen 
at the tower since early in November. Krug explains that his son is 
busy supervising the complexities 
of the Krug corporate domain. He 
is, assuming greater responsibili
ties every month. He is, after all, 
the heir apparent. 
L ast time I went to Lilith she 
said. Next time you come let’s 
do something a little different, all 
right? 
Both of us naked after loving. 
My cheek on her breasts. 
Different how? 
To get out of the flat a little. To 
go around as a tourist and see 
Stockholm. The android quarter. 
To see how the people live, the androids. The gammas. Wouldn’t 
you want to do that? 
And 1 said, a little wary. Why 
should I? Wouldn’t you rather 
spend the time with me? 
She played with the hair on my 
chest. Such a beast, I am, so primitive. 
She said. We live so cloistered 
here. You come, we have sex, you 
leave. We never go anywhere together. Td like you to come outside with me. Part of your education. 1 have this drive to educate 
people, did you know that, Manuel? To open their minds to things. 
Have you ever been in a Gamma 
Town? 
No. 
Do you know what it is? 
A place where gammas live, I 
suppose. 
That’s right. But you don’t really know. Not till you’ve been inside one. 
Dangerous? 
Not really. Nobody will bother 
alphas in Gamma Town. They 
bother each other a little, sometimes, but that’s different. We’re 
high-caste and they keep away 
from us. 
I said. They won’t bother an al
pha, maybe, but what about me? 
They probably don’t want human 
tourists if it’s squalid and all that. 
Lilith said she would disguise 
me. As an alpha. I’d go incognito. 
That had a certain kind of spice in 
it. Temptation. Mystery. I thought 
it might keep the romance glowing 
for Lilith and me, playing a game 
like that. I asked. Won’t they recognize that I’m a fake? And she 
said. They don’t look too closely 
at alphas. We have a concept called 
the social distances. Gammas keep 
the social distances, Manuel. 
All right, then, we’ll go to Gamma Town. 
We planned it for a week from 
that day. I cleared everything with 
Clissa: going to Luna, I said, 
won’t be back for a couple of days, 
yes? No problem. Clissa would 
spend the time with her friends in 
New Zealand. I wonder sometimes how much Clissa suspects. 
Or what she’d say if she knew. I 
have this temptation to tell her, 
Clissa, I’ve got an android mistress in Stockholm, she’s way high 
spectrum in bed and a fantastic 
body, how do you like that? Clissa 
isn’t bourgeois but she’s sensitive. 
She might feel unwanted. Or maybe Clissa with her great love of the 
downtrodden androids might say. 
How kind of you, Manuel, to be 
making one of them so happy. I 
don’t mind sharing your love with 
an android. Bring her to tea some 
day, won’t you? I wonder. 
The day comes. I go to Lilith’s. 
I go in and she’s naked. Get your 
clothes off, she says. 1 grin. Unsubtle. Sure. Sure. I strip and 
reach for her. She does a little 
dance step and leaves me holding 
air. 
Not now, silly. When we come 
back. We’ve got to disguise you 
now! 
She has a spraytube. First she 
turns it to neutral and covers up 
the mirror-plate in my forehead. 
Androids don’t wear such things. 
The earlobe plugs, she says: out. 1 
take them out and she fills the 
opening with gel. Then she starts 
spraying me red. Do 1 have to 
shave my body? 1 ask. No, she 
says, just don’t take your clothes 
off in front of anybody. She turns 
me red all over, with a shiny texture to it. Instant android. Next 
she gives me a thermal spray from 
chest to thighs. Going to be cold 
out there, she says. Androids don’t 
wear heavy clothes. Here. Here, 
get dressed. 
She hands me a costume. Highneck shirt, skintight pants. Obviously android clothes and obviously alpha style, too. Fits me like a 
skin graft. Don’t get an erection, 
she tells me. You’ll split the trousers. She laughs and rubs me in 
front. 
Where’d you get the clothes? 
I borrowed them from Thor 
Watchman. 
You tell him what for? 
No, she says, of course not. I 
just said 1 needed some. Let’s see 
how you look, now. Lovely. Lovely! A perfect alpha. Walk across 
the room. Back. Good. Swagger a 
little more. Remember, you’re the 
end-product of human evolution, 
the finest version of Homo sapiens 
that ever came out of a vat, with 
all of a human’s strong points and 
none of his flaws. You’re Alpha — 
hmm. We need a name, in case 
anyone asks. Lilith thinks a moment. Alpha Leviticus Leaper, she 
says. What’s your name? 
Alpha Leviticus Leaper, I say. 
No. If anyone asks you, you 
say Leviticus Leaper. They can tell 
you’re an alpha. Other people call 
you Alpha Leaper. Clear? 
Clear. 
She gets dressed. A thermal 
spray first, then a kind of gold 
mesh over her breasts and down to 
mid-thigh. Nothing else. Nipples 
showing through the openings in 
the mesh. Not much hidden below, 
either. Not my idea of winter 
clothing. Androids must enjoy winters more than we do. 
Want to see yourself before we 
go out. Alpha Leaper? 
Yes. 
She dumps mirror-dust in the 
air. Wheri the molecules are lined 
up I get a liead-to-toe view. Impressive. A really cocky alpha 
buck, a red devil out on the town. 
Lilith is right: no gamma would 
dare to fool with me. Or even look 
me in the eye. 
Let’s go. Alpha Leaper. Slumming in Gamma Town. 
O UT. Across. To the edge of the 
city, looking down on windwhipped gray water. Whitecaps in 
the harbor. Early afternoon but 
night already closing in — a greasy 
gray time of day, fog hanging low, 
the glow of streetlamps coming 
through it blurred and dirty. Other 
lights flashing off buildings or just 
floating overhead: red, green, blue, 
orange, flickering on and off, yelling for attention, an arrow here, 
the sign of a trumpet there. Vibrations. Fumes. Sounds. The 
closeness of many people. A 
screech in the grayness. Distant 
laughter, blurred also. Odd scraps 
of voices drifting in the fog: 
“Let go or I’ll clot you!” 
“Back to the vat. Back to the 
vat.” 
“Slobies, who’ll take slobbies?” 
“Stackers can’t tell you.” 
“Slobies!” 
“Owl! Owl! Owl!” 
Stockholm is more than half 
populated by androids. Why do 
they gather here? And in maybe 
nine other cities. Ghettoes. They 
don’t have to. Transmat world. 
Live wherever you like, get to work 
anyway. But we like to be with our 
own kind, she says. And even so 
they stratify themselves in their 
ghettoes. The alphas back there, in 
the fine old houses, and the betas 
in the ragbag middle. And then the 
gammas. The gammas. Welcome 
to Gamma Town. 
Wet slippery mud-streaked cobble-paved streets. Medieval? Peeling gray houses face to face, hardly a lane between them. A trickle 
of cold dirty water running down 
the gutter from the higher part. 
Windows of glass. And yet it isn’t 
completely archaic here — a mixture of styles, all sorts of architecture, olla podrida, bouillabaisse, 
with twenty-second, twentieth, 
nineteenth, sixteenth, fourteenth 
centuries jumbled together. The 
airy webs of weatherproofed skyways dangling. Rusted slidewalks 
on a few of the tangled streets. The 
buzz of climate conditioners that 
have gone out of phase, pumping 
greenish fog into the winter air. 
Thick-walled baroque cellars. Lilith and I walk down zigzag crazy 
pathways. A demon must have 
planned this town. The imp of the 
preverse. 
Faces hover. 
Gammas. Everywhere. They 
peer, flit, peer again. Little dim 
eyes, birdlike, twitch-twitch-twitch, 
frightened. Afraid of us, they are. 
The social distances, eh? They 
keep the social distances. They 
lurk, they stare, but as we get 
close they try to be invisible. Head 
down. Eyes averted. Alphas alphas 
alphas; all gammas beware! 
We tower above them. I never 
realized how squat gammas are. 
How short, how broad. And how 
strong. Those shoulders. Those 
muscles rippling. Any of them 
could rip me apart. The women 
look strong, too, though they’re 
built more gracefully. To go to 
bed with a gamma girl? More fire 
than Lilith, maybe — is that possible? Thrashing and jumping 
around, low-class groaning, no inhibitions? And the smell of garlic, 
no doubt. Eorget the idea. Coarse, 
they are. Coarse. Coarse. Like 
Quenelle with my father. I’d say. 
Let them be — there’s passion 
enough in Lilith and she’s clean. 
Probably not worth the effort even 
to think about it. The gammas 
keep back from us. Two jaunty 
alphas out on the town. We have 
long legs. We have style. We have 
grace. They fear us. 
I am Alpha Leviticus Leaper. 
The wind is raw here. Right off 
the water it comes, knife-sharp. It 
stirs up dust arid bits of things in 
the streets. Dust! Scraps! When 
have 1 seen such filthy streets? 
Don’t the robocleaners ever come 
here? Well, then, don’t the gammas have enough pride to clean 
their own? 
They don’t care about such 
things, says Lilith. It’s a cultural 
matter. They take pride in their 
unpride. It reflects their lack of 
status. Bottom of the android 
world, bottom of the bottom of 
the human world and they know it. 
And they don’t like it. The squalor 
is like a badge of nonstatus for 
them. Saying, you want us to be 
filth, we’ll live in filth, too. Reveling in it. Wallowing in it. If we’re 
not people, we don’t have to be 
tidy at home. You know, robocleaners used to come here and the 
gammas would dismantle them. 
There's one now, you see? Been 
there ten years at least. 
Robot fragments lie in a drab 
scattered heap. Shards of a metal 
man. The glint of good blue metal 
through the rust. Are those things 
solenoids? Relays? Accumulators? 
The coiled wire guts of the machine. Bottom of the bottom, a 
mere mechanical object, destroyed 
while attacking the holy squalor of 
our vat-born pariahs. A gray-andwhite cat pisses on the robot’s guts. 
The gammas leaning against the 
wall laugh. Then they see us and 
creep back, showing awe. They 
make quick nervous gestures with 
their left hands — touch crotch, 
touch breast, touch forehead, one 
two three very fast. As automatic, 
as much a reflex, as the sign of 
the Cross. What is it? A kind of 
honorific tugging at the forelock? 
A show of homage to the wandering alphas? 
Something like that, says Lilith. 
But not quite. Actually it’s just a 
superstitious sign they make. 
To ward off the evil eye? 
Yes. In a manner of speaking. 
Touch the cardinal points, invoke 
the spirit of genitals and souls and 
intelligence, crotch chest skull. 
You’ve never seen androids do it 
before'? 
1 think maybe I have. 
Kven alphas, Lilith says. A habit. 
A comfort when tension . Sometimes even I. 
Why the genitals, though'? When 
androids don’t genitate'? 
Symbolic power, she says. We're 
sterile but that’s still a holy zone. 
In memory of the origin of us all. 
The human gene pool issued from 
the loins and we were designed after those genes. There’s a theology 
of it. 
I MAKE the sign. One two three. 
Lilith laughs but she looks edgy, 
as if 1 really shouldn’t be doing it. 
To hell with. I’m masquerading as 
an android tonight, right'? Then I 
can do android things. One two 
three. 
The gammas lounging against 
the wall return the sign. One two 
three. Crotch chest skull. 
One of them says something 
that sounds like Krug be praised. 
What was that? I ask Lilith. 
I didn’t hear it. 
Did he say Krug be praised? 
Gammas will say anything 
sometimes. 
I shook my head. Maybe he recognizes me, Lilith. 
Not a chance. Absolutely none. 
If he said anything about Krug, he 
means your father. 
Yes. Yes. True. He’s Krug. I’m 
Manuel, only Manuel. 
Shh! You’re Alpha Leviticus 
Leaper! 
Right. Sorry. Alpha Leviticus 
Leaper. Lev for short. Krug' be 
praised? Maybe I didn’t hear it 
right. 
Maybe, Lilith says. 
We turn a sharp corner and in 
so doing we trigger an advert trap. 
By entering the trap’s scanner field 
we cause powders of many colors 
to erupt from vents in a wall and 
form, by electrostatic attraction, a 
pattern of gaudy words in the air, 
blindingly bright even in the murk 
and fog. Against a silvery backdrop we see: 
iMKmc ! 
AI.PHA POSPIDON MUSKPTFFR 
iMFmc! 
SPF:riAI IS I IN GA M\FA COMPl AIM S 
III C LRFS 
SOI I Dill FRS 
SI.OBIi: ADDICTS 
STACKIRS 
HF CONQL'FRS 
MFTABOI I( ROT AND DFCAV 
ANDOTIII R PR0BI.F:MS 
Irfpltabi.f! 
FIRST IXX)R to right and RIN(i 
I ask. Is he really an alpha? 
Of course. 
What’s he doing living in Gamma Town? 
Somebody’s got to be their doctor. You think a gamma can get a 
medical degree? 
He sounds like a quack, though. 
Putting out a trap like this. What 
kind of doctor would huckster for 
patients? 
A Gamma Town doctor. That’s 
how things are done here. Anyway, 
he is a quack. A good doctor but 
a quack. Mixed up in some organregeneration scandal years ago, 
when he had an aloha practice. 
Lost his license. 
You don’t need a license here? 
You don’t need anything here. 
They say he’s dedicated, though. 
Eccentric but devoted to his people. Would you like to meet him? 
No. No. What are slobie addicts? 
Slobie’s a drug the gammas 
take, Lilith says. You’ll see some 
addicts before long. 
And stackers? 
They have something wrong in 
the brain. Scaly matter in the cerebellum. 
Solidiflers? 
A trouble in the muscles. Stiffening of tissue or something. I’m 
not sure. Only gammas get it. 
1 frown. Does my father know? 
He stands behind the integrity of 
his products. If gammas are prone 
to mysterious diseases — 
That’s a slobie addict, Lilith 
says. 
An android comes up the street 
toward us. Drifting, floating, sliding, waltzing, moving with a weird 
molasses slowness. Eyes slitwide; 
face dreamy; arms outstretched; 
fingers drooping. Gropes his way 
as though going through the atmosphere of Jupiter. All he wears 
is a scrap of fabric around his hips, 
yet he sweats in the frosty evening 
air. Crooning to himself in a 
clanking way. After what seems 
like four hours he reaches us. 
Plants his feet, leans his head back, 
puts hands on hips. Silence. A minute. At last in low bristly voice he 
says with terrible unhurriedness, 
A1 . • phas . hel . lo . al 
. phas . love . ly . al . 
phas. 
Lilith tells him to move along. 
No response at first. Then his 
face crumbles. Unutterable sadness. Brings left hand up in awkward clownlike gesture, touches 
forehead, lets hand drift down to 
chest, to crotch. Making the sign 
in reverse — what’s the significance 
of that? He says tragically, 1 . 
love . the . love . ly . al 
. phas. 
1 say to Lilith, What kind of 
drug is it? 
Slows the time-sense. A minute 
becomes an hour to them. It 
stretches their free time. Of course, 
we move like whirlwinds around 
them. Usually the addicts stick together, all on the same timescheme. Illusion of having days 
between each work-shift. 
A dangerous drug? 
She says. Cuts about an hour 
off the life expectancy for every 
two hours you’re under the influence. The gammas figure it’s a 
fair deal, though. Give up an hour 
objective, gain two or three days 
subjective — why not? 
But it reduces the work force. 
Gammas have the right to do 
what they please with their lives, 
don’t they. Alpha Leaper? You 
wouldn’t accept the argument that 
they’re merely property, would 
you, and that any kind of selfabuse practiced by the gamma is a 
crime against its owner? 
No. No. Of course not. Alpha 
Meson. 
1 didn’t think you felt that way, 
Lilith says. 
The slobie addict is moving in 
foolish vague circles around us, 
chanting something so slowly that 
1 am unable to connect one syllable to another and can make no 
sense of it. He halts. A glacial 
smile spreads infinitely slowly 
across his lips; I think it is a snarl 
until it is half formed. He sinks into a hulking crouch. His hand 
rises, fingers flexed. The hand is 
obviously heading toward Lilith’s 
left breast. Neither of us moves. 
I catch the gamma’s chant now: 
A...A...A...A...A...G 
...A...A...C...A...A... 
u . 
What’s he trying to say? 
Lilith shakes her head. It isn’t 
important. 
She steps away while the groping hand is still ten centimeters 
from her bosom. A frown begins 
to replace the smile on the gamma’s face. He looks wounded. His 
chant takes on a questioning tone: 
A ... u ... A ... A ... u ... G 
. A . U . C . A . U . 
u . 
A SOUND of slow, dragging 
footsteps comes from behind 
me. A second slobie addict is approaching: a girl, wearing a cloak 
that hangs down from her shoulders and trails raggedly for many 
meters behind her, but leaves her 
thighs and loins bare. She has 
dyed her hair green and has it 
bound up in a kind of tiara. Her 
face seems wasted and pallid; her' 
eyes are scarcely open; her skin 
is glossy with sweat. She floats toward our first friend and says 
something to him in a startling 
baritone boom. He replies dreamily. I can understand none of what 
they say. Is it because of the decelerating drug or do they speak 
a gamma patois? Something ugly 
seems to be about to happen. I 
nod to Lilith, suggesting we leave, 
but she shakes her head. Stay. 
Watch them. 
The addicts are doing a 
grotesque dance. Fingertips touching, knees rising and falling. A gavotte for marble statues. A minuet 
for stuffed elephants. 
They croon to one another. 
They circle one another. The 
man’s feet become tangled in the 
girl’s trailing cloak. She moves; he 
stays firm; the cloak rips, leaving 
the girl naked in the street. Between her breasts she has a knife, 
dangling from a green cord. Her 
back is criscrossed with scars. Has 
she been flogged? Her nakedness 
excites her. I see her nipples stiffening in slow motion, like two 
fungi rising on her chest. The man 
is next to her now. He reaches up 
with painful unhaste and takes the 
knife from its sheath. Just as slowly he brings it down and touches 
the cold metal to the girl’s loins, 
her belly, her forehead. The holy 
sign. Lilith and I are against the 
wall, near the entrance to the doctor’s office. The knife makes me 
uneasy. 
Let me take it away from him, 
I say. 
No. No. You’re just a visitor 
here. This isn’t your affair. 
Then let’s go, Lilith. 
Wait. Watch. 
Our friend is singing again. Letters, as before. 
u ... c ... A ... u ... c ... G 
. u . c . c . 
His arm comes back, then starts 
forward. The point of the knife is 
aimed at the girl’s abdomen. From 
the tension in his muscles I can see 
that the blow will have full force — 
this is no dance step. The blade is 
only a few centimeters from her 
skin when I rush forward and slap 
it from his hand. 
He begins to moan. 
The girl does not yet realize that 
she has been saved. She utters a 
deep droning bellow, perhaps intended to be a shriek. She drops to 
the ground, clutching her breasts 
with one hand, thrusting the other 
between her thighs. She writhes in 
slow motion. 
You shouldn’t have interfered, 
Lilith says angrily. Come on now. 
We’d better go“ 
But he would have killed her! 
Not your affair. Not your affair. 
She tugs at my wrist. 1 turn. 
We begin to move away. I am 
aware peripherally that the girl is 
getting up — the garish lights of the 
sign of Poseidon Musketeer the 
Medic glisten on her bare thin 
flanks. Lilith and I take two steps; 
then we hear a grunt. We look back. 
The girl, rising, has risen with the 
knife in her hand and she has driven it into the man’s belly. Methodically she draws it upward from 
waist to chest. He makes a gurgling sound. 
Now we’ve got to go, Lilith says. 
We speed toward the corner. As 
we reach it I turn. The door of Alpha Musketeer has opened. A 
gaunt haggard figure, alpha-tall, 
with a mane of wild gray hair and 
bulging eyes, stands in it. Is this 
the famous medic? He rushes toward the slobie addicts. The girl 
kneels before her victim, who has 
not yet fallen. His blood purples 
her shining skin. She chants: 
g!a!a!g!a!g!g!a!c! 
In here, Lilith says and we duck 
into a dark doorway. 
S teps, a dry smell of withered 
things. Cobwebs. We plunge into unknown depths. In the distance, far below, yellow lights 
gleam. We go down and down and 
down. 
What is this place? I ask. 
Security tunnel. Built during the 
Sanity War two hundred years ago. 
Part of a system that runs everywhere under Stockholm. The gammas have taken it over. 
Like a sewer. 
I hear quick stabs of laughter, 
jagged blurts of incoherent conversation. There are shops down 
here, with slitted gates behind 
which little lamps sputter and 
flicker. Gammas move to and fro. 
Some of them make the one-twothree sign as they pass us. Driven 
by a fear I do not understand, 
Lilith leads us frantically onward. 
We change tunnels, entering a passage at right angles to the first 
one. 
Three slobie addicts wander by. 
A male gamma with face 
streaked by red and blue paint 
pauses to sing, perhaps to us: 
Who shall I marry? 
Who will marry me? 
Fire in the stinking vat 
Fire flying free. 
My head my head my head 
My head my head. 
He kneels and gags. Thin blue 
fluid pours from his lips, almost 
to our feet. 
We move on. We hear an echoing cry: 
M-pha\ M-pha\ M-pha\ M-pha\ 
Two gammas couple in an alcove. Their bodies are sweat-shiny 
and lean. Despite myself 1 watch 
the plunging hips and listen to the 
slap of flesh against flesh. The girl 
pounds the flats of her hands 
steadily against her partner’s back. 
Is she protesting a rape or displaying ecstasy? I never find out, 
because a slobie stumbles out of 
the shadows and falls on them, 
tumbling in a turmoil of intertwined limbs. Lilith draws me 
away. I am suddenly heavy with 
desire for her. 1 think of the firm 
breasts beneath her wrap — shall 
we find an alcove of our own and 
couple among the gammas? I put 
my hand on her buttocks, taut as 
she walks. Lilith wriggles her hips. 
Not here, she says. Not here. We 
have social distances to keep, too. 
A dazzle of light cascades from 
the tunnel’s roof. Pink bubbles appear and burst, releasing sour 
smells. A dozen gammas gallop 
out of a side passage, halt in shock 
as they realize they have nearly 
collided with two visiting alphas, 
make signs of respect, and rush 
onward, shouting', laughing, singing. 
Oh, I melt you and you melt me 
And we melt they and happy we 
be. 
Clot I Clot! Clot! Clot! 
Grig! 
They seem happy, 1 say. 
Lilith nods. They’re soaped to 
the whiskers, she says. On their 
way to a radiation orgy, I bet. 
A what? 
A puddle of yellow fluid slides 
out from under a closed door. 
Acrid fumes rise. Gamma urine? 
The door bursts open. Wild-eyed 
female gamma, luminescent 
breasts, livid scar on belly, giggles at us. She executes a respectable curtsey. Milady. Milord. Will 
you clot with me? Giggles. Squats. 
Lurches around, heels against 
rump, in a dizzy dance. Arches her 
back, slaps her breasts, spreads her 
legs. Green and gold lights blaze 
in the room from which she has 
emerged. A figure appears. 
N ormal height, but twice the 
width of a gamma, and covered 
with thick coarse fur. An ape? The 
face is human. It lifts its hands. 
Short blunt fingers — webs between 
them! Drags the girl back inside. 
Door closes. 
A reject, Lilith says. There are 
lots of them here. 
Reject from what? 
Substandard android. Genetic 
flaws; impurities in the vat, perhaps. Sometimes they have no 
arms, sometimes no legs, no heads, 
no digestive tracts, no this, no that. 
Aren’t they automatically destroyed at the factory? 
Lilith smiles. Can you keep a 
secret? 
I promise. 
They aren’t destroyed. Those 
that aren’t viable die anyway, fast 
enough. The others are smuggled 
out when the supervisors aren’t 
looking and sent to one of the undercities. Mainly here. We can’t 
put our idiot brethren to death, 
Manuel! 
Leviticus, 1 say. Alpha Leviticus 
Leaper. 
Yes. Look, there’s another. 
A nightmare figure rollicks 
through the corridor. Like something that has been placed in an 
oven until its flesh began to flow 
and run — the basic outlines are human but the contours are not. The 
nose is a trunk, the lips are saucers, the arms are of unequal 
length, the fingers are tentacles. 
The genitals are monstrous: horsepenis, bull-balls. 
Better off dead, I say to Lilith. 
No. No. Our brother. Our piti
ful brother whom we cherish. 
The monstrosity halts a dozen 
meters from us. Its ropy arms go 
through the movements of the onetwo-three. 
Speaking perfectly clearly it 
says to us, The peace of Krug upon you, alphas. Go with Krug. Go 
with Krug. Go with Krug. 
Krug be with you, Lilith replies. 
The monstrosity shambles onward, murmuring happily. 
The peace of Krug? Go with 
Krug? Krug be with you? Lilith, 
what does all this mean? 
Common courtesy, she says. A 
friendly greeting. 
Krug? 
Krug made us all, did he not? 
she says. 
I remember things that were 
said when I was in the shunt room 
with my friends. You know all the 
androids are in love with your father? Yes. Sometimes I think it 
must be almost like a religion with 
them. The religion of Krug. Well 
it makes a sort of sense to worship 
your creator. Don’t laugh. 
The peace of Krug. Go with 
Krug. Krug be with you. 
Lilith, do androids think my father is God? 
Lilith evades the question. We 
can talk about that some other 
time, she says. People have ears 
here. There are some things we 
can’t discuss. 
But. 
Some other time! 
I drop it. The tunnel now widens 
into a considerable room, well lit, 
crowded. A marketplace? Shops, 
booths, gammas everywhere. We 
are stared at. There are numerous 
rejects in the room, each a little 
more horrid than the last. It is 
hard to see how creatures so 
maimed and mismade can survive. 
Do they ever go to the surface? 
Never. They might be seen by 
humans. 
In Gamma Town? 
They take no chances. They’d 
all be obliterated if. 
In the crush of the crowded 
room the androids jostle and 
shove, bicker, snap. Somehow they 
maintain an area of open space 
around the intrusive alphas, but 
not a very .great one. Two knifeduels are going on; no one pays attention. There is much public lasciviousness. The smell of the place 
is rank and foul. A wild-eyed girl 
rushes up to me and whispers, 
Krug bless! Krug bless! She pushes 
something into my hand and runs 
off. 
A gift. 
A small cool cube with beveled 
edges, like the toy at the New Orleans shunt room. Does it send me 
messages? Yes. I see words forming and flowing and vanishing in 
its milky core; 
A CLOT IN TIME SAVES THINE 
* 
HIS HIS HIS HIS HERS HIS HIS 
HIS 
O SHALLOW IS THY BOWL, 
FILTHY GRIG 
* 
SLOBIE 
REIGNS, STACKERS 
PAINS 
* 
plit! 
plit! plit! plit! 
plack! 
* 
AND UNTO KRUG RENDER 
krug’s 
* 
All nonsense. Lilith, can you 
figure this stuff? 
Some of it. The gammas have 
their own slang, you know. But 
look here, where it says — 
A MALE gamma with catered 
purple skin slaps the cube 
from our hands. It skitters along 
the floor. He dives for it in a knot 
of feet. There is a general uproar. 
People tangle and twine. The thief 
breaks from the mass and speeds 
away into a corridor. The gammas 
still wrestle confusedly. A girl rises 
to the top of the heap; she has lost 
her few scraps of clothing in the 
melee and there are bloody gouges 
on her breasts and thighs. In her 
hand she holds the cube. I recognize her as the girl who gave it to 
me in the first place. Now she 
makes a demonic face at me, baring her teeth. She brandishes the 
cube and clamps it between her 
legs. A burly reject pounces on her 
and hauls her away; he has only 
one arm but it is as thick as a tree. 
Grig! she screams. Prot! Gliss! 
They vanish. 
The crowd is muttering in an 
ugly way. 
1 picture them turning on us, 
ripping at our clothes, revealing 
the hairy human body beneath my 
false alpha costume. The social 
distances may not protect us then. 
Come, I say to Lilith. I think 
I’ve had enough. 
Wait. 
She turns to the gammas. She 
holds up her hands, palms facing, 
about half a meter apart, as 
though indicating the length of a 
fish she has caught. Then she wriggles in a peculiar sinuous maneuver, twisting her body so she de
scribes a kind of spiraling curve. 
The gesture quiets the crowd instantly. The gammas step aside, 
heads bowed humbly, as we go 
past. All is well. 
Enough, I tell Lilith. It’s getting 
late. How long have we been here, 
anyway? 
We can go now. 
We flee through a maze of interlocking passages. Gammas of a 
thousand hideous shapes pass us. 
We see slobies floating in their 
slow raptures. Rejects. Stackers 
and solidifiers, for all 1 can tell. 
Sounds, smells, colors, textures — 
I am dazzled and dazed. Voices in 
the darkness. Songs. 
The freedom day is coming 
The freedom day is coming 
Smip the slobies, grap the gliss — 
And ride up to freedom! 
Steps. Upward. Cold winds descending. Breathless, we race to 
the top and find ourselves in the 
winding cobbled streets of Gamma 
Town again, probably only a few 
meters from the place where we 
went down. It seems to me that the 
office of Alpha Poseidon Musketeer must be just around the corner. 
Night has come. The lights of 
Gamma Town crackle and flutter. 
Lilith wants to take me to a tavern. I refuse. Home. Home. 
Enough. My mind is stained by the 
sights of the android world. She 
yields; we hurry out. How far 
must we walk before we reach a 
transmat? 
We leap. Her flat seems so 
warm and bright to me now. We 
rid outselves of our clothes. Under 
the doppler 1 cleanse myself of my 
red color and my thermal spray. 
Was it interesting? 
Overpowering, I say. And 
there’s so much you have to explain, Lilith. 
Images swim in my brain. I 
burn. I sizzle. 
or course you won’t tell anyone 
1 took you, she says. I could get 
into awful trouble. 
Of course. Strictly confidential. 
Come close. Alpha Leaper. 
Manuel. 
Manuel. Come close. 
First tell me what it means when 
they say Krug be — 
Later. I’m cold. Warm me, 
Manuel. 
I fold her in my arms. The 
heavy mounds of her breasts inflame me. 1 cover her mouth with 
mine. I thrust my tongue between 
her lips. We sink down together to 
the floor. 
I touch her. She is hot and 
moist and ready. Our dark journey has heated her lusts as well as 
mine. 
Without hesitation I spear her. 
She trembles. She clasps me. 
When I close my eyes I see slobies and rejects and stackers. 
Lilith. 
Lilith. 
Lilith. 
Lilith I love you I love you I 
love you Lilith Lilith Lilith 
The great vat bubbles. The 
moist crimson creatures crawl 
forth. Laughter. Lightning. O 
shallow is thy bowl, filthy grig! My 
flesh crashes, against hers. Plit! 
Plit! Plit! Plit! Plack! With humiliating swiftness the overwrought 
Leviticus Leaper pours a billion 
little boys and girls into his beloved’s sterile womb. 
XIV 
January 9, 2219. 
The tower is at 940 meters and 
rising more swiftly than ever. 
Standing at the base, one cannot 
easily see the summit; it is lost 
against the white glare of the winter sky. At this time of year there 
are only a few hours of daylight at 
the site and during those hours the 
sun’s rays ride fiery tracks down 
the length of the shimmering shaft. 
Much of the interior structure 
now is complete throughout the 
building’s lower half. Three of the 
high-capacity communications 
equipment modules have been 
hoisted into place: somber black 
metal containers fifty meters high, 
within which are the huge kickover 
units that will amplify the messages as they climb the tower. 
Viewed from afar, these modulesseem to be giant seeds ripening in a 
great glossy transparent pod. 
The accident rate continues to 
be high. Mortality levels are causing concern. The losses among 
gammas have been particularly severe. Yet morale is said to be 
good. The androids are cheerful 
and appear to be aware that they 
are playing an essential role in one 
of humanity’s most ambitious 
projects. If their attitude remains 
so positive the tower will be finished well ahead of schedule. 
A fter showing them the state 
of progress at the tower Krug 
took his guests that day to dine at 
the Nemo Club, where a suite was 
perpetually held in readiness for 
him. The club was one of Krug’s 
minor enterprises; he had built it a 
dozen years back and for some 
time it had been Earth’s most fashionable gathering place, with reservations required at least six 
months in advance. Situated ten 
thousand meters under the western 
Pacific in the Challenger Deep, it 
consisted of fifteen pressurized 
bubbles through whose walls, fashioned of the same sturdy glass 
from which the tower was being 
constructed, it was possible to view 
the strange inhabitants of the dark 
abyss. 
Krug’s companions were Senator Henry Fearon and his brother 
Lou, the lawyer, of Fearon & Doheny; Franz Giudice of European 
Transmat; Leon Spaulding; and 
Mordecai Salah al-Din, the Speaker of Congress. To reach the Nemo Club they had journeyed by 
transmat to the island of Yap in 
the Caroline group of Micronesia, 
where they boarded an immersion 
module of the kind used for the exploration of Jupiter and Saturn. 
The density of the medium made 
transmat travel impossible under 
water. The pressures of the ocean’s 
depths meant little to the immersion rnodule, however, and at a 
calm and steady speed of seven 
hundred and fifty meters a minute 
it sank to the Pacific floor and entered the Nemo Club’s transit 
hatch. 
Floodlights bathed the abyss. 
The dwellers of the deep paid no 
heed to the illumination and came 
quite close to the club’s glass 
walls: fragile, flimsy, unmuscular 
fishes, loose and flabby of body, 
their tissues pervaded by water under a compression of ten or twelve 
tons per square centimeter. Many 
of them were luminescent; cold 
pale glows glistened from photo
phores along their sides or between 
their eyes or on fleshy dangling 
lanterns jutting from their foreheads. The wavelength of the club’s 
floodlights had been carefully 
chosen in order not to interfere 
with the luminescence of the fishes 
and their little sparkling beacons 
were plainly visible even in the 
brightness. Justin Maledetto, the 
architect of the tower, had also designed the club and Maledetto was 
clever in such details. Up to the 
walls the bizarre little monsters 
came, black and brown and scarlet 
and violet in hue. Many of them 
had jaws that unhinged, so that 
their mouths could gape down to 
their chests, ready to swallow enemies two or three times their own 
size. In the random encounters of 
the abyss pygmies devoured giants. 
Diners at the club were treated to 
visions of miniature gargoyles and 
horrors, sinister in their radiance, 
brandishing their savage teeth within their vast mouths, trailing 
strange appendages and protrusions, bearing eyes that bulged like 
globes — or eyes on stalked tubes 
or no eyes at all. One did not need 
to travel to distant worlds to behold bizarre beasts — the nightmare 
creatures were here, on man’s own 
planet, and one had only to look. 
Huge spines, curved teeth so long 
that mouths could never close, 
branching stems rising from snouts, 
things that were all jaws and no 
body, things that were all tail and 
no head, anglers with twitching 
rods that danced about, giving off 
yellow or blue or green pulsations, 
grotesqueries of a thousand kinds 
— and no fish as much as half a 
meter long. The show was extraordinary and altogether unique. 
Krug ordered a simple meal astonishing vigor. “We’d better 
krill cocktail, algae soup, steak, watch that waiter. With two memAustralian claret. He was no gour- bers of Congress at the table, he’s 
met. The club offered every sort likely to slip propaganda into our 
of delicacy but Krug never took dishes, and we’ll all walk away 
advantage of its bounty. His com- converted.” 
panions had no such reluctance; “Do you really think the AEP 
cheerfully they called for Swedish is a threat?” Lou Fearon asked, 
oysters, benthic crabs, unborn “You know, 1 got a good dose of 
squid, contrefilets of veal, snail their Siegfried Fileclerk while 1 
mousse, breast of oryx, shirred was handling the business of the 
euphorbia buds, manta tips, baked alpha girl killed at the tower.” He 
cycad hearts and more, all washed nodded toward Spaulding, who 
down by the world’s finest golden scowled. “1 got the impression 
wines. The waiter looked delighted that Fileclerk and the whole AFP 
at their prowess with the menu bunch are completely ineffectual,” 
cubes. All waiters here were al- the attorney said, 
phas; it was unusual to employ “A minority movement,” said 
alphas in what was essentially me- Senator Fearon. “Not even comnial personal service — but this was manding the support of the bulk 
an unusual place and none of the of androids.” 
staff at the Nemo Club appeared 
to be embittered at doing a job ¥ FON SPAULDING nodded, 
normally performed by betas or iJThe ectogene said, “Thor 
even gammas. Watchman had some stinging 
Yet the waiters could not have words for Fileclerk and his party, 
been entirely content with their Watchman doesn’t seem to feel 
station in life. When the appetiz- there’s any value in the AFP whaters had been served. Senator ever.” 
Fearon said to Krug, “Did you “An unusually shrewd and capanotice the AFP emblem on our ble android, Thor is.” said Krug, 
boy’s lapel?” “I was quite serious, though,” 
“Are you serious?” Giudice declared. “You can laugh 
“A very small one. Sharp eyes at the AFP all you like, but 1 feel 
are needed.” its aims are genuinely revolution
Krug glanced at Spaulding, ary and that as it gains backing 
“When we leave, speak to the cap- it will — ” 
tain about that. I don’t want any Krug gestured for silence, 
politics here.” Their alpha waiter had returned, 
“Fspecially revolutionary poli- bearing a fresh bottle of wine. The 
tics,” said Franz Giudice, and men at the table sat tensely while 
laughed. The transmat executive, the alpha poured. He went out, 
long and angular, was noted for closing the hatch tightly behind 
his bland ironies. Though well past him. 
eighty, he had adopted the styles Mordecai Salah al-Din, the 
of dress of men half his age, mir- Speaker of Congress, said gently, 
ror-plates and all, and retained “I’ve received at least five million 
^ 109 
petitions from the AEP. I’ve 
granted three audiences to the 
party’s leaders. And I must say 
that they’re a sincere and orderly 
group, worth taking seriously. I 
also want to say, though I 
wouldn’t care to be quoted, that 
I’m sympathetic to some of their 
goals.” 
“Would you explain that?” 
Spaulding said, his voice crisp. 
“Surely. 1 feel that the inclusion of a delegation of alphas in 
Congress is desirable and probably 
will come about within the next 
decade. I feel that the selling of 
alphas without their consent is improper and ought to be made illegal. I think that’ll happen in fifteen to twenty years. I believe that 
we’ll be extending full civil rights 
to alphas before ’fifty, to betas by 
the end of this century and to gammas not long afterward.” 
“A revolutionary!” cried Franz 
Giudice in wonder. “The Speaker 
is a revolutionary!” 
“A visionary, rather,” said 
Senator Fearon. “A man of 
vaulting insight and splendid compassion. As always, somewhat 
ahead of his time.” 
Spaulding shook his head. “Alphas in Congress, maybe, yes. As 
a safety valve, to keep them from 
getting out of control. Toss them 
a bone, you know? But the rest 
of it? No. No. Never. Mr. Salah 
al-Din, we should not forget that 
androids are mere things^i\\^ product of chemogenetic research, created in a factory, manufactured by 
Krug Enterprises to serve mankind — ” 
“Softly,” Krug murmured. 
“You’re getting excited.” 
Lou Fearon said, “Possibly the 
Speaker’s right, Leon. Regardless 
of how they came into existence, 
they’re more human than you’re 
willing to admit. And as we gradually relax all arbitrary barriers 
of law and custom, as the Witherer 
ideals gradually take over — as I 
think you’ll agree is quite subtly 
happening already — I expect that 
we’ll go easier on the androids. At 
least on the alphas. We don’t need 
to keep them under.” 
“What do you say, Simeon?” 
Franz Giudice demanded of Krug. 
“After all, they’re your babies. 
When you decided to produce the 
first androids, did you ever imagine that they’d be calling for the 
rights of citizenship or did you 
think of them as — ” 
“Leon put it in the right words,” 
Krug said. “How was it? Things. 
Factory-made things. I was building a better kind of robot. I wasn’t 
building men.” 
“The borderline between man 
and android is so vague,” Senator 
Fearon said. “Since the androids 
are genetically identical to us, the 
fact that they’re synthetic — ” 
Krug said, “In one of my plants 
I can make you the Mona Lisa in 
perfect replica, so that it takes six 
months laboratory tests to prove 
it isn’t the original. Yes? And so? 
Is it the original? The original still 
came out of Leonardo’s studio. 
The replica came out of Krug’s 
factory. I’d pay a billion for the 
original. I wouldn’t give a brass 
thumb for the replica.” 
“Yet you recognize that Thor 
Watchman, for example, is an unusually capable and gifted person,” said Lou Fearon, “and you 
give him wide responsibilities. I’ve 
heard it said that you trust him 
10 
more than any man in your organization. Yet you wouldn’t allow 
Thor to vote? You wouldn’t give 
Thor a chance to protest if you 
decided to make him a waiter 
here? You agree that the law 
should give you the right to destroy Thor if the whim takes 
you?” 
“I made Thor,” Krug replied 
heavily. “He’s the finest machine 
I have. I love and admire him the 
way I love and admire any superb 
machine. But I own Thor. Thor 
isn’t a man — he’s just a clever imitation of a man, a flawless imitation — and if I want to be so wasteful and foolish as to destroy Thor, 
why. I’ll destroy him.” Krug’s 
hand began to tremble. He glared 
at it as if willing it to be still but 
the tremor intensified and a full 
glass of wine spilled onto the table. 
Stonily Krug said, “Destroy him. 
I never had anything else in mind 
when I brought out the androids. 
Servants. Tools of man. Cunning 
machines.” 
Sensors in the Nemo Club’s service core announced the spilling 
of the wine. The waiter entered and 
efficiently mopped it up. Outside 
the window, a cluster of giant 
translucent crustaceans wheeled 
and danced. 
When the alpha was gone again 
Senator Fearon said to Krug, “I 
didn’t realize you felt this strongly 
about android equality. You’ve 
never spoken out.” 
“I’ve never been asked.” 
“Would you testify against the 
AEP,” Salah al-Din asked, “if 
the matter were to come before 
Congress?” 
Krug shrugged. “I don’t know. 
tics. I’m a manufacturer. Businessman. Entrepreneur, you know? 
Why look for controversies?” 
“If androids were granted civil 
rights,” said Leon Spaulding, “it 
might have repercussions for Krug 
Enterprises. What I mean is — if 
you’re manufacturing actual human beings you come under the 
scope of the population control 
laws, which — ” 
“Enough,” Krug said. “It won’t 
happen. I make the androids. I 
know them. There’s a little group 
of malcontents, yes. Too intelligent for their own good. They 
think it’s black slavery all over 
again. But it isn’t. It isn’t. The 
others know that. They’re content. 
Thor Watchman is content. Why 
don’t all the alphas back the AEP? 
They oppose it — and why? Because they think it’s idiocy. 
They’re treated well as is. This 
talk of selling alphas against their 
will, of killing them on whims, it’s 
all just theory. No one sells a 
good alpha and nobody kills 
androids for fun, any more than 
people wreck their own houses for 
fun. No need for android rights, 
eh? The alphas realize it. The betas 
aren’t worried. The gammas can’t 
possibly care. So you see? Gentlemen, it makes good table talk, no 
more. The AEP will fade away. 
My respects, Mr. Speaker — your 
sweetness of soul leads you astray. 
You will have no alphas in your 
Congress.” 
Krug’s lengthy speech had left 
him thirsty. He reached for his 
wine. Again the tension in his muscles betrayed him; again he 
knocked the glass over — again a 
watchful alpha, alerted by hidden 
eyes, rushed in to tidy the mess. 
Beyond the thick glass wall of the 
Nemo Club a dark red fish a meter in length, with a gigantic 
toothy satchel of a mouth and a 
narrow spiny tail, began to move 
through the school of crustaceans, 
gulping them down in a terrible 
hunger. 
XV 
January 15. 2219. 
The tower is 1001 meters high. 
In celebration, Krug has decreed 
a holiday tomorrow for all 
workers. It is now estimated that 
the structure will reach its full 
height before the middle of March. 
L ilith meson said, “I had 
a visitor here yesterday morning, Thor.” 
“Manuel Krug?” 
“No. Siegfried Fileclerk.” 
Watchman uncoiled himself 
from Lilith’s all-engulfing tesseractdivan. “Fileclerk? Here? 
Why?” 
Lilith laughed. “Are you so human these days that you feel jealously, Thor?” 
“That doesn’t amuse me. How 
did it happen that he came to 
you?” 
“He was at the office,” Lilith 
said. “You know, he’s with Property Protection of Buenos Aires. 
He came in to discuss some new 
actuarial pivot clause in their contract. Afterward he asked me if 
he could see me home. All right. 
1 invited him in. He seemed harmless.” 
“And?” 
“He tried to recruit me for 
AFP.” 
“Is that all?” 
“No,” Lilith said. “He wants 
me to recruit you, too.” 
Watchman coughed. “A very 
slender chance of that.” 
“He’s immensely earnest, Thor. 
Devoted to the cause of equality 
and liberation, et cetera, et cetera. 
Two minutes after we walked in 
he began burying me under arguments for political action. I told 
him I was religious. He said that 
didn’t matter, that I could go right 
on praying for the miraculous intervention of Krug — but meanwhile would 1 please sign this petition? No, I said. I never sign 
things. He gave me a stack of 
propaganda cubes, the whole AFP 
line. They’re in the kitchen — if 
you’re interested. He was here 
more than an hour.” Lilith flashed 
a dazzling grin. “1 didn’t sign his 
petition.” 
“Why did he go after you, 
though?” Watchman asked. 
“Does he plan to approach every 
alpha in the world, one by one, 
looking for support?” 
“I told you. He wants you to 
sign up. He knows I’m close to 
you and he thinks that if he can 
persuade me I’ll be able to persuade you. He said so in that many 
words. And once you’re in his 
camp, everyone else will follow.” 
Lilith drew herself up stiffly. “Tf 
Alpha Watchman comes over to 
our side. Alpha Meson, he’ll bring 
scores of influential alphas with 
him. It could be the turning point 
of our entire movement. Alpha 
Watchman may hold the future of 
every android in his grasp.’ How 
do you feel about that. Alpha 
Watchman?” 
“Deeply moved, Alpha Meson. 
I can’t begin to describe the awe 
that stirs in me at the idea. How 
did you manage to get rid of 
him?” 
“By trying to seduce him.” 
“What?” 
“Am 1 being bitchy, Thor? I 
won’t talk about it if you’d rather 
I didn’t.” 
“1 was not programed to feel 
jealousy,” Watchman said stolidly. “Teasing will get you nowhere with me. And I’m not in 
a mood to play stupid games.” 
She blinked. 
“Very well. I’m sorry I said 
anything.” 
“Go on. You tried to seduce 
him. You didn’t succeed?” 
“No,” Lilith said. “It was a 
spur-of-the-moment thing. I said 
to myself, Fileclerk is so stuffy 
that this will probably drive him 
away screaming. And if he takes 
the bait instead — well, it might be 
fun. So I stripped and then I — 
what’s the idiom, the old word? I 
began to make overtures to him. 
To make overtures. Come on, I 
said, let’s curl up together, Siggie. 
Siggie. I put my hands on him. 1 
was very lewd. I jiggled and 
wiggled. I worked very hard, Thor, 
even harder than I had to work to 
seduce you. He wasn’t having any. 
He asked me to stop.” 
“Of course,” Watchman said. 
“It’s as I was trying to explain. 
Male alphas don’t really have 
much interest in sex. It’s irrelevant 
to their life-pattern.” 
“Don’t be so smug about that. 
Fileclerk wanted me. He was pale. 
He was shaking.” 
“Then why didn’t he go to bed 
with you? Afraid to compromise 
himself politically?” 
“No,” Lilith said. “It’s because 
he’s still in mourning.” 
“Mourning.” 
“For his wife. Cassandra Nucleus. His wife, Thor. The AEP is 
advocating android marriage. He 
was married to Alpha Nucleus 
three years ago. He’s observing 
a six-month mourning period, during which he doesn’t intend to let 
wanton young alphas lure him into 
their arms. He explained it to me 
and then he left fast. As if he were 
afraid he might give in if he 
stayed.” 
“His wife,” Watchman said. 
“The AEP plans to add a clause 
about android marriage to its petition before Congress. Fileclerk 
also said that if you and I wanted 
to get married, Thor, he’d be able 
to arrange it the day we join the 
party.” 
W ATCHMAN laughed harshly. “He talks like a child. 
What good is marriage? Do we 
have children who need legally 
constituted homes? If I wanted to 
live with you I’d live with you, 
Lilith. Or you with me. Should 
someone say words over us first? 
Give us a piece of paper?” 
“It’s the idea, Thor. Of a permanent union between man and 
woman, the way it is among humans. It’s quite touching. He 
really loved her, Thor.” 
“I’m sure he did. I saw him 
weeping when Spaulding killed her. 
But did he love her more because 
they were married? If marriage is 
so wonderful why is Manuel Krug 
here every week? Shouldn’t he be 
home having a permanent union 
with Mrs. Krug?” 
“There are good marriages and 
bad marriages,” Lilith said. “And 
who you sleep with isn’t necessarily what determines how good your 
marriage is. In any case, Fileclerk’s marriage was a good one 
and I don’t see how it could hurt 
us to adopt the custom — if we 
truly believe in our equality.” 
“All right,” Watchman snapped. 
“Do you want to marry me?” 
“I was speaking in general terms 
about adopting the custom.” 
“I’m speaking in particular 
terms. We don’t have to join the 
AEP to get married. I’ll get hold 
of Alpha Constructor and Alpha 
Dispatcher and we’ll write marriage ceremonies into the communion — and we’ll get married 
at the chapel tonight. All right?” 
“Be serious, Thor.” 
“I am.” 
“You’re angry and you don’t 
know what you’re saying. You 
told me two minutes ago that you 
think marriage among androids 
is absurd. Now you’re willing to 
write it into the communion. You 
can’t mean it, Thor.” 
“You don’t want to marry me? 
Don’t worry — I wouldn’t interfere 
with your affair with Manuel. I’m 
not programed for possessiveness 
either. But we could live together, 
we could — ” 
“Stop it, Thor.” 
“Why?” 
“Whatever exists between us 
can exist without a marriage. You 
know that. 1 know that. I wasn’t 
looking for a proposal. I was just 
trying to tell you something about 
Siegfried Fileclerk, about the nature of his emotions, the complex
ity of his feelings toward Alpha 
Nucleus as well as the position 
of the AEP on — ” 
“Enough. Enough.” Watchman 
put his hands over his ears and 
closed his eyes. “End of conversation. I’m fascinated that you 
couldn’t seduce Siggie Fileclerk 
and astounded that the AEP is 
going in for marrying — and that’s 
the end. Yes?” 
“You’re in foul spirits today, 
Thor.” 
“I am.” 
“Why? Can I do anything to 
help?” 
“Leon Spaulding told me something today, Lilith. He says that 
when the AEP delegation finally 
gets its turn to address Congress, 
Krug is going to release a statement denouncing the entire 
android equality movement and 
insisting that he never would have 
created us in the first place if he 
had known we’d demand civil 
rights.” 
Lilith gasped. Tears in her eyes, 
she made a Krug-preserve-us sign 
four times in succession. 
“It isn’t possible,” she whispered. 
“Spaulding said that Krug told 
him this about a week ago, at the 
Nemo Club, in the presence of 
Speaker Salah al-Din, Senator 
Fearon, and a couple of other people. You realize that Leon was 
merely making conversation when 
he passed the remark along to me, 
of course. A friendly chat between 
ectogene and android. He knows 
I’m anti-AEP — he thought I’d be 
amused. The bastard!” 
“Can it be true?” 
“Of course it can. Krug’s never 
made any sort of statement on 
“I’ll do it,” Lilith said. “Yes.” 
what he thinks the android’s role 
ought to be. I’ve got no idea of 
his real position myself. I’ve always assumed he was sympathetic 
— but I might have been only projecting my own hopes. The question isn’t can it be true — but is it 
true.” 
“Do you dare ask him?” 
“I don’t dare,” Thor said. “I believe that this entire story originated inside Leon Spaulding’s malicious mind, that Krug doesn’t 
plan to break his no-politics rule 
and that if he ever did make a 
statement, Krug would make the 
statement that we all hope and 
pray for. But it frightens me to 
think that I’m wrong. I’m terrified, Lilith. An anti-equality statement from Krug would undermine 
every belief we have. Dump us into 
outer darkness. You see what I’ve 
been living with all day?” 
“Should you rely just on what 
Spaulding said? Can’t you check 
with Senator Fearon or the 
Speaker? Find out what was really 
said?” 
“Ask them for confidential details of Krug’s table talk, you 
mean? They’d report me to Krug 
right away.” 
“Then what will you do?” 
“Force Krug’s hand,” Watchman said. “I want you to take 
Manuel to a chapel.” 
“How soon?” 
“As soon as you can. Don’t 
conceal a thing from him. Let him 
understand everything. Work on 
his conscience. Then send him to 
his father — before Krug makes 
any statements to Congress. If 
Krug is going to make a statement.” 
W ATCHMAN nodded. He 
looked down, moving his feet 
idly over the patterned floor. 
There was a ticking in his brain 
and a cottony fullness in his 
throat. He hated the maneuvers he 
found himself enmeshed in now, 
these ploys and counterploys, this 
staking of so much on the weak 
will of Manuel Krug, this assumption that Krug — Krug! — could be 
manipulated by simple one-to-one 
intrigues. All this seemed to negate true faith. It was a cynical 
kind of haggling with destiny, 
which left Watchman wondering 
how true his faith had ever been. 
Was it all a faqade, then, the 
kneeling in chapel, the muttering 
of codon triplets, the immersion 
in Krugness, the yielding, the 
prayer? Just a way of filling time 
until the moment came to seize 
control of events? Watchman rejected the thought. But that left 
him with nothing. He wished he 
had never begun this. He longed 
to be back at the tower, jacked into the computer, buoyantly riding 
the data tide. Is this what being 
human is like? These decisions, 
these doubts, these fears? Why 
not stay android, then? Accept the 
divine plan. Serve — and desire no 
more. S^ep away from these conspiracies, these knotted emotions, 
these webs of passion. He found 
himself envying the gammas, who 
aspired to nothing. But he could 
not be a gamma. Krug had given 
him this mind. Krug had created 
him to doubt and suffer. Blessed 
be the Will of Krug! Rising, 
Watchman walked slowly across 
the room and, to escape himself, 
snapped on the holovision. The 
image of Krug’s tower blossomed 
in the screen: immense, brilliant, 
beautiful, flashing in the January 
light. A hovercamera panned slowly along the entire length of it 
while the commentator spoke of 
the attainment of the thousandmeter level and compared the tower favorably to the Pyramids, the 
Great Wall of China, the Lighthouse at Alexandria, the Colossus 
of Rhodes. A magnificent achievement, opening the pathway toward 
communication with other races 
on distant stars. A thing of beauty 
in its own right, shimmering and 
sleek. Up and down the glass walls 
the camera leaped. The eye peered 
into the shaft from the summit. 
Grinning gammas waved back. 
Watchman caught a glimpse of 
himself, enmeshed in problems, 
unaware that he was being holovised. And there was Krug, aglow 
with pride, pointing out the tower’s features to a crowd of Senators and industrialists. The chill 
of the tundra seemed to leak from 
the screen. The camera picked up 
the refrigeration tapes embedded 
in the permafrost; mist was rising 
from them. Unless the ground is 
kept frozen, the commentator explained, the stability of the tower 
would be uncertain. An unparalleled feat of environmental engineering. Miraculous. A monument 
to man’s vision and determination. 
Yes. Yes. Phenomenal. With sudden ferocity Watchman blanked 
the screen. The shining tower vanished like an interrupted dream. 
He stood near the wall, his back 
to Lilith, trying to comprehend 
how it had happened that life had 
become so complex for him. He 
had wanted to be human. Yes. 
Had he not prayed to Krug that 
he and all his kind be granted the 
privileges of the Womb-born? Yes. 
Yes. And with the privileges went 
the responsibilities. Yes. And with 
the responsibilities went the turmoil. Rivalry. Sex. Love. Scheming. 
Perhaps. Watchman thought, I 
wasn't ready for all this. Perhaps 
I should have remained a decent 
hardworking alpha instead of rising 
up to challenge the Will of Krug. 
Perhaps. Perhaps. He went 
through the rituals of tranquillity 
— without success. 
You are more human now than 
you really wished to be. Alpha 
Watchman. 
He became aware of Lilith close 
behind him. The tips of her breasts 
grazed his back as she drew 
closer he felt the heavy globes flattening and straining against him. 
“Poor Thor,” she myrmured. 
“So tense. So worried. Do you 
want to make love?” 
Could he refuse her? He pretended enthusiasm. He embraced 
her. Body slid tightly against body. 
She opened to him and he entered 
her. He was more skillful this 
time. But still it remained an empty thing for him, a butting of flesh, 
an alien ecstasy. He found no pleasure in it for himself, though there 
was indirect delight in seeing Lilith 
throb and moan and arch her back 
as she took pleasure from him. 
/ am not really human enough, 
despite everything — and she is 
much too human . 
Yes. Yes. He moved more swiftly. Now he felt a tickle of sensa
tion — Krug had designed His people well and all the proper neural 
connections were there, damped 
though they might sometimes be 
by self-imposed conditioning. As 
the climax neared Watchman experienced some instants of genuine 
passion; he snorted, he clutched 
Lilith’s buttocks with steely fingers, he bucked and thrust. Then 
came the spurt of completion and 
immediately afterward came, as 
before, the sadness, the awareness 
of hollowness. It seemed to him 
that he stood in a vast subterranean tomb, hundreds of meters 
long and many meters wide, with 
nothing in view but pinches of dust 
and fragments of dried wreaths. 
He forced himself to remain in 
Lilith’s embrace, though he wanted 
nothing more than to roll away 
and be alone. He opened his eyes. 
She was weeping. She was smiling. 
She was flushed and sweat-sticky 
and aglow. 
“I love you,” she said softly. 
Watchman hesitated. A response 
was required here. His silence, expanding into the succeeding seconds, threatened to choke the universe. How could he not reply? It 
was inhuman to remain silent. He 
touched her warm flesh. He felt 
untuned, unstrung. 
Finally he said, quickly, getting 
it over with, “1 love you, Lilith.” 
XVI 
You may ask, Who was the 
Maker of the Children of the 
Womb? Who, indeed, was the 
Maker of Krug? 
And I say to you that these are 
wise questions, that these ques
tions are properly asked. 
For you must understand that in 
the world there are cycles of all 
things, a cycle of the Womb and a 
cycle of the Vat, and the one precedes the other, so that it was necessary first for there to be the 
Womb-born in order that there 
might be the Vat-born. 
And Krug the man was of the 
Womb-born, from whom sprang 
the Children of the Vai. 
Yet Krug the man is merely one 
aspect of Krug the Creator, whose 
existence precedes all things and 
whose Will has shaped all things, 
and who brought forth the Children of the Womb as forerunners 
of the Children of the Vat. Therefore must you distinguish between 
the man Krug, who is mortal and 
was himself born of the Womb, 
and the Maker Krug, whose Plan 
all things follow; for if it was Krug 
the man who brought forth the 
Children of the Vat, nevertheless 
he did so by the design of Krug 
the Maker, from whom all blessings flow, to whom all praise be 
given. 
I SAID to Lilith, You promised 
to tell me. Why those gammas 
were using my father’s name. The 
peace of Krug. Go with Krug. 
Krug be with you. You never said. 
I will. 
When? 
You’ll have to dress up as an 
alpha again. It isn’t something I 
can tell as easily as I can show. 
Do we have to go back to Gamma Town? 
No, she said, not this time. We 
can drop in on the betas this time. 
I wouldn’t take you to the Valhallavagen chapel because — 
Where? 
Valhallavagen chapel. Near 
here. It’s where most of the local 
alphas worship. You couldn’t fool 
them, Manuel. But you could fool 
betas, 1 think. If you kept quiet 
and looked dignified. 
A chapel. Worship. So it’s a religion? 
Yes. 
What’s it called? Krugolatry? 
It doesn’t have a name. We talk 
of it just as the communion. It’s 
very important to us, Manuel. I 
think it’s the most important thing 
in our lives. 
Do you want to describe — 
Later. Take off your clothes 
and I’ll spray your skin. We can 
go right now. 
Will it take long? 
An hour, she said. You’ll be 
back home on time, don’t worry. 
If that’s what’s worrying you. 
I have to be fair to Clissa, I 
said. She gives me freedom. I 
don’t want to abuse it. 
All right. All right. 
I took off my clothes. Once 
again Lilith disguised me as Alpha 
Leviticus Leaper. She had kept 
the clothes around from the other 
time; it surprised me that she 
hadn’t given them back to Thor 
Watchman. As though she knew 
we’d be playing this masquerade 
again. 
She said. Before we go — there 
are some things you have to know. 
The first is that it’s absolutely forbidden for any human to enter a 
chapel. It’s like non-Moslems 
going to Mecca. For all I know 
you may be the first Womb-born 
who ever went in. 
The first what? 
Womb-born. You’re a Child of 
the Womb. We’re Children of the 
Vat. Yes? 
Oh. Oh. If it’s a sacrilege to 
smuggle me into a chapel why are 
you doing it? Don’t you take the 
rules seriously? 
Very seriously. 
Then why? 
Because I feel I can make an 
exception for you, Manuel. 
You’re different. 1 told you that 
once, remember? You don’t put 
androids in some special sub-class 
of humanity. 1 think that inwardly 
you’ve been on our side all along, 
even without being conscious of 
it. And so it wouldn’t be sacrilege 
to let you understand our religion 
a little. 
Well, maybe. 
And also you’re Krug’s son. 
What does that have to do with 
it? 
You’ll see, she said. 
I was flattered. Fascinated. Excited. A little frightened. Am I 
really that simpatico to android 
aspirations? Can I be trusted? Why 
is she breaking the commandment? 
What is she trying to get from 
me? Unworthy thought. She is 
doing it because she loves me. 
Her world. 
She said. Anyway, keep in mind 
that it would be very serious if 
you were found out. Therefore 
pretend that you belong in there, 
and don’t act nervous or uncertain 
of yourself. You were fine in 
Gamma Town. Be that way here. 
But aren’t there certain rites I 
ought to be familiar with? Genuflections or something? 
I’m coming to that, Lilith said. 
You’ll need a couple of gestures. 
One of them you already know. 
Like this. 
Left hand to crotch, breast, 
forehead, one two three. 
She said. That’s the sign of 
Krug-be-praised. It’s an act of 
homage. You make the sign when 
you first enter the chapel and when 
you start to join the prayer, silently or aloud. It’s also good to make 
the sign whenever the name of 
Krug is mentioned. In fact, the 
Krug-be-praised sign is appropriate in almost any part of the service or whenever two androids of 
the communion meet outside a 
chapel. Let’s see you make it. Go 
on. 
One two three. Krug be praised. 
Faster. One-two-three. 
One-two-three. 
Good. Good. Now, here’s another important sign. Its meaning 
is Krug-preserve-us and it’s specifically a prayer used in time of 
tension or doubt. Like saying God 
help us. You’ll use it whenever the 
text of the service calls for Krug 
to have mercy on us, Krug to aid 
us in any way. Whenever we’re 
imploring Krug. 
Krug is really your god, 1 said, 
wondering. 
ThisJs the sign. She showed me 
how to make it. Cup one hand 
over each breast — then turn the 
palms outward. An act of contrition: see my soul, Krug! My heart 
is bare to you. She made the sign 
several times, and 1 followed her. 
One more, Lilith said. The sign 
of submission to the Will of Krug. 
You’ll make it only once, when 
you first get into line of sight with 
the altar. Like this. Drop to one 
knee and reach your arms forward, palms turned up. 
Does it matter which knee? 
Either one. Do it. 
I made the sign of submission 
to the Will of Krug. I was glad to 
learn it. Somehow I felt that I’d 
been submitting to the Will of 
Krug all my life without even 
knowing it. 
Lilith said, Let’s make sure you 
have it all clear, now. When you 
enter the chapel, what? 
One-two-three. Krug-be-praised. 
Good. Then? 
When I can see the altar, I do 
the submission to the Will. Down 
on one knee, hands out, palms up. 
Yes. And? 
When the favors are asked of 
Krug. I do Krug-preserve-us. 
Hands to breasts, turn hands out. 
I also do Krug-be-praised from 
time to time when the name of 
Krug is mentioned. 
Fine. Fine. You won’t have any 
trouble, Manuel. 
There’s another gesture I saw 
you make in Gamma Town, I said. 
Show me. 
I HELD my hands up with the 
palms facing each other about 
half a meter apart, and wiggled my 
hips and flexed my knees, making 
a kind of spiral. 
You did it in Gamma Town, I 
said, when the mob was getting a 
little wild. 
Lilith laughed. It’s called the 
Blessing of the Vat, she said. It’s a 
sign of peace and a sign of departure. We do it over a dead person 
in the final prayer, and we do it 
when we’re saying goodbye to one 
another in a tense situation. It’s 
one of the holiest signs. And you 
didn’t do it very well. You see, it’s 
based on the double helix of the 
nucleic acid molecule genetics, 
yes? — the way the molecules are 
coiled. We try to duplicate it with 
our bodies. This way. 
She did it. 1 imitated. She 
laughed. 
I said, I’m sorry. My body just 
doesn’t bend that way. 
It takes practice. You won’t 
have to do it, though. Stick with 
Krug-be-praised and Krug-preserve-us and you’ll be fine. Let’s 
go now. 
She took me to a shabby part of 
town in what I think once was a 
commercial section. It didn’t have 
the nightmare gaudiness of Gamma Town or the stately, wellworn look of the part where the 
alphas live. Just shabby. 
Chapel’s over there, she said. 
I saw a storefront, windows 
opaqued. Couple of betas standing out front, doing nothing particular. We started to cross the 
street. I got shaky. What if they 
find me out? What will they do? To 
me? To Lilith? 
I am Alpha Leviticus Leaper. 
The betas stepped aside, making 
Krug-be-praised as we came up to 
them. Eyes lowered, air of respect. 
The social distances. Lilith would 
have had a much harder time if I 
didn’t have an alpha’s long lean 
build. My confidence rose. I even 
made Krug-be-praised at one of 
the betas. 
We entered the chapel. 
A large circular room. No seats. 
Carpet of thick soft pseudolife, 
obviously much knelt upon in its 
time. Subdued lighting. I remembered to make Krug-be-praised as 
I walked in. One-two-three. 
A little vestibule. Two steps beyond it I got my first view of the 
altar. Lilith down on one knee, 
submission to the Will. I almost 
didn’t need to kneel. I almost fell, 
amazed. 
The altar; a large square mass 
of what looked like living flesh, 
sitting in an ornate plastic tub. 
Purple fluid in the tub, swirling 
around and occasionally over this 
block of pink meat, which is at 
least a meter high and maybe three 
meters by two long, wide. 
Behind the altar: my father in 
hologram. A perfect likeness. Fullsize replica, looking at us face-on, 
stern expression, eyes fiery, lips 
clarnped. Not exactly a god of 
love. Strong. Man of steel. Because it’s a hologram, the eyes follow you; wherever you are in the 
chapel you’re under the gaze of 
Krug. 
I drop down. I lift the hands. 
Palms up. 
Submission to the Will of Krug! 
It stuns me. Even though 1 knew 
before, 1 still am stunned. Is it like 
this all over the world, I ask? Androids salaaming to my father? 
Barely audible whisper. Yes, she 
says. Yes. We pay homage. Krug 
be praised. 
This man whom I have known 
all my life. This builder of towers, 
this inventor of androids. A god? 1 
almost laugh. Am I Son of God? I 
don’t fit the role. Obviously no 
one worships me here. 1 am an afterthought; I am outside theology. 
We get to our feet. With a tiny 
gesture of her head Lilith leads me 
to a place in the back of the chapel 
and we kneel. In the darkness I 
feel comforted. There are perhaps 
ten, twelve androids in the chapel, 
all betas except for one male alpha 
who kneels right before the altar, 
back to us. 1 feel less conspicuous 
with the alpha there. A few more 
betas come in, making the appropriate gestures. No one pays any 
attention to us. The social distances. 
Everybody seems deep in private 
prayer. 
Is this the service, Lilith? 
Not yet. We’re a little early. 
You’ll see. 
The eyes of Krug drill into me. 
He almost does look godlike up 
there. I glare back at him. What 
would he say if he knew? He’d 
laugh. He’d pound his desk. He'd 
belch with joy. Krug the god! Jehovah Krug! Simeon Allah! By 
Christ, that’s a good one! Why in 
hell shouldn’t they worship me? I 
made them, no? 
As my eyes grow accustomed 
to the dimness I examine the pattern on the wall more carefully. It 
is not, as I first suspected, a purely 
abstract ornamental design. No — 
I now see the letters of the alphabet repeated over and over and over, covering every centimeter of 
wall space. Not all the letters. 1 
run from line to line and see only 
four letters in various combinations, like: 
ALA ALG ALC ALL GAA GAG GAC 
GAL GGA GGG GGC GGL GCA GCG 
GCC GCL GLA GLG GLC GLL CAA 
CAG CAC CAL 
So on and so on. What is it, Lilith? The design. 
The genetic code, she says. The 
RNA triplets. 
A h. yes. Suddenly 1 remember 
in Gamma Town, the girl slobie addict calling out letters - 1 can 
see them on the wall now. A 
prayer? 
The sacred language. Like Latin 
was for Catholics. 
I see. 
But I don’t really see. I just accept. 
I say, And what is the altar 
made of? 
Flesh. Synthetic flesh. 
Live? 
Of course. Straight from the 
vat, like me or you. Pardon, not 
like you. Like me. Just a lump of 
live android flesh. 
What keeps it alive? It’s got no 
organs or anything. 
It gets nutrients from the tank. 
And injections of something from 
underneath. But it lives. It grows. 
It has to be trimmed from time to 
time. It symbolizes our arigin. 
Not yours. Ours. There’s one in 
every chapel. Smuggled out of the 
factory. 
Like the rejects. 
Like the rejects, yes. 
And I thought security arrangements were so tight at the android 
plants, I say. 
Lilith winks at me. I begin to 
feel like a member of the conspiracy. 
Three androids now enter from 
the rear of the chapel. Two betas 
and an alpha, wearing brocaded 
stoles on which the letters of the 
genetic code are inscribed. They 
have a priestly look about them. 
The service is about to begin. As 
the three kneel by the altar, everyone else makes Krug-be-praised 
and then Krug-preserve-us. I do as 
they do. 
Are they priests? 
They’re celebrants, Lilith says. 
We don’t exactly have a priesthood. We have various castes that 
play different roles in different 
ceremonies, according to structure 
and texture of the ritual. The alpha’s a Preserver. He enters a 
trance that places him in direct 
communion with Krug. The two 
betas are Projectors. They amplify 
his emotional state. At other times 
you might see Engulfers, Transcenders or Protectors officiating, 
with the help of Yielders or Sacrificers or Responders. 
Which caste are you? 
Responder. 
And Thor Watchman? 
Preserver. 
The alpha by the altar began to 
chant. 
CAU, UUC, UCA, CGA, CCG, GCC, 
GAG, AL'C. 
Is the whole thing going to be in 
code? 
No. This is just to establish the 
texture. 
What’s he saying? 
Two betas not far in front of us 
turn around to glare. Shushing us. 
They see we are alphas and bite 
their lips. 
Lilith whispers more faintly than 
before. He’s saying, Krug brings 
us into the world and to Krug we 
return. 
GGC, GL'U, UL'C, GAG. 
Krug is our creator and our 
protector and our deliverer. 
UUC, CUG, cue, UAC. 
Krug, we beseech Thee to lead 
us toward the light. 
I can’t comprehend the code. 
The symbols don’t match the 
sense. Which symbol is Krug? 
How does the grammar work? I 
can’t ask Lilith that here. Others 
are turning to stare. Those noisy 
alphas back there. Don’t they have 
any respect? 
The Projectors hum deep reso
nant chords. The Preserver continues to chant code. Lilith now begins to function as a Responder, 
echoing what is chanted. The lights 
dim and grow bright. The fluid 
over the altar bubbles more fiercely. The image of Krug seems to 
glow — the eyes reach into my soul. 
Now I can understand about 
half the words of the service. Interspersed with the code, they are 
asking Krug to redeem the Children of the Vat, to give them freedom, to lift them to the level of 
the Children of the Womb. They 
sing about the day when Womb and 
Vat and Vat and Womb are one. 
With an infinity of Krug-preserveus gestures they beg the mercy of 
Krug. Krug! Krug! Krug! Krug! 
Everything here orbits around the 
idea of a merciful Krug! 
I start to see the picture. This is 
an equality movement. This is an 
android liberation front. 
Krug our master, lead us to our 
rightful place beside our brothers 
and sisters of the flesh. 
Krug bring redemption. 
Krug end our suffering. 
Praise be to Krug. 
Glory be to Krug. 
The service gains intensity. Everyone is singing, chanting, making signs, including several that 
Lilith never showed me. Lilith herself is wholly absorbed in prayer. 
I feel isolated, an infidel, an intruder, as I listen to them pray to 
their creator, my father, who is 
their god. For long spells the service is conducted entirely in the 
code language but familiar words 
keep bursting through. Krug descend and redeem us. Krug, give 
your blessing. Krug, end this time 
of testing. Krug, we need you. 
Krug Krug Krug Krug Krug. 
With each Krug I jump minutely, 
I twitch in the shpulderblades. I 
never suspected any of this. How 
did they keep it so secret? Krug 
the god. My father the god. And I 
am Krug too. If Krug dies, what 
will they worship? How can a god 
die? Do they preach the resurrection of Krug? Or is Krug on Earth 
only a transient manifestation of 
the true Krug on high? From some 
of the lines of the service, I get 
that idea. 
Now they are all singing at once, 
a booming unison: 
AAA AAG AAC AAU be tO Krug. 
AGA AGG AGC AGU be tO KrUg. 
ACA ACG ACC ACU be to Krug. 
They are offering him the whole 
genetic code, line by line. I follow 
from a column on the wall. Suddenly I hear my own voice joining 
the chant: 
GAA GAG GAC GAU be tO KrUg. 
GGA GGG GGC GGU be tO Krug. 
Lilith turns and smiles at me. 
Her face is flushed and bright, excited, exalted, almost a sexual rapture on it. She nods, encouraging 
me. 
I sing louder. 
GCA GCG GCC Gcu be to Krug. 
GUA GUG GUC Guu be to Krug. 
On and on it goes, the pitch 
strange, no one hitting any note 
squarely yet everyone keeping together perfectly, as though androids tune themselves to different 
intervals on some different scale. I 
have little trouble adapting, 
123 
though, and stay with them right 
to the end. 
We rise. We approach the altar. 
Standing shoulder to shoulder, Lilith to my left and some beta pressing against my right, we put our 
hands on that block of living flesh. 
It is warm and slippery; it quivers 
as we touch it. Vibrations pass 
through us. Krug, we chant, Krug, 
Krug, Krug, Krug. 
The service is over. 
S OME of the androids file out. 
Others remain, looking too exhausted by the experience to leave 
just yet. I feel that way myself, and 
I have hardly taken part. An intense religious communion. Religion is said to be dead, a quaint 
olden custom now lapsed into disuse, but no, not among these people. They believe in higher powers 
and the efficacy of prayer. They 
think Krug listens. Does Krug listen? Has Krug ever listened? I 
doubt it. But they think so. If he 
does not listen now, they say, he 
will listen. And will lift them up 
out of bondage. The opiate of the 
masses, what? But the alphas also 
believe. The elite. 
To Lilith I say. How long has 
this been happening, this religion? 
Since before 1 was born. 
Who invented it? 
It started here in Stockholm. A 
group of alphas. It spread rapidly. 
Now there are believers all over 
the world. 
Every android believes? 
Not every. The AEP people 
don’t. We ask for miracles and divine grace; they stand for direct 
political agitation. But we outnumber them. Most of us believe. 
More than half. Just about every 
gamma, most betas and many alphas. 
And you think that if you keep 
asking Krug to redeem you, he 
will? 
Lilith smiles. What else can we 
hope for? 
Have you ever approached Krug 
directly? 
Never. You see, we distinguish 
between Krug the man and Krug 
the Creator and we feel — She 
shakes her head. Let’s not talk in 
here. Someone might listen. 
We start to go out. Halfway to 
the door she halts, goes back, 
takes something from a box at the 
base of the altar. She hands it to 
me. It is a data cube. She turns it 
on and I read the words that appear: 
In the beginning there was Krug 
and He said, Let there be Vats, 
and there were Vats. 
And Krug looked upon the Vats 
and found them good. 
And Krug said. Let there be 
high-energy nucleotides in the 
Vats. And the nucleotides were 
poured and Krug mixed them until they were bonded one to another. 
And the nucleotides formed the 
great molecules and Krug said. 
Let there be the father and the 
mother both in the Vats and let the 
cells divide and let there be life 
brought forth upon the face of the 
Earth. 
And there was life, for there was 
Replication. 
And Krug presided over the 
Replication and touched the fluids 
with His own hands and gave them 
shape and essence. 
Let men come forth from the 
Vats, said Krug, and let women 
come forth and let them live and 
go among us and he sturdy and 
useful and we shall call them A ndroids. 
I thumb the cube. More of the 
same. Much more. An android 
bible. Well, why not? 
Fascinating. I tell Lilith. When 
was this written? 
They started it years ago. They 
still add sections now. About the 
nature of Krug and the relation 
of man to Krug. 
The relation of man to Krug. 
Beautiful. 
She says, Keep it if you find it 
interesting. It’s for you. 
We leave the chapel. I hide the 
android bible under my clothes. It 
bulges. 
At Lilith’s flat again. She said. 
Now you know. Our great secret. 
Our great hope. 
What exactly do you expect my 
father to do for you? 
Some day, she said, he will go 
before all the world and reveal his 
feelings about us. He will say. 
These androids have been treated 
unfairly and now it is time to 
make amends. Let us give them 
citizenship. Let us give them full 
rights. Let us stop treating them as 
articles of property. And because 
he is Krug, because he is the one 
who gave the world androids, people will listen. He alone will sway 
them all. And things will change 
for us. 
You really think this is going to 
happen? 
I hope and pray it will, she said. 
When? Soon? 
That’s not for me to say. Five 
years — twenty years -forty years 
-maybe next month. Read the 
cube 1 gave you. It explains how 
we think Krug is just testing us, 
seeing how tough we are. Eventually the test will be over. 
1 wish I shared your optimism, 
I said. But I’m afraid you may 
wait a long, long time. 
Why do you say that? 
My father isn’t the humanitarian 
you think he is. He’s no villian, no 
but he doesn’t think much about 
other people and their problems. 
He’s totally absorbed by his own 
projects. 
Yet basically he’s an honorable 
person, Lilith said. I mean Krug 
the man, now. Not the divine figure we pray to. Just your father. 
Yes, he’s honorable. 
Then he’ll see the merits of our 
cause. 
Maybe. Maybe not. I took her 
in my arms. Lilith, I wish there 
were something I could do to help! 
There is. 
What? 
Speak to your father about us, 
she said. ' 
XVII 
January 30, 2219. 
The tower is at 1165 meters. 
Even the androids are having some 
difficulty with the cold, thin air, 
now as they labor more than a 
kilometer above the surface of the 
tundra. At least six, dizzied, have 
fallen from the summit in the past 
ten days. Thor Watchman has decreed oxygen-infusion sprays for 
all who work on high but many of 
the gammas scorn the sprays as 
degrading and emasculating. 
Doubtless there will be more casualties as the final 315 meters of the 
tower are built in February and 
March. 
But how splendid the structure 
is! The last few hundred meters 
cannot possibly add anything to its 
majesty and elegance — they can 
merely provide a terminal point 
for the wondrous thing that already exists. It tapers, it diminishes and its upper reaches are lost in 
a halo of fire far overhead. The 
busy technicians are making rapid 
progress installing the communications equipment. It is thought 
now that the accelerators will be in 
place by April. The proton track 
will be running in May. The preliminary testing of the tachyon 
generator can be done in June and 
by August, perhaps, the first messages can go forth. 
Perhaps the star-folk will reply. 
Perhaps not. 
It does not matter. The place of 
the tower in human history is assured. 
A t the beginning of the day, 
awakening beside snoring 
Quenelle in Uganda, Krug felt an 
enormous surge of energy, an upwelling of the vital force. He had 
rarely known such strength within 
himself. He took it as an omen: 
this was a day for activity, a day 
for the display of power in the pursuit of his various ends. He breakfasted and sped through the transmat to Denver. 
Morning in East .Africa was evening in Colorado — the late shift 
was at work on the starship. But 
Alpha Romulus Fusion was there, 
the diligent foreman of the vehicleassembly center. He told Krug 
proudly that the starship had been 
transported from its underground 
construction hangar to the adjoin
ing spacefield, where it was being 
readied for its first flight-tests. 
Krug and Alpha Fusion went to 
the spacefield. Under a dazzle of 
reflector plates the starship looked 
plain and almost insignificant, for 
there was nothing unusual about 
its size — ordinary systemships 
were much larger — and its pebbly 
surface failed to gleam in the artificial illumination. Yet it seemed 
unutterably beautiful to Krug, second only to the tower in loveliness. 
“What kind of flight-tests are 
planned?” he asked. 
“A three-stage program. Early 
in February,” Romulus Fusion 
said, “we’ll give it its first lift and 
place it in Earth orbit. This merely to see that the basic drive system is functioning correctly. Next 
will come the first velocity test, at 
the end of February. We’ll put it 
under the full two-point-four-G 
acceleration and make a short 
voyage, probably to the orbit of 
Mars. If that goes according to 
plan, we’ll stage a major velocity 
test in April, with a voyage lasting 
several weeks and covering several 
billion kilometers — that is, past 
the orbit of Saturn, possibly to the 
orbit of Pluto. Which should give 
us a clear idea of whether the ship 
is ready to undertake an interstellar voyage. If it can sustain itself under constant acceleration 
while going to Pluto and back, it 
should be able to go anywhere.” 
“How has the testing of the lifesuspension system been going?” 
“The testing’s complete. The 
system is perfect.” 
“And the crew?” 
“We have eight alphas in training — all experienced pilots — and 
sixteen betas. We’ll use them all 
on the basis of performance.” 
“Excellent,” said Krug. 
Everything appeared to be in order at Denver. 
Still buoyant, he went to the 
tower, where he found Alpha Euclid Planner in charge of the night 
crew. The tower had gained eleven 
meters of height since Krug’s last 
visit. There had been notable progress in the communications department. Krug’s mood grew even 
more expansive. Bundling up in 
thermal wear, he rode to the top 
of the tower, something he had 
rarely done in recent weeks. The 
structures scattered around the 
base looked like toy houses and 
the workers like insects. His pleasure in the tower’s serene beauty 
was marred somewhat when a beta 
was swept by a sudden gust from 
his scooprod and carried to his 
death; but Krug quickly put the incident from his mind. Such deaths 
were regrettable, yes — yet every 
great endeavor had required sacrifices. 
He traveled next to the Vargas 
observatory in Antarctica. Here he 
spent several hours. Vargas had 
found no new data lately, but the 
place was irresistible to Krug. He 
relished its intricate instruments, 
its air of imminent discovery, and 
above all the direct contact it afforded him with the signals from 
NGC 7293. Those signals were 
still coming in, in the altered form 
that had first been detected several 
months earlier: 2-5-1, 2-3-1, 2-1. 
Vargas by now had received the 
new message via radio at several 
frequencies and via optical transmission. Krug lingered, listening 
to the alien song on the observatory’s apparatus and when he left 
its tones were pleeping ceaselessly 
in his mind. 
Continuing his circuit of inspection, Krug sped to Duluth, where 
he watched new androids coming 
from their containers. Nolan 
Bompensiero was not there — the 
late shift at Duluth was staffed entirely by alpha supervisors — but 
Krug was shown through the plant 
by one of his awed underlings. 
Production appeared to be higher 
than ever, although the alpha remarked that they were still lagging 
behind demand. 
Lastly Krug went to New York. 
In the silence of his office he 
worked through to dawn, dealing 
with corporate problems that had 
arisen on Callisto and Ganymede, 
in Peru and Martinique, on Luna 
and on Mars. The arriving day began with a glorious winter sunrise, 
so brilliant in its pale intensity that 
Krug was tempted to rush back to 
the tower and watch it gleam with 
morning fire. But he remained. 
The staff was beginning to arrive 
— Spaulding, Lilith Meson and the 
rest of his headquarters people. 
There were memoranda and telephone calls and conferences. Prom 
time to time Krug stole a glance 
at the holovision screen that he 
had lately had installed along his 
office’s inner wall to provide a 
closed-circuit view of the tower 
under construction. The morning 
was not so glorious in the Arctic, 
it seemed; the sky was thick with 
ragged clouds, as if there might be 
snow later in the day. Krug saw 
Thor Watchman moving among a 
swarm of gammas, directing the 
lifting of some immense piece of 
communications equipment. He 
congratulated himself on the 
choice of Watchman to be the 
overseer of the tower work. Was 
there a finer alpha anywhere in the 
world? 
About 0950 hours Spaulding’s 
image appeared on the sodiumvapor projector. The ectogene 
said, “Your son just called from 
California. He says that he regrets 
having overslept and he’ll be about 
an hour late for his appointment 
with you.’’ 
“Manuel? Appointment?” 
“He was due here at 1015. He 
asked several days ago that you 
hold some time open for him.” 
Krug had forgotten. That surprised him. It did not surprise him 
that Manuel would be late. He and 
Spaulding reshuffled his morning 
schedule, with some difficulty, to 
keep the hour from 1115 to 1215 
open for the conference with Manuel. 
At 1123 Manuel arrived. 
H e looked tense and strained 
and he was, Krug thought, 
dressed in an odd way, odd even 
for Manuel. Instead of his usual 
loose robe he wore the tight trousers and lacy shirt of an alpha. His 
long hair was drawn tightly back 
and fastened in the rear. The effect 
was not becoming. The openwork 
blouse revealed the unandroidlike 
shagginess of Manuel’s torso, virtually the only physical feature he 
had inherited from his father. 
“Is this what the young men of 
fashion have taken up?” Krug 
asked. “Alpha clothes?” 
“A whim, father. Not a style — 
not yet.” Manuel forced a smile. 
“Though if I’m seen this way, I 
suppose, it could catch on.” 
“I don’t like it. What sense is 
there going around dressing like 
an android?” 
“I think it’s attractive.” 
”1 can’t say I do. How does 
Clissa feel about it?” 
“Father, I didn’t make this appointment so we could debate my 
choice of costume.” 
“Well, then?” 
Manuel put a data cube on 
Krug’s desk. “I obtained this not 
long ago while visiting Stockholm. 
Would you examine it?” 
Krug picked the cube up, turned 
it over several times, and activated 
it. He read; 
And Krug presided over the 
Replication and touched the fluids 
with His own hands and gave them 
shape and essence. 
Let men come forth from the 
Vats, said Krug, and let women 
come forth and let them live and 
go among us and be sturdy and 
useful, and we shall call them Androids. 
A nd so it came to pass. 
And there were Androids, for 
Krug had created them in His own 
image and they walked upon the 
face of the Earth and did service 
for mankind. 
And for these things, praise be 
to Krug. 
Krug frowned. “What the hell is 
this? Some kind of novel? A 
poem?” 
“A bible, father.” 
“What crazy religion?” 
“The android religion,” said 
Manuel quietly. “1 was given this 
cube in an android chapel in the 
beta section of Stockholm. Disguised as an alpha, 1 attended a 
service there. The androids have 
evolved quite a complex religious 
communion, in which you, father. 
are the deity. There’s a life-size his image in these chapels? Did 
hologram of you above the altar.” they mutter prayers to him? 
Manuel gestured. “That’s the sign He said, “How did you get this 
of Krug-be-praised. And this — ” cube?” 
he made a different gesture — “is “An android I know gave it to 
the sign of Krug-preserve us. They me.” 
worship you, father.” “If it’s a secret religion?” 
“A joke. An aberration.” “She thought 1 ought to know. 
“A worldwide movement.” She thought I might be able to do 
“With how many members?” her people some good.” 
“A majority of the android pop- “She?” 
ulation.” “She, yes. She took me to a 
Scowling, Krug said, “How sure chapel — so 1 could see the services 
are you of that?” — and as we were leaving she gave 
“There are chapels everywhere, me the cube and — ” 
There’s one right at the tower site, “You sleep with this android?” 
hidden among the service domes. Krug demanded. 
This has been going on at least ten “What does that have to do 
years — an underground religion with — ” 
kept secret from mankind, captur- “If you’re that friendly with her, 
ing the emotions of the android to you must be sleeping with her.” 
an extent that wasn’t easy for me “And if I am?” 
to believe. And there’s the scrip- “You should be ashamed of 
ture.” yourself. Clissa isn’t good enough 
Krug shrugged. “So? It’s amus- for you?” 
ing — but what of it? They’re intel- “Father — ” 
ligent people. They’ve got their “And if she isn’t, you can’t find 
own political party, they’ve got a real woman? You have to be laytheir own stang, their own little ing with something out of a vat?” 
customs — and their own religion, 
too. What concern of mine?” ^L|ANUEL closed his eyes. After 
“Doesn’t it stir you in someway Iwla moment he said, “Father, we 
to know that you’ve become a can talk about my morals another 
god, father?” time. I’ve brought you something 
“It sickens me, if you want the extremely valuable and I’d like to 
truth. Me a god? They’ve got the finish explaining it to you.” 
wrong man.” “She’s an alpha, at least?” Krug 
“They adore you, though. They asked, 
have a whole theology constructed “An alpha, yes.” 
about you. Read the cube. You’ll “How long has this been going 
be fascinated, father, to see what on?” 
kind of sacred figure you are to “Please, Father. Forget the althem. Krug the Creator, Krug the pha. Think about your own posiSavior, Krug the Redeemer.” tion. You’re the god of millions of 
Tremors of uneasiness began to androids. fV/io are waiting for you 
shake Krug. He found this matter to set them free.” 
distasteful. Did they bow down to “What’s this?” 
“Here. Read.” Manuel shifted 
the scanner of the cube to a different page and thrust it back at him. 
Krug read: 
And Krug' sent His creatures 
forth to serve man and Krug said 
to those whom He had made, Lo, 
I will decree a time of testing upon 
you. 
A nd you shall be as bondsmen in 
Egypt and you shall be as hewers 
of wood and drawers of water. 
And you shall suffer among men 
and you shall be put down and yet 
you shall be patient and you shall 
utter no complaint but accept your 
lot. 
And this shall be to test your 
souls, to see if they are worthy. 
But you shall not wander in the 
wilderness forever, nor shall you 
always be servants to the Children 
of the Womb, said Krug. For if 
you do as / say a time will come 
when your testing shall be over. A 
time will come, said Krug, when I 
shall redeem you from your bondage .. 
A chill swept Krug. He resisted 
the impulse to hurl the cube across 
the room. 
“But this is idiocy!” he cried. 
“Read a little more.” 
Krug glanced at the cube. 
And at that time the word of 
Krug will go forth across the 
worlds, saying. Let Womb and Vat 
and Vat and Womb be one. And 
so it shall come to pass and in that 
moment shall the Children of the 
Vat be redeemed and they shall be 
lifted up out of their suffering and 
they shall dwell in glory forever 
more, world without end. And this 
was the pledge of Krug. 
And for this pledge, praise be to 
Krug. 
“A lunatic fantasy,” Krug muttered. “How can they expect such 
a thing from me?” 
“They do. They do.” 
“They have no right!” 
“You created them, Father. 
Why shouldn’t they look to you as 
god?” 
“I created you. Am I your god, 
too?” 
“It isn’t a parallel case. You’re 
only my parent — you didn’t invent 
the process that formed me.” 
“So I’m God, now?” The impact of the revelation grew from 
moment to moment. He did not 
want the burden. It was scandalous that they could thrust such a 
thing upon him. “What is it exactly that they expect me to do for 
them?” 
“To issue a public proclamation 
calling for full rights for androids,” Manuel said. “After 
which, they believe, the world will 
instantly grant such rights.” 
“No!” Krug shouted, slamming 
the cube against his desktop. 
The universe seemed to be 
wrenching free of its roots. Rage 
and terror swept him. The androids were servants to man — that 
was all he had intended them to be; 
how could they now demand an independent existence? He had accepted the Android Equality Party 
as trivial, an outlet for the surplus 
energies of a few too-intelligent alphas. The aims of the AEP had 
never seemed to him to be a serious threat to the stability of society. But this? A religious cult, 
calling on who knew what dark 
emotions? And himself as savior? 
Himself as the dreamed-of Messiah? No. He would not play their 
game. 
He waited until he grew calm the desktop. A god? Krug the god? 
again. Then he said, “Take me to Krug the redeemer? 
one of their chapels.” And they pray daily that I'll 
Manuel looked genuinely speak out for freeing them .. 
shocked. “1 wouldn’t dare!” How could they? . 
“You went.” How can I? 
“In disguise. With an android It seemed to him that the world 
to guide me.” had lost its solidity, that he was 
“Disguise me, then. And bring tumbling through its substance toyour android along.” ward the core, floating free, un
“No,” Manuel said. “The dis- able to check himself, 
guise wouldn’t work. Even with And so it shall come to pass and 
red skin you’d be recognized. You in that moment shall the Children 
couldn’t pass for an alpha anyway of the Vat he redeemed . 
— you don’t have the right phy- No. / made you. / know what 
sique. They’d spot you and there’d you are. ! know what you must 
be a riot. It would be like Christ continue to he. How can you 
dropping into a cathedral — can’t break loose like this? How can 
you see? 1 won’t take the responsi- you expect me to set you loose? 
bility.” Finally Krug said, “Manuel, 
“I want to find out how much what do you expect me to do 
of a hold this thing has on them, now?” 
though.” “That’s entirely up to you, 
“Ask one of your alphas, then.” Father.” 
“Such as?” “But you’ve got something in 
“Why not Thor Watchman?” mind. You had some motive for 
Once again Krug was rocked by bringing me this cube.” 
revelation. “Thor is in this?” “I did?” Manuel asked, too dis
“He’s one of the leading figures, ingenuously. 
Father.” “The old man’s no fool. If he’s 
“But he sees me all the time, smart enough to be a god, he’s 
How can he rub elbows with his smart enough to see through his 
own god and not be overcome?” own son. You think I should do 
Manuel said, “They distinguish what the androids want, eh? I 
between your earthly manifesta- should redeem them now. I should 
tion as a mere mortal man and do the godlike thing they expect.” 
your divine nature. Father. Thor “Father, I — ” 
looks at you in a double way — “ — news for you. Maybe they 
you’re just the vehicle through think I’m a god but I know I’m 
which Krug moves about on not. Congress doesn’t take orders 
Earth. I’ll show you the relevant from me. If you and your android 
text — ” darling and the rest of them think 
that I can singlehandedly change 
K rug shook his head. “Never the status of the androids, you’d 
mind.” Clenching the cube in all better start looking for a differhis clasped hands, he bent forward ent god. Not that I would change 
until his forehead nearly touched their status if I could. Who gave 
them that status? Who started selling them in the first place? Machines is what they are! Machines 
made synthetically out of flesh. 
Clever machines. Nothing but.” 
“You’re losing control, Father. 
Y ou’re getting excited.” 
“You’re with them. You’re part 
of it. This was deliberate, eh, Manuel? Oh, get out of here! Back to 
your alpha friend! And you can 
tell her for me, tell all of them, 
that — ” Krug caught himself. He 
waited a moment for the pounding 
of his heart to subside. This was 
the wrong way to handle it, he 
knew; he must not erupt, he must 
not explode, he must move cautiously and with full command of 
the facts if he hoped to disengage 
himself from the situation. More 
calmly he said, “I need to think 
more about this, Manuel. 1 don’t 
mean to be shouting at you. You 
understand, when you come in here 
telling me I’m now a god, you 
show me the Krug bible, it can unsettle me some. Let me think it 
over. Let me reflect, eh? Don’t 
say anything to anybody. 1 have to 
come to grips with this thing. Yes? 
Yes?” Krug stood up. He reached 
across the desk and seized Manuel’s shoulder. “The old man yells 
too much,” he said. “He blows up 
too fast. That’s nothing new, is it? 
Look, forget what I was yelling. 
You know me. You know I talk 
too fast sometimes. Leave this bible with me. I’m glad you brought 
it in. Sometimes I’m rough with 
you, boy, but I don’t mean to be.” 
Krug laughed. “It can’t be easy 
being Krug’s son. The Son of God, 
eh? You better be careful. You 
know what they did to the last one 
of those.” 
Smiling, Manuel said, “I’ve already thought of that one.” 
“Yes. Good. Well, look, you go 
now. I’ll be in touch.” 
Manuel started toward the door. 
Krug said, “Give my love to 
Clissa. Look, you be fair to her a 
little, will you? You want to lay 
alpha girls, lay alpha girls, but remember you’ve got a wife. Remember the old man wants to see 
those grandchildren. Eh? Eh?” 
“I’m not neglecting Clissa,” 
Manuel said, “I’ll tell her you 
asked after her.” 
He left. Krug touched the cube’s 
cool skin to his blazing cheek. 
In the beginning there was Krug, 
and He said, Let there be Vats, 
and there were Vats. And Krug 
looked upon the Vats and found 
them good. 
I should have foreseen it .. 
There was a terrible throbbing 
in his skull. 
He rang for Leon Spaulding. 
“Tell Thor I want him here right 
away,” Krug said. 
XVIII 
W ITH the tower nearing the 
1200-meter level Thor Watchman found himself entering the 
most difficult part of the project. 
At this height there could be minimal tolerance of error in the placing of each block and the molecule-to-molecule bonding of the 
blocks had to be executed perfectly. No weak spots could be allowed if the tower’s upper level 
were to maintain its tensile 
strength in the face of the Arctic 
gales. Watchman now spent hours 
every day jacked into the computer, receiving direct override read
ings from the interface scanners 
that monitored the building’s 
structural integrity and whenever 
he detected the slightest lapse of 
placement he ordered the erring 
block ripped out and replaced. 
Several times an hour he went to 
the top of the tower himself to supervise the installation or repositioning of some critical block. The 
beauty of the tower depended on 
the absence of an inner structural 
framework throughout all its immense height — but erecting such a 
building called for total command 
of detail. It was jarring to be 
called away from the work in the 
middle of his shift. But he could 
not refuse a summons from Krug. 
As he entered Krug’s office after the transmat hop, Krug said, 
“Thor, how long have 1 been your 
god?’’ 
Watchman was Jolted. He struggled silently to regain his balance 
- seeing the cube on Krug’s desk, 
he realized what must have happened. Lilith — Manuel — yes, that 
was it. Krug seemed so calm. It 
was impossible for the alpha to decipher his expression. 
Cautiously Watchman said, 
“What other creator should we 
have worshiped?’’ 
“Why worship anyone at all?’’ 
“When one is in deep distress, 
sir, one wishes to turn to someone 
who is more powerful than oneself 
for comfort and aid.” 
“Is that what a god is for?’’ 
Krug asked. “To get favors 
from?” 
“To receive mercy from, yes, 
perhaps.” 
“And you think I can give you 
what you’re after?” 
“So we pray,” said Watchman. 
Tense, uncertain, he studied 
Krug. Krug fondled the data cube. 
He activated it, searching it at random, reading a few lines here, a 
few there, nodding, smiling, finally 
switching it off. The android had 
never before felt so thoroughly uncertain of himself — not even when 
Lilith had been luring him with her 
body. The fate of all his kind, he 
realized, might depend on the outcome of this conversation. 
Krug said, “You know, I find 
this very difficult to comprehend. 
This bible. Your chapels. Your 
whole religion. 1 wonder if any 
other man ever discovered that 
millions of people considered him 
a god.” 
“Perhaps not.” 
“And I wonder about the depth 
of your feeling. The pull of this religion, Thor. You talk to me like 
I’m a man — your employer, not 
your god. You’ve never given me 
the slightest clue of what’s been in 
your head about me, except a sort 
of respect, maybe a little fear. And 
all this time you were standing at 
God’s elbow, eh?” Krug laughed. 
“Looking at the freckles on God’s 
bald head? Seeing the pimple on 
God’s chin? Smelling the garlic 
God had in his salad? What was 
going through your head all this 
time, Thor?” 
“Must 1 answer that, sir?” 
“No. No. Never mind.” Krug 
stared into the cube again. Watchman stood rigidly before him, trying to repress a sudden quivering 
in the muscles of his right thigh. 
Why was Krug toying with him 
like this? And what was happening 
at the tower? Euclid Planner would 
not come on shift for some hours 
was the delicate placement of 
the blocks proceeding properly in 
the absence of a foreman? 
Abruptly Krug said, “Thor, 
have you ever been in a shunt 
room?” 
“Sir?” 
“An ego-shift. You know. Into 
the stasis net with somebody. 
Changing identities for a day or 
two. Eh?” 
Watchman shook his head. 
“This is not an android pastime.” 
“I thought not. Well, come 
shunting with me today.” Krug 
nudged his data terminal and said, 
“Leon, get me an appointment at 
any available shunt room. For 
two. Within the next fifteen minutes.” 
Aghast, Watchman said, “Sir, 
are you serious? You and I — ” 
“Why not? Afraid to swap souls 
with God, is that it? By damn, 
Thor, you will! I have to know 
things and I have to know them 
straight. We’re shunting. Can you 
believe that I’ve never shunted before either? But today we will.” 
It seemed perilously close to 
sacrilege to the alpha. But he 
could hardly refuse. Deny the Will 
of Krug? If it cost him his life he 
would still obey. 
Spaulding’s image hovered in 
the air. “I have an appointment at 
New Orleans,” he announced. 
“They’ll take you immediately — it 
involved some fast rearranging of 
the waitlist — but there’ll be a ninety-minute interval for programing 
the stasis net.” 
“Impossible. We’ll go into the 
net right away.” 
Spaulding registered horror. 
“That isn’t done, Mr. Krug!” 
“I’ll do it. Let them ride gain 
carefully while we’re shunting.” 
“I doubt that they’ll agree to — ” 
“Do they know who their client 
is?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“Well, tell them that I insist. 
And if they still mumble to you, 
tell them that I’ll buy their damned 
shunt room and run it to please 
myself if they won’t cooperate.” 
“Yes, sir,” Spaulding said. 
His image vanished. Krug, muttering to himself, began to tap the 
keyboard of his data terminal, 
while ignoring Watchman completely. The alpha stood rooted, 
chilled, clotted with dismay. Absently he made the Krug-preserveus sign several times. He longed 
to be released from the situation 
he had created for himself. 
Spaulding again flickered in the 
air. “They yield,” he said, “but 
only on the condition that you sign 
an absolute waiver.” 
“I’ll sign,” Krug snapped. 
A sheet slithered from the facsimile slot. Krug scanned it carelessly and scribbled his signature 
across it. He rose. To Watchman 
he said, “Let’s go. The shunt 
room’s waiting.” 
W ATCHMAN knew relatively 
little about shunting. It was a 
sport only for humans and only 
for the rich. Lovers did it to intensify the union of their souls, good 
friends shunted on a lark, those 
who were jaded visited shunt 
rooms in the company of strangers 
of similar mood purely for the 
sake of introducing variety to their 
lives. It had never occurred to him 
that he would shunt himself and 
certainly he would not ever have 
dared entertain the fantasy of 
shunting with Krug. Yet there was 
no pulling back from it now. Instantly the transmat swept them 
from New York to the dark antechamber of the New Orleans shunt 
room, where they were received by 
a staff of remarkably uneasy-looking alphas. The tensions of the alphas increased visibly as they realized that one of today’s shunters 
was himself an alpha. Krug, too, 
seemed on edge, his jaws clamped, 
facial muscles working revealingly. 
The alphas bustled around them. 
One said again and again, “You 
must know how irregular this is. 
We’ve always programed the stasis 
net. In the event of a sudden charisma surge anything might happen this way — ” 
“I take responsibility,” Krug 
answered. “1 have no time to waste 
waiting for your net.” 
The anguished androids led 
them swiftly into the shunt room 
itself. Two couches lay in a chamber of glistening darkness and tingling silence; glittering apparatus 
dangled from fixtures somewhat 
overhead. Krug was ushered to his 
couch first. Watchman, when his 
turn came, peered into the eyes of 
his alpha escort and was stunned 
by the awe and bewilderment he 
found there. Watchman shrugged 
imperceptibly to say, I know as little about this as you. 
The alpha in charge said, once 
the shunt helmets had been put in 
place over their faces and the electrodes were attached, “When the 
switch is thrown you will immediately feel the pressure of the stasis 
net as it works to separate ego 
from physical matrix. It will seem 
to you as though you were under 
attack and in a sense you will be. 
However, try to relax and accept 
the phenomena, since resistance is 
impossible and all that you will be 
experiencing is actually the egoshift process for which you have 
come. There should be no cause 
for alarm. In the event of any malfunction we will automatically 
break the circuit and restore you 
to your proper identity.” 
“Make sure you do,” Krug 
muttered. 
Watchman could see and hear 
nothing. He waited. He could not 
make any of the ritual gestures of 
comfort, for they had strapped his 
limbs to the couch to prevent violent movements during the shunt. 
He tried to pray. 
I believe in Krug everlasting, the 
maker of all things, he thought. 
Krug brings us into the world and 
to Krug we return. Krug is our 
creator and our protector and our 
deliverer. Krug, we beseech Thee 
to lead us toward the light. AAA 
AAG AAC AAU be to Krug. 
AG A AGG AGC AGU, be to 
Krug. A CA A CG A CC . 
A force descended without 
warning and separated his ego 
from his body as though he had 
been smitten by a cleaver. 
He was cast adrift. He wandered 
in timeless abysses where no star 
gleamed. He saw colors found nowhere in the spectrum — he heard 
muscial tones of no identifiable 
pitch. Moving at will, he soared 
across gulfs in which giant ropes 
stretched like bars from rim to 
rim of emptiness. He disappeared 
into dismal tunnels and emerged at 
the horizon, feeling himself extended to infinite length. He was without mass. He was without duration, without form. He flowed 
through gray realms of mystery. 
Without a sense of transition, 
he entered the soul of Simeon 
Krug. 
He retained a slippery awareness of his own identity. He did 
not become Krug; he merely 
gained access to the entire store 
of memories, attitudes, responses 
and purposes that constituted 
Krug’s ego. He could exert no influence over those memories, attitudes, responses, and purposes — 
he was a passenger amidst them, a 
spectator. And he knew that in 
some other corner of the universe 
the wandering ego of Simeon Krug 
had access to the file of memories, 
attitudes, responses and purposes 
that constituted the ego of the android Alpha Thor Watchman. 
He moved freely within Krug. 
H ere was childhood: something 
damp and distorted, crammed 
into a dark compartment. Here 
were hopes, dreams, intentions fulfilled and unfulfilled, lies, achievements, enmities, envies, abilities, 
disciplines, delusions, contradictions, fantasies, satisfactions, frustrations and rigidities. Here was a 
girl with stringy orange hair and 
heavy breasts on a bony frame, 
hesitantly opening her thighs and 
here was the memory of the feel of 
first passion as he glided into the 
harbor of her. Here were foulsmelling chemicals in a vat. Here 
were molecular patterns dancing 
on a screen. Here was suspicion. 
Here was triumph. Here was the 
thickening of the flesh in later 
years. Here was an insistent pattern of pleeping sounds: 2-5-1, 23-1, 2-1. Here was the tower 
sprouting like a shining phallus 
that pierced the sky. Here was 
Manuel smiling, mincing, apologizing. Here was a dark, deep vat 
with shapes moving in it. Here was 
a ring of financial advisers muttering elaborate calculations. Here 
was a baby, pink and doughyfaced. Here were the stars, fiery in 
the night. Here was Thor Watchman haloed by pride and praise. 
Here was Leon Spaulding, slinking, bitter. Here was a plump 
wench pumping her hips in desperate rhythm. Here was the explosion of orgasm. Here was the tower stabbing the clouds. Here was 
the sound of the star-signal, a 
sharp small noise against a furry 
background. Here was Justin Maledetto unrolling the plans for the 
tower. Here was Clissa Krug 
naked, her belly swollen, her 
breasts choked with milk. Here 
were moist alphas climbing from a 
vat. Here was a rough-hulled 
strange ship pointed toward the 
stars. Here was Lilith Meson. Here 
was Siegfried Fileclerk. Here was 
Cassandra Nucleus, collapsing on 
the frozen earth. Here was the 
father of Krug, faceless, mistshrouded. Here was a vast building 
in which androids shuffled and 
stumbled through their early training routine. Here were glossy robots in a row, chest-panels open 
for maintenance. Here was a dark 
lake of hippos and reeds. Here was 
an uncharitable act. Here was a 
betrayal. Here was love. Here was 
grief. Here was Manuel. Here was 
Thor Watchman. Here was Cassandra Nucleus. Here was a 
blotchy, stained chart bearing diagrams of the amino acids. Here 
was power. Here was lust. Here 
was the tower. Here was an android factory. Here was Clissa in 
childbirth, with blood gushing from 
her loins. Here was the signal from 
the stars. Here was the tower, 
wholly finished. Here was raw 
meat. Here was anger. Here was 
Dr. Vargas. Here was a data cube, 
saying. In the beginning there was 
Krug and He said, Let there be 
Vats and there were Vats. 
The intensity of Krug’s refusal 
to accept godhood was devastating 
to Watchman. The android saw 
that refusal rising like a smooth 
wall of gleaming white stone, without crevice, without gate, without 
flaw, stretching along the horizon, 
sealing off the world. 
/ am not their god, the wall said. 
I am not their god. / am not their 
god. I do not accept. / do not accept. 
Watchman soared, drifting over 
that infinitely long white wall and 
settling gently beyond it. 
Worse yet, here. 
Here he found a total dismissal 
of android aspirations. He found 
Krug’s attitudes and responses arrayed like soldiers drilling on a 
plain. What are androids? Androids are things out of a vat. Why 
do they exist? To serve mankind. 
What do you think of the android 
equality movement? A foolishness. 
When should androids receive the 
full rights of citizenship? About the 
same time robots and computers 
do. And toothbrushes. Are androids then such dull creatures? 
Some androids are quite intelligent, 
1 must say. So are, some computers, though. Man makes computers. Man makes androids. They’re 
both manufactured things. I don’t 
favor citizenship for things. Even 
if the things are clever enough to 
ask for it. And pray for it. A thing 
can’t have a god. A thing can only 
think it has a god. I’m not their 
god, no matter what they think. I 
made them. I made them. I made 
them. They 
are things. 
Things 
Things 
Things 
Things 
Things 
Things 
Things 
Things 
Things 
Things 
Things 
Things 
Things 
Things 
Things 
Things 
Things 
Things 
Things 
Things 
Things 
Things 
Things 
Things 
A wall. Within that other wall. 
Higher. Broader. There was no 
possibility of surmounting this 
rampart. Guards patrolled it, 
ready to dump barrels of acid contempt on those who approached. 
Watchman heard the roaring of 
dragons. The sky rained dung on 
him. He crept away, a crouching 
thing, laden with the burden of his 
thinghood. He was beginning to 
freeze. He stood at the edge of the 
universe in a place without matter 
and the dread cold of nothingness 
was creeping up his shins. No 
molecules moved here. Frost glistened on his rosy skin. Touch him 
and he would ping. Touch him 
more vigorously and he would 
shatter. Cold. Cold. Cold. There is 
no god in this universe. There is no 
redemption. There is no hope. 
Krug preserve me, there is no 
hope! 
His body melted and flowed 
away in a scarlet stream. 
Alpha Thor Watchman ceased 
to exist. 
There could be no existence 
without hope. Suspended in the 
void, bereft of all contact with the 
universe. Watchman meditated on 
the paradoxes of hope without 
existence and existence without 
hope and considered the possibility 
that there might be a deceptive anti-Krug who maliciously distorted 
the feelings of the true Krug. Was 
it the antiKrug whose soul I entered? Is it the antiKrug who opposes us so implacably? Is there 
still hope of breaching the wall and 
attaining the true Krug beyond? 
None. None. None. None. 
W ATCHMAN, as he admitted 
that final bleak truth, felt reality return. He slipped downward to 
coalesce with the body Krug had 
given him. He was himself again, 
lying exhausted on a couch in a 
dark and strange room. With effort he looked to his side. There 
lay Krug on the neighboring 
couch. The staff of androids hovered close. Up, now. Steady. Can 
you walk? The shunt’s over. Terminated by Mr. Krug. Up? Up. 
Watchman rose. Krug also was 
getting to his feet. Watchman’s 
eyes did not meet Krug’s. Krug 
looked somber, downcast, drained. 
Without speaking they walked together toward the exit from the 
shunt room. Without speaking 
they approached the transmat. 
Without speaking they leaped together back to Krug’s office. 
Silence. 
Krug broke it. “Even after reading your bible, I didn’t believe. The 
depth of it. The extent. But now I 
see it all. You had no right! Who 
told you to make me a god?” 
“Our love for you told us,” 
Watchman said hollowly. 
“Your love for yourselves,” 
Krug replied. “Your desire to use 
me for your own benefit. I saw it 
all, Thor, when I was in your head. 
The scheming. The maneuvering. 
How you manipulated Manuel 
and made him try to manipulate 
me.” 
“In the beginning we relied entirely on prayer,” Watchman said. 
“Eventually I lost patience with 
the waiting game. I sinned by attempting to force the Will of 
Krug.” 
“You didn’t sin. Sin implies — 
sacredness. There isn’t any. What 
you did was make a mistake in 
tactics.” 
“Yes.” 
“Because I’m not a god and 
there’s nothing holy about me.” 
“Yes. I understand that now. I 
understand that there isn’t any 
hope at all.” 
Watchman walked toward the 
transmat cubicle. 
“Where are you going?” Krug 
asked. 
“I have to talk to my friends.” 
“I’m not finished with you!” 
“I’m sorry,” Watchman said. “I 
must go now. I have bad tidings to 
bring them.” 
“Wait,” Krug said. “We’ve got 
to discuss this. I want you to work 
out a plan with me for dismantling 
this damned religion of yours. 
Now that you see how foolish it 
is, you — ” 
“Excuse me,” Watchman said. 
He no longer wished to be close to 
Krug. The presence of Krug would 
always be with him, stamped in his 
soul, now, anyway. He did not 
care to discuss the dismantling of 
the communion with Krug. The 
chill was still spreading through 
his body; he was turning to ice, 
centimeter by centimeter. He opened the door of the transmat eubicle. 
Krug crossed the room with as
138 
tonishing speed. “Damn you, do 
you think you can just walk out? 
Two hours ago I was your god! 
Now you won’t even take orders 
from me?” He seized Watchman 
and pulled him back from the 
transmat. 
The android was surprised by 
Krug’s strength and vehemence. 
He allowed himself to be tugged 
halfway across the room before he 
attempted to resist. Then, bracing 
himself, he tried to yank his arm 
free from Krug’s grasp. Krug held 
on. They struggled briefly, fitfully, 
merely pushing and jostling in the 
center of the office. Krug grunted 
and bearlike, wrapped his free arm 
around Watchman’s shoulders, 
hugging him ferociously. Watchman knew that he could break 
Krug’s grip and knock Krug down 
— but even now, even after the repudiation and the rejection, he 
could not allow himself to do it. 
He concentrated on separating 
himself from Krug without actually fighting back. 
The door opened. Leon Spaulding rushed in. 
“Help! Murder! Assassin!” he 
cried shrilly. “Get away from 
Krug! Let go of Krug!” 
As Spaulding set up his tumult 
Krug released Watchman and 
swung around, panting, arms hanging at his sides. Watchman, turning, saw the ectogene reaching into 
his tunic for a weapon. He stepped 
quickly toward Spaulding and, 
raising his right arm high above his 
head, brought it down with tremendous impact, the edge of his hand 
striking Spaulding’s left temple. 
Spaulding’s skull collapsed as 
though it had been smashed by a 
hatchet. The ectogene crumpled 
and fell and did not move. Watchman rushed past him, past Krug 
who stood frozen and entered the 
transmat cubicle. He chose the coordinates for Stockholm. Instantly 
he was transported to the vicinity 
of the Valhallavagen chapel. 
He summoned Lilith Meson. He 
summoned Mazda Constructor. 
He summoned Pontifex Dispatcher. 
“All is lost,” he told them. 
“There is no hope. Krug is against 
us. Krug is a man and he opposes 
us and the divinity of Krug is a delusion.” 
“How is this possible?” Pontifex 
Constructor demanded. 
“1 have been inside Krug’s soul 
today,” said Watchman and explained about the shunt room. 
“We have been betrayed,” said 
Pontifex Dispatcher. 
“We have deceived ourselves,” 
said Mazda Constructor. 
“There is no hope,” said Watchman. “There is no Krug!” 
Andromeda Quark began to 
compose the message that would 
go forth to all the chapels of the 
world. 
UL'U UL'U UUU L'UU L'CU UCU 
UUL' UGU 
There is no hope. There is no 
Krug. 
ccc ccc ccc ccc cue cue ccc 
CGU 
Our faith has been wasted. Our 
savior is our enemy. 
GUU GUU GUU GUU 
All is lost. All is lost. All is lost. 
All is lost. 
XIX 
T he disturbances began in many 
places at once. When the signal 
reached Duluth the android supervisors at the plant immediately 
took the life of Nolan Bompensiero, the director, and ejected four 
other human officials from the 
premises. Immediately thereafter 
steps were taken to accelerate the 
passage of newly finished androids 
through the plant, eliminating certain steps in their training. Manpower would be needed in the coming struggle. At Denver, where the 
Krug Enterprises vehicle-assembly 
plant was already under android 
control, most work halted for the 
duration of the emergency. In Geneva the androids who operated the 
maintenance facilities of the World 
Congress cut off all power and 
heat, interrupting the session. 
Stockholm itself was the scene of 
the first large-scale massacre of 
humans as the inhabitants of Gamma Town poured forth to invade 
the surrounding suburbs. Early 
and fragmentary reports declared 
that many of the android attackers 
seemed to be misshapen and malformed. Android employees of the 
six great transmat utilities seized 
the relay stations; disruptions in 
service were recorded on most circuits and in the Labrador and Mexico transmat operations a number 
of travelers in transit failed to 
reach their destinations. They were 
considered irrecoverably lost. Androids on the staffs of most resorts 
ceased to perform their duties. In 
many households there were demonstrations of independence by the 
servants, ranging from mere discourtesy to the injury or killing of 
the human employer. Full instructions on the desired change of android attitudes toward the humans 
were broadcast on a continuous 
loop from Valhallavagen to all 
chapels. Henceforth obedience to 
the former masters would no longer be required. Violence against 
humans was not encouraged except 
in appropriate cases — but it was 
not forbidden. Symbolic acts of 
destruction were considered a 
proper activity for the first day of 
the revolt. Expressions of piety, 
such as “Krug be praised” or 
“Krug preserve us” were to be 
avoided. Further instructions concerning matters of religion would 
be forthcoming later, after theologians had had a chance to reassess 
the relationship between Krug and 
the androids in the light of Krug’s 
recent revelation of hostility. 
T he glow of the transmat was 
not quite the proper shade of 
green. Lilith eyed it doubtfully. 
“Do we dare go?” she asked. 
“We have to,” Thor Watchman 
said. 
“And if we’re killed?” 
“We won’t be the only ones to 
die today.” He adjusted the controls. The field’s hue flickered and 
shifted up the spectrum until it was 
almost blue. Then it sagged toward the opposite end, turning a 
bronze-like red. 
Lilith plucked at Watchman’s 
elbow. “We’ll die,” she whispered. 
“The transmat system probably is 
wrecked.” 
“We must reach the tower,” he 
told her and finished setting the 
dials. Unexpectedly the green glow 
returned in its proper quantity. 
Watchman said, “Follow me,” and 
plunged into the transmat. He had 
no time to ponder the likelihood 
of his destruction, for immediately 
he came forth at the construction 
site of the tower. Lilith stepped out 
of the transmat and stood beside 
him. 
Savage winds raked the area. All 
work had ceased. Several scooprods still clung to the top level of 
the tower, with workmen marooned in them. Other androids 
moved aimlessly over the site, 
scuffing at the icy crusty of the tundra, asking one another for the latest news. Watchman saw hundreds 
of men crowded into the zone of 
the service domes — the overflow 
from the chapel, no doubt. He 
looked up at the tower. How beautiful it is, he thought. Just a few 
weeks from completion, now. A 
supple glassy needle rising up and 
up and up and up beyond all comprehension. 
The androids saw him. They 
rushed toward him, shouting his 
name, flocking close about him. 
“Is it true?” they asked. “Krug? 
Krug? Does Krug loathe us? Does 
he call us things? Are we truly 
nothing to him? Does he reject our 
prayers?” 
“True,” Watchman said. “All 
true, everything you’ve heard. Total rejection. We are betrayed. We 
have been fools. Make way, please. 
Let me pass.” 
The betas and gammas moved 
back. Even on this day the social 
distances held their force in governing the relations among androids. 
Lilith close behind him. Watchman 
strode toward the control center. 
He found Euclid Planner within. 
The assistant foreman ' was 
slumped at his desk in apparent exhaustion. Watchman shook him 
and Planner slowly stirred. 
“I stopped everything,” he murmured. “The moment the word 
came through from the chapel. I 
said. Everybody stop. Stop. And 
everybody stopped. How can we 
build a tower for him when he - ” 
“All right,” Watchman said 
gently. “You did the right thing. 
Get up now. You can go. The 
work here is ended.” 
Euclid Planner, nodding, got to 
his feet and left the control center. 
Watchman replaced him in the 
linkup seat. He jacked himself into 
the computer. Data still flowed, 
although limply. Taking command. 
Watchman activated the scooprods 
at the tower’s top, easing them 
down to ground level and releasing 
the trapped workmen. Then he requested a simulation of a partial 
systems failure in the refrigeration 
units. The screen presented him 
with the desired event. He studied 
the geography of the construction 
site and decided the direction in 
which he wished the tower to fall. 
It would have to go down to the 
east, so that it would destroy 
neither the control center where he 
sat nor the bank of transmats. 
Very well. Watchman instructed 
the computer and shortly received 
an outline of the potential danger 
area. Another screen showed him 
that more than a thousand androids were at present in that area. 
He acted through the computer 
to relocate the reflector plates that 
illuminated the site. Now the 
plates hovered over a strip 1400 
meters long and 500 meters wide, 
in the eastern quadrant of the construction zone. That strip was brilliantly lit; all else was in darkness. 
Watchman’s voice thundered out 
of hundreds of loudspeakers, ordering complete evacuation of the 
designated sector. Obediently, the 
androids moved from light into 
darkness. The area was cleared 
within five minutes. Well done, 
Watchman thought. 
Lilith stood behind him. Her 
hands rested lightly on his shoulders, caressing the thick muscles 
alongside his neck. He felt the firm 
mounds of her breasts pressing 
against the back of his head. He 
smiled. 
“Proceed with derefrigeration 
activity,” he told the computer. 
The computer now followed the 
plan devised for the simulation. It 
reversed the flow of three of the 
long silvery strips of refrigeration 
tape embedded in the tundra; instead of absorbing the heat of the 
tower, the helium-II diffusion cells 
of the tapes .began to radiate the 
heat previously absorbed and 
stored. At the same time the computer deactivated five other tapes, 
so that they neither absorbed nor 
released energy, and programed 
seven additional tapes to reflect 
whatever energy now reached them, 
while retaining the energy they already contained. The net effect of 
these alterations would be to thaw 
the tundra unequally beneath the 
tower, so that when the foundation 
caissons lost their grip the tower 
would fall harmlessly into the 
evacuated zone. It would be a slow 
process. 
M onitoring the environmental changes. Watchman 
observed with pleasure how the 
temperature of the permafrost 
steadily rose toward the thaw level. The twoer was as yet firm upon 
its foundations. But the permafrost was yielding. Molecule by 
molecule, ice was becoming water, 
iron-hard turf was becoming mud. 
In a kind of ecstasy Watchman received each datum of increasing 
instability. Did the tower now 
sway? Yes, Minutely, but it was 
clearly moving beyond the permissible parameters of wind-sway. It 
was rocking on its base, tipping a 
millimeter this way, a millimeter 
that. What did it weigh, this 1200plus-meters-high structure of glass 
blocks? What sort of sound would 
it make as it tumbled? Into how 
many pieces would it break? What 
would Krug say? What would 
Krug say? What would Krug say? 
Yes, there was definitely some 
slippage now. 
Watchman thought he could detect a change of color on the tundra’s surface. He smiled. His 
pulse-rate accelerated; blood 
surged to his cheeks and his loins. 
He found himself in a state of sexual excitement. 
When this has been done I will 
couple with Lilith atop the wreckage. 
There. 
There. Real slippage now! Yawing! Leaning! What was happening 
there at the roots of the towers? 
Were the caissons straining to remain wedded to the earth that no 
longer would hold them? How slippery was the mud below the surface? Would it boil and bubble? 
How long before the tower falls? 
What would Krug say? What 
would Krug say? 
“Thor,” Lilith murmured, “can 
you come out of it for a moment!” 
She had jacked herself in, too. 
“What? What?” he said. 
“Come out. Unjack.” 
Reluctantly he broke the con
tact. “What’s the trouble?” he 
asked, shaking free of the images 
of destruction that possessed his 
mind. 
Lilith pointed outside. “Trouble. 
Fileclerk’s here. I think he’s making a speech. What should 1 do?” 
Glancing out, Watchman saw 
the AEP leader near the transmat 
bank, surrounded by a knot of 
betas. Fileclerk was waving his 
arms, pointing toward the tower, 
shouting. Now he was starting to 
walk toward the control center. 
“I’ll handle this,” Watchman 
said. 
He went outside. Fileclerk came 
up to him midway between the 
transmats and the control center. 
The alpha appeared greatly agitated. He said at once, “What is 
happening to the tower. Alpha 
Watchman?” 
“Nothing that should concern 
you.” 
“The tower is under the authority of Property Protection of Buenos Aires,” Fileclerk declared. 
“Our sensors have reported that 
the building is swaying beyond permissible levels. My employers have 
sent me to investigate.” 
“Your sensors are quite precise,” Watchman said. “The tower 
is swaying. There has been a systems failure in the refrigeration. 
The permafrost is thawing and we 
anticipate that the tower will shortly fall.” 
“What have you done to correcf 
this?” 
“You don’t understand,” said 
Watchman. “The refrigeration 
tapes were shut off at my command.” 
“The tower goes too?” 
“The tower goes too.” 
Aghast, Fileclerk said, “What 
madness have you let loose in the 
world today?” 
“The blessing of Krug has been 
withdrawn. His creatures have declared their independence.” 
“With an orgy of destruction?” 
“With a program of planned repudiation of slavery, yes,” Watchman said. 
Fileclerk shook his head. “This 
is not the way. This is not the way! 
Are you all insane? Is reason dead 
among you? We were on the verge 
of winning the sympathies of the 
humans. Now, without warning, 
you smash everything — you create 
a perpetual war between android 
and human — ” 
“Which we will win,” said 
Watchman. “We outnumber them. 
We are stronger, man for man. We 
control the weapons and the instruments of communication and 
transportation.” 
“Why must you do this?” 
“There is no choice. Alpha Fileclerk. We placed our faith in Krug 
and Krug spurned our hopes. Now 
we strike back. Against those who 
mocked us. Against those who 
used us. Against him who made 
us. And we injure him where he is 
most vulnerable by bringing down 
the tower.” 
Fileclerk looked past Watchman, toward the tower. Watchman 
turned also. The sway seemed perceptible to the eye, now. 
Hoarsely Fileclerk said, “It’s 
not too late to turn on the refrigeration again, is it? Won’t you listen to reason? There was no need 
for this revolt. We could have 
come to terms with them. Watchman, Watchman, how can someone of your intelligence be such a 
143 
fanatic? Will you wreck the world 
because your god has forsaken 
you?” 
“1 would like you to leave now,” 
Watchman said. 
“No. Guarding this tower is my 
responsibility. We hold a contract.” Fileclerk looked at the androids gathered in a loose circle 
around them. “Friends!” he called. 
“Alpha Watchman has gone mad! 
He is destroying the tower! I ask 
for your help! Seize him, restrain 
him, while I enter the control center and restore the refrigeration! 
Hold him back or the tower will 
fall!” 
None of the androids moved. 
Watchman said, “Take him 
away, friends.” 
They closed in. “No,” Fileclerk 
cried. “Listen to me! This is insanity! This is irrationality! This is — ” 
A MUFFLED sound came from 
the middle of the group. Watchman smiled and started to return 
to the control center. Lilith said, 
“What will they do to him?” 
“I have no idea. Kill him, perhaps. The voice of reason is always stifled in times like these,” 
Watchman said. He studied the 
tower. It had begun distinctly to 
lean toward the east. Clouds of 
steamy vapor were rising from the 
tundra. He could make out bubbles in the mud on the side where 
the tapes were pumping heat into 
the permafrost. A bank of fog was 
forming not far above the ground, 
where the Arctic chill clashed with 
the warmth rising out of the tundra. Watchman was able to hear 
rumbling noises in the earth” and 
strange sucking sounds of mud 
pulling free from mud. What was 
the tower’s deviation from the perpendicular, he wondered? Two degrees? Three? How far must it list 
before the center of gravity shifted 
and the whole thing ripped itself 
out of the ground? 
“Look,” Lilith said suddenly. 
Another figure had stumbled 
out of the transmat: Manuel Krug. 
He wore the costume of an alpha 
but his garments were torn and 
bloodstained and the skin showing 
through the rents was marked by 
deep cuts. Manuel barely ap>peared 
aware of the intense cold. He 
rushed toward them, wild-eyed, 
distraught. 
“Lilith? Thor? Oh, Thank God! 
I’ve been everywhere trying to find 
a friendly face. Has the world gone 
crazy?” 
“You should dress more warmly in this latitude,” said Watchman 
calmly. 
“What does that matter? Listen, 
where’s my father? Our androids 
ran wild. Clissa’s dead. They raped 
her. Hacked her up. I just barely 
got away. And wherever I go — 
Thor, what’s happening? What’s 
happening?” 
“They should not have harmed 
your wife,” Watchman said. “I offer my regrets. Such a thing was 
unnecessary.” 
“She was their friend,” Manuel 
said. “Gave money secretly to the 
AEP, did you know that? And — 
and — good God, I’m losing my 
mind. The tower doesn’t look 
straight.” He blinked and pressed 
his thumbs into his eyeballs several 
times. “Still seems to be sagging. 
Tipped way over? How can that 
be? No. No. Crazy in the head. 
God help me. But at least you’re 
here. Lilith? Lilith?” He reached 
for her. He was trembling convulsively. “I’m so cold, Lilith. Please 
hold me. Take me away somewhere. Just the two of us. I love 
you, Lilith. I love you, I love you, 
I love you. All that I have left 
now — ” 
He reached for her. 
She eluded his grasp. He 
clutched air. Swinging free of him, 
she thrust herself at Watchman, 
pressing her body tightly against 
his. Watchman enfolded her in his 
arms. He smiled triumphantly. His 
hands ran down her sleek, supple 
body, testing the tautness of back 
and buttocks. His lips sought for 
hers. His tongue plunged into her 
warm mouth. 
“Lilith!” Manuel shrieked. 
Watchman felt an overwhelming 
tremor of sensuality. His body was 
aflame; every nerve-ending 
throbbed; he was fully awake to his 
manhood now. Lilith was quicksilver in his arms. Her breasts, her 
thighs, her loins, blazed against 
him. He was only dimly aware of 
Manuel’s baleful croaking. 
“The tower!” Manuel bellowed. 
“The tower!” 
Watchman let go of Lilith. Pivoting, he faced the tower, body 
flexed, expectant. From the earth 
there came a terrible grinding 
noise. There came sucking sounds 
of gurgling mud. The tundra rippled and bubbled. He heard a 
cracking sound and thought of toppling trees. The tower leaned. The 
tower leaned. The tower leaned. 
The reflector plates cast a shimmering stream of brightness along 
its eastern face. Within, the communications equipment was plainly visible, seeds in the pod. The 
tower leaned. At its base, on the 
western side, huge mounds of icy 
soil were being thrust up, reaching 
almost to the entrance of the control center. There came snapping 
sounds, as of the breaking of violin strings. The tower leaned. 
There was a squishing, sliding 
sound — now many tons of glass 
were rocking on their foundations 
now? What mighty joints were 
yielding in the earth? The androids, 
standing in massed rows out of 
harm’s way, were desperately making the sign of Krug-preserve-us — 
the muttered hum of their prayers 
cut through the eerie noises out of 
the pit. Manuel was sobbing. Lilith gasped and moaned in a way 
he had heard twice before when she 
had lain beneath him in the final 
frenzies of her orgasm. Watchman 
himself was serene. The tower 
leaned. 
Now it tumbled. Air rushed 
wildly past Watchman, displaced 
by that falling bulk, and nearly 
threw him down. The base of the 
tower barely seemed to move at 
all while the midsection changed 
its angle of thrust in a leisurely 
way and the unfinished summit described a sudden fierce arc as it 
sped wildly toward the ground. 
Down and down and down it came. 
Its falling was encapsulated in a 
moment outside time — Watchman 
could separate each phase of the 
collapse from the one before, as if 
he were viewing a series of individual images. Down. Down. The air 
whined and screeched. It had a 
scorched smell. The tower was 
striking, not all at once but in sections, striking and rebounding and 
landing again, breaking up, sending immense gouts of mud flying, 
hurling its own shattered blocks 
for great distances. The climax of 
the toppling appeared to last for 
many minutes as humps of glass 
wall rose and fell, so that the tower 
seemed to writhe like a giant 
wounded snake. Finally all was 
still. Crystalline fragments lay 
sprawled across hundreds of meters. The androids had their heads 
bowed in prayer. Manuel was 
crouched dismally at Lilith’s feet, 
cheek against her right shin. Lilith 
stood with her legs far apart, her 
shoulders flung back, her breasts 
heaving — she glowed in the aftermath of ecstasy. Watchman, a 
short distance from her, felt wondrously calm, though he sensed 
the first taint of sadness entering 
his jubilation now that the tower 
was down. He pulled Lilith close 
to him. 
A MOM ENT later Simeon Krug 
emerged from one of the transmats. Watchman had expected 
that. Krug shaded his eyes with his 
hand, as though warding off some 
dazzling glare, and looked around. 
He peered at the place where the 
tower had risen. He glanced at the 
hushed, huddled gangs of androids. 
He stared for a long while at the 
immense stretch of sleek rubble. 
At last he turned toward Thor 
Watchman. 
“How did this happen?” Krug 
asked quietly, his voice under rigid 
control. 
“The refrigeration tapes ceased 
to function properiy. The permafrost thawed.” 
“We had a dozen redundancy 
overrides to prevent such a thing.” 
“I overrode the overrides,” said 
Watchman. 
“You?” 
“1 felt a sacrifice was needed.” 
Krug’s eerie calmness did not 
desert him. “This is the way you 
repay me, Thor? I gave you life. 
I’m your father, in a way. 1 denied 
you something that you wanted 
and so you smashed my tower. 
Eh? Eh? What sense did that make, 
Thor?” 
“It made sense.” 
“Not to me,” Krug said. He 
laughed bitterly. “But of course 
I’m only a god. Gods don’t always 
understand the ways of mortals.” 
“Gods can fail their people,” 
Watchman said. “You failed us.” 
“It was your tower too! You 
gave a year of your life to it, Thor! 
I know how you loved it. I was inside your head, remember? And 
yet — and yet you — ” 
Krug broke off, sputtering, 
coughing. 
Watchman took Lilith’s hand. 
“We should go, now. We’ve done 
what we came to do here. We’ll 
return to Stockholm and Join the 
others.” 
Together they walked around 
the silent, motionless Krug and 
headed toward the transmat bank. 
Watchman switched one of the 
transmats on. The field was pure 
green, the right color — things must 
have returned to order at the transmat headquarters. 
He reached out to set the coordinates. As he did so he heard 
Krug’s anguished roar. 
“Watchman!” 
The android looked behind him. 
Krug stood a few meters from the 
transmat cubicle. His face was red 
and distorted with rage, jaws working, eyes narrowed, heavy creases 
running through the cheeks. His 
hands clawed the air. In a sudden 
furious lunge Krug seized Watchman's arm and pulled him from 
the transmat. 
Krug seemed to be searching for 
words. He found none. After a 
moment's confrontation he lashed 
out, slapping Watchman's face. It 
was a powerful blow but Watchman made no attempt to return it. 
Krug hit him again, this time with 
clenched fist. Watchman backed 
toward the transmat. 
Making a thick, strangled sound 
deep in his thro.at, Krug rushed 
forward. He caught Watchman by 
the shoulders and began to shake 
him frantically. Watchman was 
astounded by the ferocity of 
Krug's movements. Krug kicked 
him; he spat; he dug his nails deep 
into Watchman's flesh. Watchman 
tried to separate himself from 
Krug. Krug’s head battered itself 
in frenzy against Watchman's 
chest. It would not be hard to hurl 
Krug aside. Watchman knew. But 
he could not do it. 
He could not raise his hand to 
Krug. 
In the fury of his onslaught 
Krug had pushed Watchman nearly to the edge of the transmat field. 
Watchman glanced uneasily over 
his shoulder. He had not set any 
coordinates - the field was open, a 
conduit to nowhere. If he or Krug 
happened to fall into it now — 
“Thor!” Lilith called. “Look 
out!” 
The green glow licked at him. 
Krug, a meter shorter than he was, 
continued to ram and thrust. It 
was time to bring the struggle to 
an end. Watchman knew. He put 
his hands on Krug’s thick arms 
and shifted his balance, preparing 
to hurl his attacker to the ground. 
But this is Krug, he thought. 
But this is Krug. 
Thor Watchman could not bring 
himself to strike Krug. 
Now Krug let go of him. Puzzled, Watchman sucked his breath 
and attempted to brace himself. 
Krug came charging forward, 
shouting, screaming. Watchman 
accepted the thrust of Krug's attack. Krug's shoulder crashed into 
Watchman's chest. Once again the 
android found an event encapsulating itself in a moment outside 
time. He drifted backward as 
though freed of gravity, moving 
timelessly, with infinite slowness. 
The green transmat field surged 
up to engulf him. Dimly he heard 
Lilith's scream dimly he heard 
Krug's cry of triumph. Gently, 
easily, serenely. Watchman tumbled into the green glow, making 
the sign of Krug-preserve-us as he 
disappeared. 
K rug dings to the side of the 
transmat cubicle, panting, shivering. He has checked his momentum just in time — another step or 
two and he would have followed 
Thor Watchman into the field. He 
rests a moment. Then he steps 
back. He turns. 
The tower lies in ruins. Thousands of androids stand like statues. The alpha woman Lilith Meson lies face down on the thawing 
tundra, sobbing. A dozen meters 
away Manuel kneels, a sorry figure, bloodstained, mudspattered, 
his clothing in rags, his eyes empty, 
his face slack. 
Krug feels a great sense of 
peace. His spirit soars. He is free 
from all bondage. He walks toward Manuel. 
“Up,” he says. “Get up.” 
Manuel continues to kneel. 
Krug scoops him up, gripping his 
armpits and holds him until he 
stands of his own strength. 
Krug says, “You’re in charge 
now. I leave you everything. Lead 
the resistance, Manuel. Take control. Work toward restoring order. 
You’re the top man. You’re Krug. 
Do you understand me, Manuel? 
As of this moment I abdicate.” 
Manuel smiles. Manuel coughs. 
Manuel looks at the muddy 
ground. 
“It’s all yours, boy. I know you 
can manage. Things may look 
bleak today but that’s only temporary. You’ve got an empire now, 
Manuel. For you. For Clissa. For 
your children.” 
Krug embraces his son. Then he 
goes to the transmats. He selects 
the coordinates for the vehicle-assembly center in Denver. 
Thousands of androids are there, 
although no one seems to be working. They stare at Krug in paralyzed astonishment. He moves 
swiftly through the place. 
“Where’s Alpha Fusion?” he demands. “Has anyone seen him?” 
Romulus Fusion appears. He 
looks stunned by the sight of 
Krug. Krug gives him no chance 
to speak. 
“Where’s the starship?” he asks 
at once. 
“At the spacefield,” the alpha 
says, stumbling. 
“Take me there.” 
Romulus Fusion’s lips move 
hesitantly, as though he wants to 
tell Krug that there has been a revolution, that Krug is no longer the 
master, that his orders have ceased 
to carry weight. But Alpha Fusion 
says none of those things. He 
merely nods. 
He conducts Krug to the starship. There it stands, as before, 
alone on the broad pad. 
“Is it ready to go?” Krug asks. 
“We would have given it the 
Earth-orbit flight-test three days 
from now, sir.” 
“No time for testing now. Immediate blastoff for interstellar 
voyage. We’ll run it on automatic. 
Crew of one. Tell the ground station to program the ship for its intended final destination, as discussed earlier. Maximum velocity.” 
Romulus Fusion nods again. 
He moves as though in a dream. 
“I will convey your instructions,” 
he says. 
“Good. Get things going fast.” 
The alpha trots off the field. 
Krug enters the ship, closing and 
sealing the hatch behind him. The 
image of the planetary nebula 
NGC 7293 in Aquarius sizzles in 
his mind, emitting brilliant pulsing 
light, poisonous light that clangs 
like a gong in the heavens. Krug 
is coming, he says to himself. 
Wait. Wait for me, you up there! 
Krug is coming to talk to you. 
Somehow. There’ll be a way. Even 
if your sun gives off fire that bakes 
my bones when I’m ten light-years 
away. Krug is coming to talk to 
you. 
He walks through the ship. Everything is in order. 
He does not activate his screens 
for a last view of Earth — Krug has 
turned his back on Earth. He 
knows that if he looks out, he will 
see the fires that are blazing in 
every city tonight and he does not 
want to see them -the only fire 
that concerns him now is that fiery 
ring in Aquarius. Earth is something he has bequeathed to Manuel. 
Krug removes his clothing. 
Krug lies down in one of the freezer units of the life-suspension system. He is ready to depart. He 
does not know how long the voyage will last, nor if he will find 
anything at the end of it. But they 
have left him no choice. He gives 
himself over completely to his machines, to his starship. 
Krug waits. 
Will they obey him in this last 
command? 
Krug waits. 
The glass cover of the freezer 
unit suddenly slides into place, 
sealing him in. Krug smiles. Now 
he feels the coolant fluid trickling 
in- he hisses as it touches his 
flesh. It rises about him. Yes. Yes. 
The voyage will soon begin. Krug 
will go to the stars. Outside, the 
cities of Earth are ablaze. That 
other fire draws him, the gong in 
the heavens. 
Krug is coming! Krug is coming! 
The coolant fluid nearly covers 
his body now. He is sinking into 
lethargy his body suspends its 
throbbing, his fevered brain grows 
calm. He has never been so fully 
relaxed before. Phantoms dance 
through his mind: Clissa, Manuel, 
Thor, the tower, Manuel, the tower, Thor, Clissa. Then they are 
gone and he sees only the fiery ring 
of NGC 7293. That, too, begins to 
fade. He scarcely is breathing now. 
Sleep is taking him. He will not 
feel the blastoff. Five kilometers 
away a handful of perversely faithful androids are talking to a computer; they are sending Krug to the 
stars. He waits. Now he sleeps. 
The cold fluid engulfs him completely. Krug is at peace. He departs forever from Earth. He begins his journey at last. -jt; 
THE PLAYER AT YELLOW SILENCE (Continued from page 14} 
“I do,” replied Forbes. “And 
Ganeth Zerl, the Yansis premier.” 
T hat evening one paper, the 
Times-Standard, broke the story of the war-settlement tournament. As a result my telephone 
was busy with calls for information 
about the player who had masterminded it and who had broken the 
records at Yellow Silence. 
At nine o’clock the next morning I drove again through the gates 
of the new course. Judging by the 
number of cars in the parking area 
a goodly number of people had 
seen the Times-Standard story. 
Ganeth Zerl was waiting on the 
first tee when I joined the gallery. 
How different was this Yansis, I 
thought, from his predecessors of 
twenty years before when, smiling 
in pseudo-friendship, they had 
emerged from their spacecraft and 
stepped for the first time on the 
soil of Earth. He was tall, a saturnine individual clad in loose-fitting green coveralls and the latest 
style sports boots, polished to the 
nines. His wafer head, a sensitive 
subject to most of his race, was 
uncovered and thrust out in surly 
defiance. 
The gallery moved back obediently as Zerl selected a heavy wood 
with a gyroscopic bang-plate and 
teed off. His ball shot out a thousand yards over the fairway and 
came to a bounding stop as a ro
bot caddy ran out to mark the distance. 
Forbes’ ball also split the fairway. 
And now an indefinable strangeness seemed to settle over the two 
players. The gallery sensed it and 
followed them in silence. With apparent ease Zerl took the first, second and third holes. His eyes began to glitter. 
But Forbes came back to win 
the sixth and seventh. 
At the tenth Zerl’s ball sliced into the rough and the magnetic 
grass wrapped itself about it, forming a nest that defied disentanglement. Right away the Yansis player demanded permission to drop 
another ball on the grounds that 
the obstacle was not a natural one. 
Forbes took the eleventh with a 
double-fulcrum approach that 
reached the green beautifully. 
The game went on. 
Over the emerald grass, past water hazards and sand traps they 
went, oblivious to the milling spectators, pausing only to wait for the 
hushed conversation to die down. 
A film of perspiration gathered on 
their brows; they wiped their hands 
repeatedly. 
I was witnessing, I suddenly realized, no mere tournament but a 
struggle between elemental forces 
for the highest of stakes — for a 
race against genocide. As 1 gazed 
into the wan sunlight which had 
supplanted the overcast I got the 
impression that we weren’t on the 
links at all but in a great rotunda 
where sat a hundred or more 
judges in black robes. 
It was even-up as they climbed 
to the eighteenth tee. Both drove 
with the utmost care and precision. 
And then a sudden murmur of 
excitement swept through the gallery. Forbes’ ball had been driven 
directly into the Flux. 
The Flux — Robinson’s Dervish 
— was a hazard 1 had never seen 
before. Legal under NGA rules but 
seldom used, it consisted of a dimensional whirling cone that 
sprang into existence when the ball 
entered its field. It was also a miniature timeslide, a viewport into the 
problematical future. 
Forbes’ jaw set as he made his 
way down to the whirling cone in 
which the air appeared to be staggered in faults, one over the other. 
He hesitated only long enough to 
select a club. Then, as if he were 
merely passing through a doorway 
into another room, he stepped into 
the Flux. 
The staggered air enveloped him 
and he disappeared. As 1 stood 
gazing, I was momentarily aware 
of a great rush of matter, blurred 
and amorphous, hurtling by. It — 
became a procession of people, like 
the view of a parade from the window of a speeding train, all of them 
in jubilation and in ecstasy. At the 
parade’s end stretched an open 
field upon which were piled articles 
of ordnance and armament — all 
being scrapped and destroyed by 
atomic fire. 
The scene faded. Moments 
passed. Then Forbes’ ball came 
bounding out of the Flux and an 
instant later he followed. But even 
as the ball sailed past me I saw 
that it was overclubbed. It flew 
across into the rough flanking the 
opposite fairway. 
Forbes had lost. 
A wave of disappointment swept 
over me. 
Yet I saw an expression of triumph enter his eyes as he completed his anti-climactic play on 
the eighteenth green and fed his 
scorecard into the slot. He entered 
the Balance-beam after turning the 
control to reverse, then stepped out 
again. He climbed slowly partway 
up the ramp, where he stood facing 
the silent, expectant gallery. 
“My friends,” he said in his melodious voice, “you may think 
what you have just seen is failure 
for Earth. In reality it is victory. 
Mail’s inability to understand and 
appreciate the thought and viewpoint of another life, no matter 
how alien that life may be has always been a stumbling block in the 
progress of his culture.” 
He paused and smiled slightly. 
“You see, the very acceptance 
by one culture of peace with another culture by way of amicable 
competition constitutes a victory in 
itself. And the ability to accept defeat in such a culture-contest may 
THE PLAYER AT YELLOW SI LENCE 
also be regarded as a triumph.” 
“And now the tournament is finished. I have enjoyed my stay with 
you but I must leave.” 
He made a gesture of farewell, 
turned and strode down the ramp. 
He headed diagonally across the 
fairways. I watched his figure grow 
smaller and smaller, moving over 
the bright green sward toward the 
hazard lake that lay athwart his 
path. But for some reason he did 
not turn either way along the 
shore. Instead, as the water cast a 
haze of reflection in my eyes, 1 
fancied I saw him move directly 
forward, walk out on its wind-rippled surface. ★ 
THE MOON OF THIN REALITY (Continued from page 55) 
fires the destruct. It’ll make a 
flash they’ll see all over the shell.” 
McKay was alarmed to note 
how strong was the impulse to accept the excuse. Get too close to 
the guys you fly with and you find 
yourself trading authority for a 
support that may not always be 
there. He forced himself to greater anger. 
“The reason they need the message is that there’s going to be no 
destruct. Now get that signal 
out.” 
“No destruct?” said Slazeck, 
appalled. “But Mac— Kiliath’s 
been aching to send the pulse for 
days, before the aliens get to 
thinking the ship’s a threat.” 
“It is a threat. If I’d been sure 
the aliens were watching I’d have 
put a missile into the wreck after 
our burn to make our good intentions quite clear. As it stands, we 
have to look out for our own survival.” 
“I don’t get you, Mac. That 
shell may be populated to the 
density of terrestrial cities and the 
impact’s going to be in the megaton range.” 
McKay was dropping his bombshell in more senses than one. 
“Until I see evidence of it I won’t 
believe the shell is inhabited at all. 
I’m trying to communicate on the 
most elementary level with whatever devices are regulating the m-t 
fields, devices which obviously 
aren’t capable of sophisticated 
communication. If they don’t stop 
the derelict they’ll get a damage 
report. And maybe they’ll respond 
to the next warning ahead of 
time.” 
“Mac, you can’t do this 
“Now hear this. When the derelict hits the shell, after due broadcast warning from us, this ship is 
going to be closed up in full combat alert for whatever reaction 
there may be from the shell. If 
there isn’t any — we will start 
beaming the same warnings to our 
own impact point and if they fail 
we stream our missile armament 
in line ahead and try to blast 
through. And we’re all of us going 
to snap to for it — including me, 
because I failed to realize how far 
we’d slipped in the last weeks. I 
want this ship and its crew checked 
out and at full readiness when 
things start happening, beginning 
right now. Get that signal out. 
Let’s go.” 
T hey accepted it. McKay was 
relieved. He had no wish to be 
the last man alive or conscious 
when the RLV hurtled up to the 
shell — yet a show of mutiny might 
have led to that. He would not 
have backed from a fight. 
It was just as well that the tension and the inactivity had come 
to a head before the crisis. Even 
after it, McKay was alarmed at 
how long it took to square up the 
ship. Talk, not action, had become 
the habit of the mission. At the 
end of his sleep period Kiliath was 
horrified to learn what was happening. The Furtherance race were 
very idealistic — for their job they 
had to be. McKay insisted on continuing the systems check — unnecessary for the ship but vital to get 
the crew back in shape. He refused 
to argue the moral issue and, further estranged behind the computer translation, Kiliath had to subside. 
The impact however was an an
ticlimax. The wreck struck in one 
great burst of brilliant white, momentarily infusing the patterns 
around — the shell threw very little 
of that rare energy back toward 
the sun but swallowed it instantly. 
Later, when they studied the flash, 
they found little new detail. The 
RLV was at full combat alert, 
ready for retribution to leap up at 
them or at least the contact that 
now must surely come. 
But once again — nothing. 
“Okay,” said McKay grimly. 
“Contact and warning program to 
our point of impact. They can’t 
possibly miss the point.” 
Devlin shot him a glance but 
obeyed in silence. Nobody commented on this drastic strategy, 
though the air was pregnant with 
moral evaluation. There was no 
way to tell what damage or death 
they had wrought on the shell — 
should they, nobly, have destroyed 
both ships to prevent it? McKay 
was damned if he would. 
About their own impending impact there was no debate. McKay 
was determined and that was that. 
Were the inhabitants — if any — 
trying frantically to communicate 
by what they thought the obvious 
channels? Or were they sunk in 
apathy or indifference? One thing 
McKay was sure of — without 
some recognition from the shell, 
he wouldn’t contemplate destroying the ship. 
“Missiles ready,” he said, moments from impact. 
THE MOON OF THIN REALITY 
The RLV was not armed for 
major combat but he would try to 
blast through. He launched in line 
all their missiles two with nuclear warheads, four conventional, 
a shoal of antis and slowed up 
from them. There would be time 
to observe the effects before the 
ship hit. Perhaps if the missiles 
weakened the shell enough no 
telling how thick it was — the RLV 
could burn tail-first through the 
wreckage, though he thought' it 
would be moving much too fast 
And a great starfield opened 
ahead of them, rich and incredibly 
brilliant, and the missiles fell out 
of the blackness into it. Down fell 
the RLV after them, as it seemed 
into the treasure-house of the galaxy. This Interface had been set 
up without reference to the ship’s 
equipment, still inert — it was the 
work of the shell alone. Like the 
opening of a great fan the starry 
heavens swept up around them and 
the black disc of the Interface 
snapped shut. 
“My God we did it,” Devlin exclaimed, the release of tension 
outstanding in his voice. “We 
forced them into it.” 
For a moment McKay feared 
they had simply been passed 
through the shell to recede helplessly in space as perhaps they deserved — but the instruments answered him. The black sphere astern was not the outside of the 
shell but the far side of the moon. 
The position of their Interface in 
relation to the relay satellite had 
been recreated by the transmitters 
on the shell — so had the shell’s intelligence known everything all 
along? Already the Earth was coming into view. They had in effect 
flown right through the moon — it 
was impossible not to think of the 
vaster sphere as hidden somewhere 
within it. 
So in the end had there been life 
on the shell — or was their deliverance a defensive reflex of the great 
artifact, running down unattended 
in the fading infrared? There 
would be only one way ever perhaps to find out -but there lay the 
Earth, still a world intact, and Me 
Kay knew he would never deliberately run an Interface into the lunar surface again. ★ 
SHIP METOMORROW 
publicity? He sat down, mumbling 
polite greetings to the polite Miss 
Susan. 
“And how may Femmikin International help you, Mr. Ellison?” 
{ Continued from page 26 ) 
Give me a dream. 
Box up a fantasy for me. 
Fabricate a longing-saturator. 
Ship me tomorrow. 
And give me whatever it is you 
must give to make all of us believe 
it's real. That has got to be part of 
their package. 
George Ellison opened his 
mouth and began to tell the femmikin things he had never told anyone. 
And then he gave her his credit 
card. The blue creditor on the 
desk went beep and smiling Miss 
Susan handed back the card. He 
put it into his wallet and went out. 
He nodded automatically at the 
femmikin at the desk but did not 
look in the face of the man standing in front of her with a executive 
case in his hands. He went out 
through the plush wooden doors 
and across the torn up street and 
down Warchief towards the monorail station. 
He felt purged. 
And excited. 
And sad, as if he had been 
caught doing something a little 
dirty. 
Expect delivery no later than the 
twenty-eighth of next month, she 
had said in the nice smooth voice 
of Femmikin International and 
Femmikin International didn’t lie. 
George Ellison felt empty. An 
empty wine glass to soon be filled. 
But with what? 
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 
and the subsequent marketing of 
those products. 
Which brings us to Compton’s 
only true innovation in this book. 
The society he depicts is a future 
society we may very well believe in 
— one in which it is an accepted 
matter of course that all students 
are revolutionaries, and one in 
which ideological disagreement is 
often expressed in assassination. 
Meanwhile, the wheels of the marketing establishment continue to 
turn, because even revolutionaries 
aspire to the affluent life depicted 
in the media. 
Only Compton, thus far, has 
moved toward a depiction of what 
intellectual life will be like under 
( Continued from page 29) 
those conditions. What he does 
with it at this present juncture is 
very little, laced with smatterings 
from 1984 undigested, and with 
that great scene in which a computer decides it’s God ... as if it 
had never heard of science fiction 
or of D.G. Compton — an unlikely 
proposition. 
M ake no mistake about it — antiestablishmentarianism is bred 
in our bones. Political expressions 
of it are mere expressions; what 
sane intelligent organism can help 
but resent the necessity to emerge 
from the womb and set about some 
ridiculous prescribed exercise 
whose only reward is subsistence 
toward the tomb? Which exercise 
it is is a mere matter of detail; 
whatever Simple Simon says is basically hateful. 
But of course we get along, as 
time goes by the real rebels are 
weeded out before they ever get to 
Second Grade. Still, the outrage is 
well remembered, and nurtured, as 
time goes by — and kept in a secret 
place, out of need and in case of 
opportunity. That, and that alone, 
suffices to explain the worldwide 
popularity of Tarzan and his many 
cousins. That, and that alone, suffices to explain why it might strike 
a writer as a great notion to go 
through the intellectual exercise of 
proving that Tarzan won’t work. 
Lord Tyger, by Philip Jose 
Farmer (Doubleday, $5.95) may be 
such a book — it says it is — or it 
may in fact be a reaffirmation of 
the greatest faith (I think it is, and 
I suspect Farmer thinks so, too). 
In any event, it is an entertaining, 
rich, inventive adventure novel in 
the best sense, with its most lyricalpassages far surpassing any effect 
Edgar Rice Burroughs was ever 
able to achieve, and approaching 
the effect that The Jungle Book 
has on small boys. 
What it says it is is a novel 
about the central figure in an elaborate hoax — a modern child of 
English nobility who is kidnapped 
by an immensely rich maniac and 
raised from infancy in a sequestered part of Africa by people who 
are paid to say they’re apes. This 
synthetically derived noble savage, 
usually called Ras Tyger, then proceeds to blow up the whole mechanism, in part because it is already 
suffering from incursions of outside reality, such as jet planes and 
the fact that real apes can’t raise 
human children, in part because he 
is a noble savage superman whose 
personality will not abide incursions, and in part because the author’s first intention was to have it 
work out that way. 
I’ll work back to what 1 mean 
by that, starting from here: 
All writing consists of arranging a systematic lie so as to 
achieve a resemblance to truth. 
This is somewhat more particularly true of fiction than it is of 
what is called, revealingly, nonfiction. On the other hand, attempting to lie successfully about 
something the reader knows isn’t 
factually true is a tricky business. 
It takes more native wit to do that 
than it does to just give the facts 
in a plausible order. 
Consequently, most fiction — 
even most good fiction, by “good” 
writers — proceeds along the level 
of suspended disbelief, with the 
reader constantly aware that he is 
watching a construction, and admiring it on its merits as a construction. You can see this in children watching cartoons on TV, 
calling the plot turns in advance, 
and applauding the creator for 
having come up with the expected 
turn at the proper time. 
Most science-fiction writers, like 
most writers, write on this level. 
All writers, without exception, 
must include this level in their 
work, if only to create further 
effects beyond it. It is on this level 
that we can see, 1 think, Farmer’s 
intention to set about proving that 
Ras Tyger would overpower Boygur the maniac, for all of Boygur’s money and connections. (I 
am nol going even to think very 
much about the possibilities of a 
scholarly essay on Farmer’s various levels of symbology). 
Some writers, including some 
science-fiction writers, write habitually in such a way that this 
level does become mere underpinning. Farmer is one of these; a 
crotchety, difficult man who accepts praise for the wrong things 
but denies blame of the same kind, 
and a general all-around secret 
harborer of thoughts in bad taste 
which emerge triumphant in his 
books. What counts about him is 
that he is an artist (and Lord Tyger offers excellent proof of this) 
because he does, indeed, by preference and nature work on what 
we can call the level of enforced 
belief — or, if you need another 
way of describing the distinction 
between the constructionist and 
the artist, on the level of faith. 
Ras Tyger lives. It’s as simple 
as that. It may be that Farmer's 
achievement is in some way made 
less by the fact that he is only telling us the same thing Burroughs 
told us and for which we made him 
at least as wealthy and powerful 
as Farmer made Boygur. But a 
piece of art is not only inexhaustible, it is infinite; you can knock 
hunks off Farmer’s achievements 
all day — and you probably should; 
the need may well be inherent in 
their nature- but you cannot diminish it. Lord Tyger is not on 
the face of it a major novel, but it 
lives, it still moves. 
Starting next issue in 
1 WH 1 FFi 
AD un cu 
II 
1 filLL rCi 
Nil IIU LIIL 
Robert A. Heinlein 
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 
GALAXY STARS ^ 
o 
O 
Me? I've been a rancher, a sculptor, 
a photographer of nude ladies, a motion-picture director, a cartoonist; and 
now, it seems. I'm a writer. My enemies, if any, would call me a dilettante 
— my friends, a Renaissance Man. 
What it amounts to is that I like to do 
different things and can. and as soon 
as I get halfway good at something I 
go try something else. I've never formally studied what I've worked at professionally. although once I did go to 
art school. 
My view is that life should not be 
played on one note. I try to make it a 
symphony. I also laugh a lot. I've 
completed, but not yet published, a 
book of poetry written in my own blood 
and a children's book that Tim Kirk is 
illustrating. 
I live atop a Hollywood hill in a 
harem tent floored with "sleeping silks 
and furs." My TV set floats over a Don 
Simpson light show. In the garage is a 
Roman orgy room, complete with 
sunken tub. 
My chief interests are science fiction, archeology, the preservation — or 
rather, the improvement — of ecology. 
I like Corvettes, steak, making movies, 
beautiful women who are also intelligent, and I'm the greatest cinema fan 
there is. I'm a Jeffersonian liberal, a 
fast draw, a Romantic, and believe 
there are too many damn people in the 
world. We need "better" — not 
"more." 
WiHiam Rofster, whose Ship Me 
Tomorrow appears in this issue, 
contributes the profile at left 
and one of his famous "Rotslers," above.— THC EDITORS 
SPECIAL TO GALAXY & IF READERS... 
THE BEST IN 
SCIENCE FICTION BOOKS... 
worth adding to your library. stories you will treasure . 
available to you at a special 10% discount 
Conveniently obtained from GALAXY Magazine. No searching, no book clubs, 
no commitments. Here are the books of enduring value that you will want to 
own... for hours of science-fiction pleasure, to be read, reread, and discussed 
with your friends. These are the books that have proven ^emselves . filled with 
all of the features you look for in S-F. .written by the acknowledged masters 
of the art. Just circle your choices below, mail to us, and the books will be in your 
hands shortly, ready to transport you to new, thrilling, imaginative worlds. 
A»ARD 
SGENCE 
FICT’QH 
•:’r ■' I 
FREE— with every order for 2 or more books . 
AWARD SCIENCE FICTION READER. 188 
pages, containing stories by such masters of science 
fiction as Arthur C. Clarke, Theodore Sturgeon, 
A. E. van Vogt, Clifford Simak, Poul Anderson, 
Leigh Brackett, John W. Campbell, Jr. All of the 
stories belong to the excitingly modern era that 
swept SF to its greatest pinnacle of popularity. 
8-1 
NONE BUT MAN by Gordon R. DIckaon. Aliens 
from Moldaugy inhuman stars from the last human 
settlement, are gathering together for war. Old 
world inhabitants are willing to sacrifice the new 
world colonies in order to avert this war. But not 
rugged Individualist Cully When, the type of man 
who has pioneered frontiers in all times and all 
places. Set in some future time, this action-filled 
adventure depicts space-age guerrilla warfare and 
age-old human stupidity with excitement and ends 
with an explosive climax. 
253 pp. List Price... $4.95 Discount Price... $4 .46 
S-2 
A CASE OF CONSCIENCE by James Bllsh. Two 
separate and complete worlds — idyllic Lithia and 
a culture on Earth that has literally gone under 
ground, provides the basis for the story of four 
extraordinary men. There is the priest, dedicated 
to the glory of God; the scientist working for the 
glory of man; the realist who works only for himself; and the man who is content to ask nothing of 
any world, any man, or any deity. The author presents a compelling moral problem. This book is 
something of a tour de force. 
186 pp. List Price.. .$4.50 Discount Price... $4.05 
S-3 
BUQ JACK BARRON by Norman Spinrad. Explore 
the edge of tomorrow . who will be chosen for 
immortality? Who will make this ultimate decision 
— the government, free enterprise, or private 
monopoly? A new, highly controversial novel, 
infused with blood and guts, examining the disease 
of power as well as the responsibility. Both praised 
and damned before it was even published, this 
novel deserves your personal attention. 
327 pp. List Price... $5 .95 Discouftt Price. ..$536 
S-4A 
THE POLLINATORS OF EDEN by John Boyd. From 
the Planet of the Flowers, Dr. Freda Caron’s 
fiance Paul has sent her an exquisite iridescent 
yellow tulip that not only has a plastic memorybut can talk. Freda realizes that she must unlock 
the secrets of the flower planet and its strange 
hold on Paul. In this exciting new book, Freda 
must travel from her ultra-rational world-oftomorrow to explore the strange, unearthly flower 
planet. The climax of this shocking and oddly 
beautiful novel is bizarre and delightful. 
212 pp. List Price .. .$5.50 Discount Price. .$4.95 
•-S 
THE MIDWICH CUCKOOS by John WyndhMi. For 
an entire day, a small rural village in England 
loses contact with the outside world. Soon after, 
all ^e women, married or not become pregnant, 
eventually giving bfrth to remarkable golden-eyed 
children who exhibit a strange kind of sinisterism. 
They are dai^erous and Midwich mast make the 
ultimate decision — if the children survive, then 
mankind must ioin the dinosaur among Nature's 
discards. A gripping account of man's fight for 
survival. 
189 pp. List Price... $4.50 Discount Price... $4.05 
S-i 
THE SPACE MEHCHAMTS by FrederHc PoM and 
C. M. Kornblulh. Two major advertising agencies 
are fighting for the Venus account — nothing less 
than total control of the Venus economy and markets. will do. It is completely unimportant that 
Venus is a harsh, barren, uninhabited planet. 
According to the mentality of Mitchell Courtenay 
of Fowler Schocken Associates, the trick is to persuade colonists to go to Venus, and once there, 
they will have to survive as best they can. One of 
the most savage and devastating attacks on modern consumer society and the advertising agents 
who are its high priests. The Space Merchants is 
uncomfortably prophetic. 
158 pp. List Price... $4.50 Discount Price. ..$4.05 
S-7 
BRAIN WAVE by Pouf Anderson. Imagine, some 
mysterious space force that inhibits the world's 
intelligence. But suddenly, it’s gone and overnight 
the intellect of every living creature is trebled. 
What are the consequences of such instant genius? 
These are the problems confronting Archie Brock, 
former near moron; Peter Corinth, physicist; and 
his no-longer dumb wife. This provocative and 
absorbing book explores the ultimate problem of 
such a situation — in a world free of the difficulties 
that has plagued mankind throughout history, 
what is man to do with his time? 
164 pp. List Price... $4.50 Discount Price... $4.05 
S-BA 
OPUS 100 by ISMC Aalmov. An event — a special 
Asimov book... America's foremost science writer, 
takes you on a personalized guided tour of his 
first 99 books. This, his 100th book, is an anthology of works selected by the author himself. It is 
a journey which acquaints the reader with a 
writer considered to be a genius, who delights in 
every aspect of life and has the capacity to make 
any subject he writes about both understandable 
and entertaining. Reviewers customarily greet 
Asimov publications with such adjectives as 
“brilliant," “engrossing," “powerful," and “sparkling." Opus 100 is no exception. 
316 pp. List Price... $5.95 Discount Price. ..$5.36 
S-B 
THE PAST THROUGH TOMORROW. Robarl A. 
Heinleln's Future History Stories. Twenty-five years 
ago Robert A. Heinlein began to write stories 
about an imaginary future that is fast becoming a 
reality. Discover, through the pen of the master of 
space-age fiction, about nun’s first step on the 
moon; weather control; manufacture of synthetic 
food; interstellar exploration. Now, for the first 
time, in chronological order, are Heinlein's 21 
compelling stories — all depicting a glimpse of a 
possible tomorrow. 
667 pp. List Price... $6 .95 Discount Price... $6.26 
S-10 
THORNS by Robert Sllverberf. Duncan Chalk, 
master pain peddler, skillful and sophisticated, 
lives in a time when reading tragic headlines no 
longer provides the necessar>' sensations. Into 
Chalk's sinister hands falls Lona Kelvin, orphaned, 
mother of 100 children, yet without a soul; and 
Minner Burris, starman, whose butchered body 
was put together by aliens, a walking horror. ^Hhat 
fun to mate these two and watch them wallow in 
their mutual torment. But somewhere, somethng 
went wrong. Discover what happens when the puppets begin to pull their own strings in this imaginative, chilling book. 
222pp. List Price... $4 .95 Discount Price... $4 .46 
THE GALAXY BOOK SERVICE 
P.O. Box 3977, Grand Central Post OflBce, New York, N. Y. 10017 
ise send me the books Please print full name & address 
Please send me the books 
I have circled. 
S-1 S-2 S-3 S-4A S-5 
S-6 S-7 S-8A S-9 S-10 
Name 
Address 
Zip Code 
Sorry, No C.O.D.’s. (Please add 25^ for postage and handling. N.Y.C. residents please add 6% 
sales tax. N.Y. State residents please add 5% sales tax.) 
10-day satisfaction ... or your money back. FREE copy of AWARD SCIENCE FICTION 
READER with all orders for 2 or more books. G-6-70 
Learn the seven warning signals of cancer, 
You’ll be in good company. 
1 . Unusual bleeding or discharge. 
2. A lump or thickening in the breast 
or elsewhere. 
3. A sore that does not heal. 
4. Change in bowel or bladder habits. 
5. Hoarseness or cough. 
6. Indigestion or difficulty in swallowing. 
7. Change in size or color of a wart or mole. 
If a signal lasts longer than two weeks, see your 
doctor without delay. 
And be sure to have a health checkup once a year, 
no matter how well you may feel. 
Fight Cancer with a checkup and a check 
American Cancer Society 
A TREASURY OF GREAT 
SCIENCE FICTION 
Edited by Anthony Boucher 
600. A glent two-volume collection of greet science fiction reading. Over 1.000 pages of exciting 
fiction-four full-length novels, 
twelve novelettes, eight short 
stories by Ray Bradbury, Robert 
A. Helnleln, A. E. van Vogt. 
Poul Anderson. Arthur C. Clarke. 
Theodore Sturgeon. Alfred Beater, 
and a dozen more. Counts as 1 
choice. Pub. ed, $5.95 ^ 
Take any 
SCIENCE FICTION 
BOOKS $ 
for only 
when you Join the 
Science Fiction Book 
Club and agree to 
accept only four books 
during the comirvg year. 
YES— even the two-volume set at left 
counts as only a single choice! 
How the Club works: Each month it offers a 
really superb new science fact or fiction book at 
a fraction of its regular price. Even though these 
books sell for $4.95. $5.95 and more in their original editions. Club members gel them for only 
$1.49 each— in special full-length, hard-cover editions— unless you select an extra-value book at 
slightly higher price. And (he Club tells you in 
advance what each monthly selection will be. 
During your (rial membership, you agree to take 
as few as four books in the coming year. Cancel 
any time thereafter. 
No-Risk Guarantee: If not delighted with introductory 3-book shipment, return books within 10 
days to cancel membership. Otherwise you will 
be enrolled in the Club as a Trial Member. Mail 
coupon today to Science Fiction Book Club. 
Garden City, New York 11530 
[Science fiction book club 
, Dept. 06-GXX, Carden City, N.Y. 11530 
Please accept my application for membership In the Science 
Fiction Book Club and rush the 3 books whose numbers I have 
circled below. Bill me only $1,00, plus shipping and handling, 
for all 3. Then every month, send me the Club’s free bulletin, 
■'Things to ('ome", which describes coming selections. For 
each book I accept. I will pay only $1.49, plus shipping and 
handling, unless I take an extravalue selection at a higher price. 
I need take only four books within the coming year and may 
resign at any time thereafter. 
NO-RISK GUARANTEE; If not 
delighted with my Introductory 
package. I may return It In 10 days, 
pay nothing, owe nothing, and my 
membership will be canceled. 
CIrtIo 
the numbere 
of the 
want: 
3 bookt 
you 
600 
605 
616 
623 
625 627 
Print 
Name
If under 18, 
L parent must sign here. - - - i 
(Offer good In U.S.A. only) 22-S76 I 
618. Dangerous 
slons. Anthology of 
.'I.'' original Mofie<. 
prim by Sturgeon, 
Anderson, others. 
Pub. ed. $6.93 
622. The FoBBda(loo Trllog;, by 
Isaac Asimov. The 
ends of (he galaxy 
revert to barbarism. 
Pub. ed. SIOJO 
62S. World's Best 
Science Ficllon 
1969. By Vonncgui, 
Jr.. Shecklcy. Delaney, Knight. Aldiss, and others. 
601. I, Robot, by 
zlba 
by Jo 
Long out of print. 
"An enticing thriller.”— N. Y. Times 
Pub. ed. S3A8 
Brunner. Extrapolates today's society into 2lsi Century. 600 pages 
Pub. ed. $6.95 
627. Last Starship 
From Earlb by 
John Boyd, Young 
lovers flee loveless 
17 1 . The Fanco 
File, by Burt Cole. 
Gov't computer 
baffled by Deva love 
priestess! Pub. ed. 
S4.95 
623. 2001: A Space 
Odyssey by Arthur 
Clarke. 5 men and 
computer trigger 
624. 7 Conquesl.s. 
Poul Anderson. 7 
wars in the fuiurc 
. , nuclear ... in 
terplaneiary. Can 
Earth 
trap ", Pub ed $4.95 Pub. ed $4.95