Grp at New 
SewBce Novef 
THE STAR KING 
by JACK VANCE 
THE DRAGON MASTERS 
FRITZ LEIBER 
The BEMs in your neighborhood 
won't run off with your books 
if you put inside the front cover 
of eoch book... a gummed bookplate 
with your name printed on it! 
No. CF-614 by Emsh 
YOUR NAME HERE 
No. CF-612 by Emsh 
FINAGLE SAYS — 
The umpteenth corollary 
of FInagle's General Law of 
Dynamic Negatives says: 
"No books are ever los^ 
by loaning except ones you 
particularly want to keep." 
100 for $4; 200, $6; 300, $8 
with owner's name imprinted 
All Postpaid. Add slate sales lax. if any. 
ACTUAL SIZE, all designs, 3x4 inches 
No. CM-12 by Cullen Rapp No. CX-57 by Lynd Ward 
The designs shown above are the only ones we offer I 
Ordsi* from GALAXY 421 Hudson street. New York 14 , N.Y. 
eaiaxy 
MAGAZINE 
DECEMBER, 1963 • Vol. 22, No. 2 
CONTENTS 
SERIAL - First of Two Parts 
THE STAR KING 8 
by Jack Vance 
COMPLETE SHORT NOVEL 
NO GREAT MAGIC 150 
by Fritz Leiber 
NOVELETTE 
IN THE CONTROL TOWER 134 
by Will Mohler 
SHORT STORIES 
THE BIG PAT BOOM 82 
by Damon Knight 
IF THERE WERE NO BENNY CEMOLI . 100 
by Philip K. Dick 
AND ALL THE EARTH A GRAVE 126 
by C. C. MacApp 
SCIENCE DEPARTMENT 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 90 
by Willy Ley 
FEATURES 
EDITOR'S PAGE 4 
by Frederik Pohl 
LULLABY: 1990 (verse) 121 
by Sheri S. Eberhart 
GALAXY'S FIVE STAR SHELF 122 
by Theodore Sturgeon & Frederik Pohl 
FORECAST 133 
Cover by EMSH from THE STAR KING 
FREDERIK POHL 
Editor 
WILLY LEY 
Science Editor 
SOL COHEN 
Publisher 
DAVID PERTON 
Production Manager 
ROSEMARIE BIANCHINI 
Art Director 
DAVE GELLER, ASSOC 
Advertising 
GALAXY MAGAZINE is published 
bi-monthly by Galaxy Publishing 
Corporation. Main offices; 421 
Hudson Street, New York 14, 
N. Y. 50c per copy. Subscription; (6 copies) $2.50 per year 
in the United States, Canada, 
Mexico, South and Central 
America and U. S. Possessions 
Elsewhere $3.50. Second-class 
postage paid at New York, N. Y. 
Copyright, New York 1963, by 
Galaxy Publishing Corporation, 
Robert M. Guinn, President. All 
rights, including translations 
reserved. All material submitted 
must be accompanied by seltaddressed stamped envelopes. 
The publisher assumes no responsibility for unsolicited material. All stories printed in 
this magazine are fiction, and 
any similarity between characters and actual persons is 
coincidental. 
Printed in the U. S. A. 
By The Guinn Co., Inc. N. Y. 
Title Reg. U. S. Pat. Off. 
SCIENCE 
SACRED & PROFANE 
D uring the recent unpleasantness, at places like Belsen 
and Buchenwald, a number of 
medical men on the payroll of the 
S.S. were given an unparalleled 
opportunity to engage in research 
on human beings. 
In most civilized countries — 
which Germany at that time was 
not — experimentation on human 
subjects is governed by strict laws 
and - by perhaps even stricter 
medical rules. It is not allowed to 
shorten the life of a subject. It is 
not even allowed to cause him 
very much pain, or to maim him 
in some distinctive way. 
In a sense this is a pity. There 
is a great deal about tbs human 
body which is as yet poorly understood, and a lot of it could 
be cleared up pretty quickly if 
it were not for these fusspot 
rules. If you want quick, sure, 
definite answers, you want subjects without rights, for you want 
them to endure whatever fate 
you decree. 
These subjects the German 
doctors had in abundance, but 
what they did with them produced no harvest of definite answers. They spared their victims 
nothing. They strapped together 
the knees of parturient women 
imtil they died in agony ; they experimented with cures for frostbite bj/ dipping men in tanks of 
icy brine, then sandwiching them 
between nude women; they 
plucked out hearts like an Inca 
priest, and timed the convulsions 
of their victims. What they did, 
in short, may have been witchcraft, but it was not science and 
it was not medicine. Surely there 
GAUXY 
THERE are some things that cannot 
be generally — things you ought to 
know. Great truths are dangerous to 
some — but factors for personal power 
and accomplishment in the hands of 
those who understand them. Behind 
the tales of the miracles and mysteries 
of the ancients, lie centuries of their 
secret probing into nature’s laws — 
their amazing discoveries of the hidden processes of man’s mind, and the 
mastery of life’s problems. Once shrouded in mystery to avoid their destruction by mass feat and ignorance, these 
facts remain a useful heritage for the 
thousands of men and women who privately use them in their homes today. 
THIS FREE BOOK 
The Rosicrucians (not a religious 
organization) an age-old brotherhood 
of learning, have preserved this secret 
wisdom in their archives for centuries. They now invite you to share the 
practical helpfulness of their teachings. 
Write today for a free copy of Ae 
book, "The Mastery of Life.” Within 
its pages may lie a new life of opportunity for you. Address: Scribe 
Q.X.M. 
r SEND THIS COUPON 
1 Scribe Q*X.M. | 
I The ROSICRUCIANS (AMORC) | 
I Sao Jose, California ! 
[ Please send me the free book. The Mastery * 
I of Life, which explains how I may learn to { 
I use my faculties and powers of mind. [ 
{ Name | 
, Address | 
Wfe Rosicrucians 
City,:. 
(AMORO SAN JOSE, CALIFORNIA, U.SA. 
were scientific questions that they 
could have answered. At that 
time, for example, from 1939 to 
1945, the earliest stages of the 
human embryo were known only 
by conjecture and analogy, for no 
human eye had seen a foetus in 
its earliest “horizons” until 1942 
— and it was not a German scientist that obtained the first such 
specimen then. The work was 
done in Boston — without either 
torture or killing. 
If the Herr Doktors had systematically murdered pregnant 
female prisoners of the concentration camps and searched their 
ovaries for laboratory specimens 
— the rest of the world would 
have hated the act, to be sure, 
but it is likely that one of the 
most sought-after treasures in 
Germany after the collapse that 
ended World War II would have 
been these same specimens. For 
they were literally irreplaceable 
— are dreadfully scarce even 
now, and indispensable to the 
study of embryology. 
But they didn’t. With no restrictive laws to stop them, with 
subjects in endless supply — they 
achieved nothing. 
The question is, why? Why not 
anything of value from all that 
pain and death? 
W e start with the assumption 
that knowledge is a thing 
worth acquiring, which is to say 
that it is worth paying a price 
for. Human beings have just so 
many coins in which to pay for 
what they want — money is one; 
but so is time, or danger, or suffering. There is nothing intrinsically wrong with spending suffM"ing to buy knowledge. Many a 
medical volunteer has given up 
his life in agony, and Ae state of 
the art has been enriched thereby. 
It is that key word, “volunteer,” which makes the difference. 
Knowledge does not exist in a 
vacuum; there can’t be any 
knowledge unless there is someone to know it. It was not a falling apple which produced the law 
of gravitation, but Newton’s 
mind. Can a computer rattle off 
a list of primes, ten thousand 
times faster than a man? Yes, 
but the computer does not 
“know” what it has done. 
Knowledge caii be described 
as something possessed by human 
beings. 
It is at least a thesis worth 
debating that inhuman practices 
cannot produce useful knowledge 
for human beings. Suffering, voluntarily accepted by the subjects 
can produce results; the same 
suffering, inflicted on helpless 
victims, cannot. 
Or if it can . why hasn’t 
it, ever? 
THE EDITOR 
Two Great Science-Fiction Novels 
by JACK WILLIAMSON 
Author of r/ie Humanoids, Darker Than You Think, etc. 
I# UABABOOK 
III SCIENCE FICTION AT (TS BEST 
TWO COMPLETE NOVELS 
JACK WILLIAMSON 
Autfier of THE HUMAHOIOS 
AFTER THE LE6I0H 
S END OF TIME 
THE LEGION OF TIME — 
He followed her through the ages, into a strange 
world of the future that might never come to 
be . 
AFTER WORLD'S END — 
A story of courage and dazzling Science-fiction 
adventure in a strange world inhabited by stranger people . 
NOW ON SALE AT ALL NEWSSTANDS • 50< 
If you missed Magabook No. 1 — The Sky Is Falling and Badge of 
Infamy, two complete sf novels by Lester del Rey— send 50(i to 
Galaxy Publishing Co., 421 Hudson St., N. Y. 14, N. Y. 
9 
I 
W hat a paradox, what a 
fearful reproach, when the 
distinction of a few hundred 
miles — nay, as many feet or 
even inches! — can transform 
heinous crime to simple unqualified circumstance!” 
— Hm. Balder Bashin, in the 
Ecclesiarchic Nunciamento 
of Year 100 at For esse, on 
the planet Krokinole. 
“Law cannot reach where enforcement will not follow.” 
— Popular aphorism. 
Excerpts from Smade Lof 
Smade's Planet, feature article 
in Cosmopolia, October, 1523. 
Q; Do you ever get lonesome, 
Mr. Smade? 
A: Not with three wives and 
eleven children. 
Q: Whatever impelled you to 
settle here? A rather dismal world, on the whole, 
isn’t it? 
A; Beauty is in the eye of the 
beholder. I don’t care to 
run a vacation resort. 
Q: What kind of people patronize the tavern? 
A; People who want quiet 
and a chance to rest. Occasionally a traveler from 
inside the Pale or an explorer. 
Q: I’ve heard that some of 
your clientele is pretty 
rough. In fact — not to 
mince matters — it’s the 
general belief that 
Smade’s Tavern is frequented by the most notorious pirates and freebooters of the Beyond. 
A: I suppose they occasionally need rest too. 
Q: Don’t you have difficulty 
with these people? Maintaining order, so to speak? 
A: No. They know my rules. 
I say, ‘Gentlemen, please 
desist. Your differences 
are your own; they are 
fugitive. The harmonious 
atmosphere of the tavern 
is mine and I intend it to 
be permanent.’ 
Q: So then they desist? 
A: Usually. 
Q; And if not? 
A: I pitch them into the sea. 
S made was a reticent man. 
His origins and early life 
were known only to himself. In 
the year 1479 he acquired a cargo of fine timber, which, for a 
whole set of obscure reasons, he 
took to a small stony world in 
the middle Beyond. And there, 
with the help of ten indentured 
artisans and as many slaves, he 
built Smade’s Tavern. 
The site was a long narrow 
shelf of heath between the 
Smade Mountains and Smade 
Ocean, precisely on the planet’s 
equator. He built to a plan as 
old as construction itself, using 
stone for the walls, timber beams 
and plates of schist for the roof. 
Completed, the tavern clung to 
the landscape, as integral as an 
outcrop of rock : a long twostoried structure with a high 
gable, a double row of windows 
to front and rear, chimneys at 
either end venting smoke from 
fires of fossil moss. At the rear 
stood a group of cypress trees, 
their shape completely appropriate to the landscape. 
Smade introduced other new 
features into the ecology. In a 
sheltered valley behind the tavern he planted fodder and garden truck. In another he kept a 
small herd of cattle and a flock 
of poultry. All did moderately 
well, but showed no disposition 
to overrun the planet. 
Smade’s dominion extended as 
far as he cared to claim — there 
was no other habitation on the 
planet — but he chose to assert 
control only over an area of perhaps three acres, within the 
bounds of a whitewashed stone 
fence. To occurrences beyond 
the fence Smade held aloof, unless he had reason to consider 
his own interests threatened: a 
contingency which had never 
arisen. 
Smade’s Planet was the single 
companion of Smade’s Star, an 
undistinguished white dwarf in 
a relatively empty region of 
space. The native flora was 
sparse : lichen, moss, primitive 
vines and palodendron, pelagic 
algae which tinctured the sea 
black. The fauna was even simpler: white worms in the seabottom muck; a few gelatinous 
creatures which gathered and ingested the black algae in a ludicrously inept fashion; an assortment of simple protozoa. 
Smade’s alterations of the planet’s ecology could hardly, therefore, be considered detrimental. 
Smade himself was tall, broad 
and stout, with bone-white skin 
and jet-black hair. His antecedents, as has been mentioned, 
were vague, and he never had 
been heard to reminisce. The 
tavern, however, was managed 
with the utmost decorum. The 
three wives lived in harmony, 
the children were handsome and 
well-mannered, Smade himself 
was unfailingly polite. His rates 
were high, but his hospitality 
was generous, and he made no 
difficulties about collecting his 
bill. A sign hung above the bar: 
“Eat and drink without stint. He 
who can and does pay is a customer. He who cannot and does 
not pay is a guest of the establishment.” 
Smade’s patrons were diverse: 
THE STAR KING 
explorers, locaters, Jamell technicians, private agents in search 
of lost men or stolen treasure, 
more rarely an IPCC representative, or “weasel”, in the argot of 
the Beyond. Others were folk 
more dire, and these were of as 
many sorts as there were crimes 
to be named. Making a virtue of 
necessity, Smade presented the 
same face to all. 
T o Smade’s Tavern in the 
July of 1524 came Kirth 
Gersen, representing himself as a 
locater. His boat was the standard model leased by the estate 
houses within the Oikumene, a 
thirty-foot cylinder equipped 
with no more than bare necessities: in the bow the monitorautopilot duplex, a star finder, 
chronometer, macroscope and 
manual controls; midships the 
living quarters with air machine, organic reconverter, information bank and storage; aft 
the energy block, the Jarnell intersplit and further storage. The 
boat was as scarred and dented 
as any. Gersen’s personal disguise was no more then wellworn clothes and natural taciturnity. Smade accepted him at his 
own terms. “Will you stay 
awhile, Mr. Gersen?” 
“Two or three days, perhaps. 
I have things to think over.” 
Smade nodded in profound 
understanding. “We’re slack just 
now; just you and the Star King. 
You’ll find all the quiet you 
need.” 
“I’ll be pleased for that,” said 
Gersen, which was quite true; 
his just-completed affairs had 
left him with a set of unresolved 
qualms. He turned away, then 
halted and looked back as 
Smade’s words penetrated his 
consciousness. “There’s a Star 
King here at the tavern?” 
“He has presented himself so.” 
“I’ve never seen a Star King. 
Not that I know of.” 
Smade nodded politely to indicate that the gossip had 
reached to the allowable limits 
of particularity. He indicated 
the tavern clock: “Our local 
time better set your watch. Supper at seven o’clock: just half 
an hour.” 
Gersen climbed stone stairs to 
his room, an austere cubicle containing bed, chair and table. He 
looked through the window, 
along the verge of heath between 
mountain and ocean. Two spacecraft occupied the landing field. 
His own and another ship, larger and heavier, evidently the 
property of the Star King. 
Gersen washed in a hall bathroom, returned to the downstairs hall, where he dined on 
the produce of Smade’s own gardens and herd. Two other guests 
made their appearance. The first 
was the Star King, who strode 
to the far end of the room in a 
flutter of rich garments: an individual with skin dyed jetblack, eyes like ebony cabochons as black as his skin. He 
was taller than average height, 
and carried himself with consummate arrogance. Lusterless 
as charcoal, the skin-dye blurred 
the contrast of his features, 
made his face a protean mask. 
His garments were dramatically 
fanciful : breeches of orange 
silk, a loose scarlet robe with 
white sash, a loose striped gray 
and black coif which hung rakishly down the right side of his 
head. Gersen inspected him with 
open curiosity. This was the 
first Star King he had observed 
as such, though popular belief 
had hundreds moving incognito 
through the worlds of man: cosmic mysteries since the first human visit to Lambda Grus. 
The second of the guests apparently had just arrived: a thin 
middle-aged man of indefinite 
racial background. Gersen had 
seen many like him: miscellaneous uncategorized vagabonds of 
the Beyond. He had short coarse 
white hair, a sallow undyed 
skin, an air of diffident uncertainty. He ate without appetite, 
looking back and forth between 
Gersen and the Star King in furtive speculation, but presently 
his most searching glances were 
directed toward Gersen. 
A fter dinner, as Gersen sat 
■^watching the play of lightning over the ocean, the man 
sidled close, wincing and grimacing in sheer nervousness. He 
spoke in a voice which he tried 
to keep even, but which trembled nevertheless. “I assume that 
you are here from Brinktown?” 
Gersen, with his own tensions, 
alarms and concerns, paused before replying, then gave a mild 
assent. “As a matter of fact, I 
am.” 
“I expected to see someone 
else. But no matter. I’ve decided 
that I can’t fulfill my obligation. Your journey is pointless. 
That’s all.” He stood back, teeth 
showing in a humorless grin. He 
was obviously braced against an 
expected dire reaction. 
“You mistake me for someone 
else,” said Gersen. 
The other peered down in disbelief. “But you are here from 
Brinktown?” 
“What of that?” 
The other made a forlorn 
gesture. “No matter. I expected 
— but no matter.” After a moment he said, “I noticed your 
ship. Model 9B. You’re a locater, then.” 
“Correct.” 
“You’re on your way out? Or 
in?” 
“I’ve been out. I can’t say that 
I’ve had luck.” 
The other man’s tension sud
13 
THE STAR KING 
denly gave way. His shoulders 
sagged. “I own to the same line 
of business. As to luck?” He 
heaved a forlorn sigh, and Gersen smelled Smade’s home-distilled whiskey. “If it’s bad, no 
doubt I have myself to blame.” 
Gersen’s suspicion was not 
completely lulled. The man’s 
voice was well-modulated, his 
accent educated. In itself it indicated nothing. He might be 
precisely as he represented himself, a locater in some sort of 
trouble at Brinktown. Or he 
might be otherwise — a situation 
entailing a set of hair-raising 
corollaries. Gersen would have 
preferred the company of his 
own thoughts, but he made a 
courteous gesture. “Do you care 
to join me?” 
“Thank you.” The man seated 
himself gratefully, and with a 
new air of bravado seemed to 
dismiss all of his worries and 
apprehensions. “My name is Lugo Teehalt. Will you drink?” 
Without waiting for assent he 
signaled one of Smade’s young 
daughters, a girl of nine or ten, 
wearing a modest white blouse 
and long black skirt. “I’ll use 
whiskey, lass, and serve this gentleman whatever he decides for 
himself.” 
Teehalt appeared to derive 
strength either from the drink, 
or from the' prospect of conversation. His voice became firmer, 
his eyes clearer and brighter. 
“How long have you been out?” 
“Four or five months,” said 
Gersen, in his role of locater. 
“I’ve seen nothing but rock and 
mud and sulfur. I don’t know 
whether it’s worth the trouble.” 
Teehalt smiled, nodded slowly. “But still — there’s always 
excitement. The star gleams, 
you notice a circlet of planets, 
you ask yourself, will it be now? 
And, time after time, the smoke 
and ammonia, the weird crystals, the winds of monoxide, the 
rains of acid. But you go on and 
on. Perhaps out in that region 
ahead the elements coalesce into nobler forms. Of course it’s 
the same slime and methane 
snow. And then, suddenly, there 
it is. Utter beauty . .” 
G ersen sipped his whiskey 
without comment. Teehalt 
apparently was a gentleman, 
well-mannered and educated, 
sadly come down in the world. 
Teehalt continued, half -talking to himself. “Where the luck 
lies, that I don’t know. I’m sure 
of nothing — now.” 
Gersen laughed sourly. “Uncertainty hurts more than ignorance.” 
Teehalt inspected him quizzically. “You can’t believe that a 
man is the better for ignorance?” 
“Cases vary. But it’s clear that 
uncertainty breeds indecision 
which is a dead halt. An ignorant man can act. As to right 
and wrong — each man to his 
own answer.” 
Teehalt smiled sadly. “You 
espouse a very popular doctrine, 
ethical pragmatism, which always turns out to be the doctrine 
of self-interest. Still, I understand you when you speak of uncertainty, for I am an uncertain 
man.” He shook his thin sharpfeatured head. “I know I’m in a 
bad way, but I’ve had a peculiar 
experience.” He finished the 
whiskey, leaned forward to gaze 
into Gersen’s face. “You are perhaps more sensitive than first 
impression v/ould suggest. And 
possibly younger than you seem.” 
“I was born in 1490.” 
Teehalt made a sign which 
could mean anything, searched 
Gersen’s face once more. “Can 
you understand me if I say that 
I have known over-much beauty?” 
“I probably could understand,” said Gersen, “if you 
made yourself clear.” 
• Teehalt blinked thoughtfully. 
“I will try.” He considered. “As 
I have admitted to you, I am a 
locater. It is a poor trade — with 
apologies to you — for eventually it involves the degradation of 
beauty. Sometimes only to a 
small extent, which is what a 
person such as myself hopes for. 
Sometimes there is only small 
beauty to corrupt and sometimes the beauty is incorruptible. He gave his hand a wave 
toward the ocean. “The tavern 
harms nothing. The tavern allows the beauty of this terrible 
little planet to make itself 
known.” He leaned forward, 
licked his lips. “You must know 
of Grendel?” 
Gersen controlled his expression. “Grendel the Monster, socalled? I know his reputation.” 
“Whatever you may have 
heard, I assure you, it is flattery.” 
“You don’t know what I have 
heard.” 
“I doubt if you have heard 
the worst. But nevertheless, and 
the astounding paradox. .” Teehalt closed his eyes. “I am locating for Grendel. He owns my 
ship. I have taken his money.” 
i(Tt is a difficult position.” 
A “When I found out — what 
could I do?” Teehalt threw up 
his hands in an excited extravagant gesture, reflecting either 
emotional turmoil or the effects 
of Smade’s whiskey. “I asked 
myself this over and over. For 
I had my ship and my money, 
not from an estate house, but 
from an institution of far greater dignity. I did not think of 
myself as a common locater. The 
idea was demeaning. I was Lugo 
Teehalt, a man of parts, who 
THE STAR KING 
had been appointed to the post 
of Chief Explorer for the institution, or some such folly — 
so I assured myself. But they 
sent me out in a 9B boat, and I 
could no longer delude myself. 
I was Lugo Teehalt, common locator. ” 
“Where is your boat?” asked 
Gersen, idly curious. “There is 
only my own and the Star King’s 
out on the landing-field.” 
Teehalt pursed his lips, in another onset of wariness. “I have 
good reason for caution.” Teehalt glanced right and left. 
“Would it surprise you to learn 
that I expect to meet — ” 
He hesitated, thought better 
of what he planned to say, and 
sat silently a moment, looking 
into his empty glass. Gersen signaled, and young Araminta 
Smade brought whiskey, on a 
white jade tray, upon which she 
herself had painted a red and 
blue floral border. 
“But this is inconsequential,” 
said Teehalt suddenly. “I bore 
you with my problems.” 
“Not at all,” said Gersen, 
quite truthfully. “The affairs of 
Grendel interest me.” 
“I can understand this,” said 
Teehalt after another pause. “He 
is a peculiar combination of 
qualities.” 
“From whom did you have 
your boat?” Gersen asked ingenuously. 
Teehalt shook his head. “I 
will not say. For all I know, you 
are Grendel’s man. I hope not, 
for your own sake.” 
“Why should I be Grendel’s 
man?” 
“Circumstances suggest as 
much. But circumstances only. 
And in fact I know that you are 
not. He would not send someone here whom I have not met.” 
“You have a rendezvous, 
then.” 
“One I don’t care to keep. 
But — I don’t know what else to 
do.” 
“Return to the Oikumene.” 
“What does Grendel care for 
that? He comes and goes as he 
pleases.” 
“Why should he concern himself with you? Locators are twenty to the dozen.” 
“I am unique,” said Teehalt. “I 
am a locator who has found a 
prize too precious to sell.” 
Gersen was impressed in spite 
of himself. 
“It is a world too beautiful for 
degradation,” said Teehalt. “An 
innocent world, full of light and 
air and color. To give this world 
to Grendel, for his palaces and 
whirligigs and casinos — it 
would be like giving a child to 
a squad of Sarcoy soldiers. 
Worse? Possibly worse.” 
“And Grendel knows of this?” 
“It is my unfortunate habit to 
drink rashly and talk wildly.” 
“As you do now,” suggested 
Gersen. 
^T^eehalt smiled his wincing 
morose smile. “You could 
tell Grendel nothing he does not 
already know. The damage was 
done at Brinktown.” 
“Tell me more of this world. 
Is it inhabited?” 
Teehalt smiled again, but 
made no answer. Gersen felt no 
resentment. Teehalt, beckoning 
to Araminta Smade, ordered 
Fraze, a heavy sour-sweet liquor 
reputed to include among its 
constituents a subtle hallucinizer. Gersen signified that he 
would drink no more. 
Night had long settled over the 
planet. Lightning crashed back 
and forth. A sudden downpour 
began to drum on the roof. 
Teehalt, lulled by the liquor, 
perhaps seeing visions among 
the flames, said, “You could never find this world. I am resolved 
that it shall not be violated.” 
“What of your contract?” 
Teehalt made a contemptuous 
motion; “I would honor it for 
an ordinary world.” 
“The information is on the 
monitor filament,” Gersen 
pointed out. “The property of 
your sponsor.” 
Teehalt was silent so long that 
Gersen wondered if he were 
awake. Finally Teehalt said, “I 
am afraid to die. Othenvise I 
would drop myself and boat and 
monitor and all into a star.” 
Gersen had no comment to 
make. 
“I do not know what to do.” 
Teehalt’s voice became soft, as 
the drink soothed his brain and 
showed him visions. “This is a 
remarkable world. Beautiful, 
yes. I wonder if the beauty does 
not conceal another quality 
which I can’t fathom, just as a 
woman’s beauty camouflages her 
more abstract virtues. Or vices . 
In any event the world is beautiful and serene beyond words. 
There are mountains washed by 
rain. Over the valleys float 
clouds as soft and bright as 
snow. The sky is a deep dark 
sapphire blue. The air is sweet 
and cool — so fresh that it seems 
a lens. There are flowers, though 
not very many. They grow in 
little clumps, so that to find 
them is like coming on a treasure. But there are many trees, 
and most magnificent are the 
great kings, with gray bark, 
which seem to have lived forever. 
“You asked if the world were 
inhabited. I am forced to answer yes, though the creatures 
who live there are strange. I call 
them dryads. I saw only a few 
hundred, and they seem a race 
ages old. As old as the trees. As 
old as the mountains.” Teehalt 
shut his eyes. “The day is twice 
THE STAR KING 
the length of ours; the mornings 
are long and bright; the noons 
are quiet, the afternoons are 
golden, like honey. The dryads 
bathe in the river or stand in the 
dark forest. Teehalt’s voice 
dwindled, he appeared to be halfasleep. 
Gersen prompted him. “ ‘Dryads’?” 
Teehalt stirred, raised in his 
chair. “It’s as good a name as 
any. They’re at least half-plant. 
I made no real examination I 
dared not. Why? I don’t know. 
I was there — oh, I suppose two 
or three weeks. This is what I 
saw. .” 
T eehalt landed the battered 
old 9B on a meadow beside 
a river. He waited while the analyzer made environmental tests, 
though a landscape so fair could 
not fail to be hospitable — or 
so thought Teehalt who was 
scholar, poet and wastrel in 
equal parts. He was not wrong. 
The atmosphere proved salubrious; allergen-sensitive cultures 
tested negative: micro-organisms 
of air and soil quickly died upon contact with the standard 
antibiotic with which Teehalt 
now dosed himself. There seemed no reason why he should not 
immediately go forth upon this 
world, and he did so. 
On the turf in front of the 
ship Teehalt stood entranced. 
The air was clear and clean and 
fresh, like the air of a spring 
dawn, and utterly silent, as if 
just after a bird-call. 
Teehalt wandered up the valley. Stopping to admire a grove 
of trees, he saw the dryads, who 
stood gathered in the shade. 
They were bipeds, with a peculiarly human torso and head 
structure, though it was clear 
that they resembled man in only 
the most superficial style. Their 
skin was a silver, brown, green, 
in sheens and splotches; the 
head showed no features other 
than purplish-green bruises, 
which seemed to be eye-spots. 
From the shoulders rose members like arms, which branched 
into twigs and then leaves of 
dark and pale green, burnished 
red, bronze-orange, golden ocher. They saw Teehalt and moved 
forward with almost human interest, to pause about fifty feet 
distant, swaying on supple limbs, 
the crests of colored leaves 
shimmering in the sunlight. 
They examined Teehalt and he 
examined them, in a mutual absence of fear, and Teehalt 
thought them the most entrancing creatures of his experience. 
Teehalt remembered the days 
which followed as idyllic and 
utterly calm. There was a majesty, a clarity, a transcendental 
quality to the planet which affected him with an almost re
ligious awe. Presently he came 
to understand that he must leave 
shortly or succumb psychically, 
give himself completely to the 
world. The knowledge afflicted 
him with an almost unbearable 
sadness, for he knew that he 
would never return. 
During this time he watched 
the dryads as they moved 
through the valley, idly curious 
as to their nature and habits. 
Were they intelligent? Teehalt 
never answered the question to 
his own satisfaction. If not intelligent, he thought, surely they 
were wise. Their metabolism 
puzzled him, and also the nature of their life-cycle, though 
gradually he acquired at least a 
glimmer of enlightenment. He 
assumed at first that they derived energy from some sort of 
photosyntheti'c process. Then, 
one morning, as Teehalt contemplated a group of dryads 
standing immobile in the 
marshy meadow, a large winged 
hawk-like creature swooped 
down, buffeted one of the dryads to the side. As it toppled 
Teehalt glimpsed two white 
shafts, or prongs, extending 
from the supple gray legs into 
the ground, which at once retracted. The hawk-creature ignored the toppled dryad, but 
scratched and tore at the marsh 
and unearthed an enormous 
white grub. Teehalt watched 
with great interest. The dryad 
apparently had located the grub 
in its subterranean burrow and 
had pierced it with a sort of 
proboscis, presumably for the 
ingestion of sustenance. Teehalt 
felt a small pang of shame and 
disillusionment. The dryads were 
evidently not quite as innocent 
and ethereal as he had thought 
them to be. 
The hawk-thing lumbered up 
from the pit, croaked, coughed, 
flapped away. Teehalt went curiously forward and stared down 
at the mangled worm. 
There was little to be seen but 
shreds of pallid flesh, yellow 
ooze and a hard black ball, the 
size of Teehalt’s two fists. As he 
stared down, the dryads came 
slowly forward and Teehalt 
withdrew. From a distance he 
watched as they clustered about 
the torn worm. It seemed to Teehalt that they mourned the mangled creature. But presently, 
with their supple lower limbs, 
they brought up the black pod 
which one of them carried away 
high in its branches. Teehalt followed at a distance, and watched 
in fascinated wonder as close beside a grove of slender whitebranched trees the dryads buried 
the black pod. 
I n retrospect Teehalt wondered why he had attempted no communication with the 
THE STAR KING 
dryads. Once or twice during 
the time of his stay he toyed 
with the idea, and let the thought 
drift away — perhaps because 
he felt himself a gross and unpleasant intruder. The dryads 
in their turn treated him with 
what might be courteous disinterest. 
Three days after the black 
pod had been buried Teehalt 
had occasion to return to the 
grove. To his astonishment he 
saw a pallid shoot rising from 
the ground above the pod. At 
the tip pale green leaves already 
were unfolding into the sunlight. 
Teehalt stood back and examined the grove with new interest. Had each of these trees 
grown from a pod originated in 
the body of a subterranean 
grub? He examined the foliage, 
limbs and bark, finding nothing 
to suggest such an origin. He 
looked across the valley, to the 
great dark-leaved giants. Surely 
the two varieties were similar? 
The giants were majestic, serene, 
with trunks rising two or three 
hundred feet to the first branching. The trees grown from the 
black pods were frail. Their foliage was a tenderer green. The 
limbs were more flexible, and 
branched close to the ground — 
but the species were clearly related. Leaf shape and structure 
were almost identical, as was the 
general appearance of the bark, 
supple and rough-textured, 
though the bark of the giants 
was darker and coarser. Teehalt’s head swarmed with speculations. 
Later the same day he climbed 
the mountain across the valley. 
Crossing the ridge he came down 
upon a glen with precipitous 
rocky walls. 
A stream rushed and splashed 
through mossy boulders and low 
fernlike plants, falling from 
pool to pool. Approaching the 
brink Teehalt found himself on 
a level with the foliage of the 
giant trees, which here grew 
close beside the cliff. He noted 
dull green sacs, like fruit, growing among the leaves. Straining, 
risking a fall, Teehalt was able 
to pluck one of these sacs. He 
carried it down the mountainside and across the meadow toward the boat. He passed a 
group of dryads who, fixing 
their purple-green eye-bruises 
on the sac, became rigid. Teehalt observed them with puzzlement. Now they approached, 
their gorgeous fans quivering 
and shimmering in agitation. 
Teehalt felt embarrassed and 
guilty. Evidently by plucking 
the sac he had offended the dryads. Why or how he could not 
fathom, but he hastily sought 
the concealment of his ship, 
where he cut open the sac. The 
husk was pithy and dry. Down 
the center ran a stalk from 
which depended white pea-sized 
seeds, of great complexity. Teehalt inspected the seeds under a 
magnifier. They bore a remarkable resemblance to small underdeveloped beetles, or wasps. 
With tweezers and knife he 
opened one out on a sheet of 
paper, noting wings, thorax, 
mandibles. Clearly an insect! 
For a long while he sat contemplating the insects which 
grew on a tree. A curious analogue, so Teehalt reflected, to 
the sapling which sprouted 
from a pod taken from the body 
of a worm. 
Sunset colored the sky; the 
distant parts of the valley grew 
indistinct. Dusk came and evening, with the stars blurring 
large as lamps. 
The long night passed. At 
dawn when Teehalt emerged 
from his boat he knew that the 
time of his departure was close 
at hand. How? Why? He had 
no answer. The compulsion nevertheless was real; he must leave, 
and he knew he would never 
return. As he considered the 
mother-of-pearl sky, the curve 
and swell of the hills, the groves 
and forests, the gentle river, his 
eyes went damp. The world was 
too beautiful to leave; far too 
beautiful to remain upon. It 
worked on something deep inside him, arousing a queer tu
THE STAR KING 
mult which he could not understand. There was a constant force 
from somewhere to run from 
the ship, to discard his clothes, 
his weap>ons, to merge, to envelope and become enveloped, to 
immolate himself in an ecstasy 
of identification with beauty and 
grandeur. 
Today he must go. “If I’m here 
any longer,” thought Teehalt, 
“I’ll be carrying leaves over my 
head with the dryads.” 
T Te wandered up the valley, 
turning to watch the sim 
swell into the sky. He climbed 
to the ridge of the hill, looked 
east over a succession of rolling 
crests and valleys, rising gradually to a single great mountain. 
To west and south he glimpsed 
the glimmer of water. To the 
north spread green parkland, 
with a crumble of gray boulders 
like the ruins of an ancient city. 
Returning into the valley Teehalt passed below the giant 
trees. Looking up he noticed that 
all the pods had split and now 
hung limp and withered. Even 
as he watched he heard a drone 
of wings. A hard heavy pellet 
struck his cheek, where it clung 
and bit. 
In shock and pain Teehalt 
crushed the insect, or wasp. 
Looking aloft he saw others — 
a multitude, darting and veering. Hastily he returned to the 
I 
ship, dressed in a coverall of 
tough film, his face and head 
protected by transparent mesh. 
He was unreasonably angry. The 
wasp’s attack had marred his 
last day in the valley, and in 
fact had caused him the first 
pain of his stay. It was too much 
to expect, he reflected bitterly, 
that paradise could exist without the serpent. And he dropped 
a can of compressed insect repellent into his pouch . though 
it might or might not be efficacious against these half -vegetable 
insects. 
Leaving the ship, he marched 
up the valley, with the insect’s 
bite paining him still. Approaching the forest he came upon a strange scene: a group of 
dryads surrounded by a buzzing 
swarm of wasps. Teehalt approached curiously. The dryads, 
he saw, were under attack, but 
lacked any efficient means of 
defence. As the wasps darted in 
to settle on the silver skin, the 
dryads flapped their branches, 
rubbed against each other, 
scraped with their legs, dislodging the insects as best they could. 
Teehalt approached, filled 
with horrified anger One of the 
dryads near him seemed to 
weaken. Several of the insects 
gnawed through its skin, drawing gouts of ichor. The entire 
swarm suddenly condensed upon the unfortunate dryad, which 
tottered and fell, while the remaining dryads moved sedately 
away. 
Teehalt, impelled to disgust 
and loathing, stepped forward, 
turned the can of repellent upon the nearly solid mass of 
wasps. It acted with dramatic 
effectiveness, the wasps turning 
white, withering, dropping to 
the ground. In a single minute 
the entire swarm was a scatter 
of small white husks. The dryad 
under attack also lay dead, having been almost instantly 
stripped of its flesh. 
The dryads who had escaped 
were now returning, and so Teehalt thought, in a state of anguish and even fury. Their 
branches quivered and flashed; 
they marched down upon him 
with every indication of antagonism. Teehalt took to his heels 
and returned to his ship. 
Wiili binoculars he watched 
the dryads. They stood about 
their dead comrade in a state of 
anxiety and irresolution. Apparently — or at least it seemed 
so to Teehalt — their anguish 
was as much for the withered 
insects as the dead dryad. 
They clustered over the fallen 
body. Teehalt could not observe 
exactly what they did, but presently they arose with a glossy 
black ball. And Teehalt watched 
them carry it across the valley 
toward the grove of giant trees. 
II 
I have examined the native 
life-forms of over two thousand 
planets. I have noted many examples of convergent evolution, 
but many many more of divergence. 
— Life Volume II, 
by Unspiek, Baron Bodissey. 
It is first of all essential that 
we understand exactly what we 
mean by the well-used term 
“convergent evolution”. Especially we must not confuse statistical probability with some 
transcendental and utterly compelling force. Consider the class 
of all possible objects, the number of which is naturally very 
large: infinite indeed, unless we 
impose an upper limit of mass 
and certain other physical qualifications. Thus imposing and so 
qualifying, we find that still 
only an infinitesimal fraction 
of this class of objects can be 
considered life-forms. Before 
we have even started the investigation we have exercised a 
very stringent selection of objects which by their very definition will show basic similarities. 
To particularize: there are a 
limited number of methods of 
locomotion. If we find a quadruped on Planet A, and a quadruped likewise on Planet B, does 
this imply convergent evolution? 
No. It merely implies evolution, 
or perhaps no more than the 
fact that a four-legged creature 
can effectively stand without 
toppling and walk without stumbling. In my opinion, therefore, 
the expression “convergent evolution” is tautological. 
— Ibid 
From: The Wages of Sin, 
Stridenko; article in Cosmopolis, May, 1404. 
Brinktown: what a city! Once 
the jumping-off place, the last 
outpost, the portal into infinity 
— now just another settlement 
of the North East Middle Beyond. But “just another”? Is this 
a fair description? Decidedly 
not. Brinktown must be seen to 
be believed, and even then the 
hard of belief depart incredulous. The houses are set far apart 
along shaded avenues; still they 
rise like watch-towers, thrusting 
up into and through the palms, 
virebols, scalmettos. It is a mean 
house which does not soar above 
the treetops. The ground level is 
no more than an entry, a raised 
pavilion where the clothes must 
be changed, for local habit ordains the use of paper housecapes and paper slippers. Then 
above : what an explosion of 
architectural conceits, what turrets and spires, belfries and cu
THE STAR KING 
polas! What jejeune magnificence, what inspired scrimshaw, 
what intricate, inventive, farcical, wonderful applications and 
misapplications of likely and 
unlikely materials! Where else 
can one find balustrades of tortoise-shell studded with goldplated fish-heads? Where else 
do ivory nymphs hang suspended by their hair from the roof 
gutters, their faces expressing 
only bland benediction? Where 
else can a man’s success be 
gauged by the sumptuousness of 
the tombstone he designs for 
himself and erects in his front 
yard, complete with panegyrical 
epitaph? And in fact where but 
in Brinktown is success such 
an ambiguous recommendation? 
Few indeed of the inhabitants 
dare show themselves within the 
Oikumene. The magistrates are 
assassins; the civil guard arsonists, extortioners and rapists; 
the elders of the council, bordello owners. But civil affairs proceed with a pimctililo and gravity worthy of the Grand Sessions 
at Borugstone, or a coronation at 
the Tower of London. The Brinktown jail is one of the most ingenious ever propounded by civic authorities. It must be remembered that Brinktown occupies 
the surface of a volcanic butte, 
overlooking a trackless jungle of 
quagmire, thorn, eel-vine skiver 
tussock. A single road leads from 
city down to jungle. The prisoner 
is merely locked out of the city. 
Escape is at his option; he may 
flee as far through the jungle as 
he sees fit; the entire continent is 
at his disposal. But no prisoner 
ever ventures far from the gate. 
And when his presence is required it is only necessary to unlock the gate and call his name. 
'^eehalt sat looking into the 
fire. Gersen wondered if he 
intended to say more. 
At last Teehalt spoke. “So I 
left the planet. I could stay no 
longer. To live there a p>erson 
must either forget himself, give 
way completely to the beauty, 
drown his identity in it — or 
else he must master it. Break it. 
Reduce it to a background for 
his own constructions. I could 
do neither, so I can never go 
back. But the memory of the 
place haunts me.” 
“In spite of the wasps?” 
Teehalt nodded somberly. 
“Yes indeed. I did wrong to interfere. There is a rh3rthm to the 
planet, an equilibrium which I 
blundered into and disturbed. 
I’ve speculated for days, but I 
still don’t understand the process completely. Wasps are born 
as fruit of the tree; the worms 
yield the seed to one kind of 
tree — this much I know. I suspect that the dryads produce the 
seed to the great giants. The pro
cess of life becomes a great 
circle, or perhaps a series of incarnations, with the great trees 
as the end-result. The dryads 
seem to tap the worms for part 
of their sustenance, the wasps 
devour the dryads. Where do the 
worms come from? Are the 
wasps their first phase? Flying 
larvae, so to speak? Do the 
worms eventually metamorphose 
into dryads? I feel this must 
be the case — though I don’t 
know. If so, the cycle is beautiful, in a fashion I can’t find 
words to describe. Something ordained, stately, ancient, like the 
rotation of the galaxy. If the 
pattern were disturbed, if one 
link were broken, the whole process would collapse. This would 
be a great crime.” 
“So therefore you don’t want 
to reveal the location of the 
world to your sponsor whom you 
believe to be Grendel the Monster.” 
“I know to be Grendel,” said 
Teehalt stiffly. 
“How did you find out?” 
Teehalt looked at him sidewise. “You are very interested 
in Grendel.” 
Gersen shrugged. “One hears 
many strange tales.” 
“True. But I do not care to 
document them. And do you 
know why?” 
“No.” 
“I have changed my thoughts 
THE STAR KING 
about you. Now I suspect you of 
weaselry.” 
t<Tf I were a weasel,” said 
Gersen smiling, “I’d hardly admit it. The IPCC has few 
friends Bej^ond.” 
“I am imconcemed,” said Teehalt. “But I hope for better days 
if — when I return home. I do 
not care to incur Grendel’s animosity by identifying him to a 
weasel.” 
“If I were a weasel,” said Gersen, “you have already compromised yourself. You know of 
truth drugs and hypnotic rays.” 
“Yes. I also know how to avoid 
them. But no matter. It’s not 
important. You asked how I 
learned that Grendel was my 
sponsor. I have no objection to 
telling you this. Through my 
own drunken prolixity. I put into Brinktown. In Sin-San’s Tavern I spoke at length, much as 
I spoke to you tonight, to a dozen enthralled listeners. Yes, I 
held their attention.” Teehalt 
laughed bitterly. “Presently I 
was called to the telephone. The 
man at the other end said his 
name was Hildemar Dasce. Do 
you know him?” 
“No.” 
“Odd,” said Teehalt, “since 
you are so interested in Grendel. 
But, in any event, he spoke to 
me, told me to report to Smade’s. 
He said I’d meet Grendel here.” 
“What?” demanded Gersen. 
“Here?” 
“Here at Smade’s. I asked, 
what’s this to me? I had no dealings with Grendel and wished 
none. He convinced me otherwise. So I’m here. I am not a 
brave man.” He made a small 
helpless gesture, picked up his 
empty glass, looked into it. “I 
don’t know what to do. If I remain Beyond. Teehalt 
shrugged. 
“Destroy the monitor filament.” 
Teehalt shook his head regretfully. “It’s the surety I carry for 
my life. Indeed I’d rather — he 
stopped short. “Did you hear 
anything?” 
“Rain. Thunder.” 
“I thought I heard tubes blowing.” He rose to his feet, peered 
from the window. “Some is coming.” 
Gersen also went to the window. “I see nothing.” 
“A ship dropped down into 
the field,” said Teehalt. He 
thought a moment. “There are 
only two ships there: yours and 
the Star King’s.” 
“Where is your ship?” 
“I set down in a valley to the 
north. I want no one meddling 
with my monitor.” He seemed 
to listen, then looking into Gersen ’s eyes he said, “You are not 
a locator.” 
“No.” 
Teehalt nodded. “Locaters are, 
by and large, a vile lot. You are 
not of the IPCC?” 
“Think of me as an explorer.” 
“Will you help me?” 
''T^he harsh precepts of Gersen’s training contended 
with an innate generosity; he 
muttered reluctantly, “Within 
limits — very narrow limits.” 
Teehalt smiled thinly. “What 
are these limits?” 
“My own business is urgent. 
I can’t allow myself to be diverted.” 
Teehalt was neither disappointed nor resentful. He could 
expect no more from a stranger. 
“Odd,” he said once more, “that 
you do not know Hildemar 
Dasce. But he will come in presently. How do I know? By the 
logic of plain ordinary fear.” 
“You’ll be safe so long as you 
stay inside the tavern,” said Gersen. “Smade has his rules.” 
Teehalt nodded, p>olitely acknowledging the discomfiture he 
had caused Gersen. A minute 
passed. The Star King rose to 
his feet, his pink and red garment glowed in the firelight. He 
walked slowly up the stairs, 
looking neither right nor left. 
Teehalt followed him with his 
eyes. “Impressive creature I 
understand that only the handsome ones are allowed to leave 
their planet.” 
“So I have heard.” 
Teehalt sat looking into the 
fire. 
Five minutes passed. Then 
Teehalt reached into his jacket, 
brought forth an envelope. 
“Here are photographs you 
might be pleased to inspect at 
your leisure.” 
Gersen took them without 
comment. 
The door slid back. Three 
dark shapes stood in the gap, 
looking into the room. Smade 
roared from behind the bar, 
“Come in or stay out! Must I 
warm the whole cursed planet?” 
Into the hall otepped the 
strangest human being of Gersen’s experience. “And there,” 
said Teehalt with a sick titter, 
“you see Beauty Dasce.” 
Dasce was about six feet tall. 
His torso was a tube, the same 
gauge from knee to shoulder. His 
arms were thin and long, terminating in great bony wrists, enormous hands. His head was also 
tall and round, with a ruff of 
red hair and a chin seeming 
almost to rest on the clavicle. 
Dasce had stained his neck and 
face bright red, excepting only 
his cheeks, which were balls of 
bright chalk-blue, like a pair of 
mildewed oranges. At some stage 
of his career his nose had been 
cleft into a pair of cartilaginous 
prongs, and his eyelids had been 
cut away; to moisten his corneas 
he wore two nozzles connected 
to a tank of fluid which every 
few seconds discharged a film of 
mist into his eyes. There was also a pair of shutters, now raised, 
which could be lowered to cover 
his eyes from the light, and 
which were painted to represent 
staring white and blue eyes similar to Dasce’s own. 
'"T^he two men at his back by 
contrast appeared ordinary 
run-of-the-mill human beings: 
both dark, hard, competentseeming, with quick clever eyes. 
Dasce made a brusque signal 
to Smade, who stood impassively watching from behind the 
bar. “Three rooms, if you please. 
We will eat presently.” 
“Very well.” 
“The name is Hildemar 
Dasce.” 
“Very well, Mr. Dasce.” 
Dasce now sauntered across 
the room to where Teehalt and 
Gersen sat. His glance shifted 
from one to the other. “Since we 
are fellow travelers, house-guests 
of Mr. Smade, let us introduce 
ourselves,” he said politely. “My 
name is Hildemar Dasce. May I 
inquire yours?” 
“I am Kirth Gersen.” 
“I am Keelen Tannas.” 
Dasce’s lips, pale purple-gray 
against the red of his skin, 
moved in a smile. “To an amazing degree you resemble a cer
THE STAR KING 
tain Lugo Teehalt whom I expected to find here.” 
“Think of me as you like,” 
said Teehalt in a reedy voice. 
“I have spoken my name.” 
“But what a pity. I have business to .transact with Lugo Teehalt!” 
“It is pointless then to approach me.” 
“As you wish. Though I suspect that the business with Lugo 
Teehalt might interest Keelen 
Tannas. Will you step aside for 
a moment’s private conversation?” 
“No. I am not interested. My 
friend knows my name. It is 
Keelen Tannas.” 
“Your ‘friend’?” Dasce turned 
his attention to Gersen. “Do you 
know this man well?” 
“As well as I know anyone.” 
“And his name is Keelen Tannas?” 
“If this is the name he offers 
you, I can only suggest that you 
accept it!” 
Without further remark Dasce 
turned away. He and his men 
went to a table at the end of 
the hall, where they ate. 
Teehalt spoke in a hollow 
voice, “He knows me well 
enough.” 
Gersen felt a spasm of irritation. Why should Teehalt feel 
impelled to embroil a stranger 
in his troubles, if his identity 
were already known? 
Teehalt explained his act in 
the next breath. “Since I fight 
the hook, he thinks he has me 
trapped, and he amuses himself.” 
“What of Grendel? I thought 
you had come here to meet him.” 
“Better that I return to Alphanor and confront him there. 
I will return his money, but I 
will not lead him to the planet.” 
At the far end of the hall 
Dasce and his two companions 
were served with platters from 
Smade’s kitchen. Gersen watched 
them a moment. “They seem unconcerned.” 
Teehalt sniffed. “They think 
that I will deal with Grendel, 
but not with them. I will try 
to escape. Dasce does not know 
that I landed over the hill. Perhaps he thinks that your ship 
is mine.” 
“Who are the other two men?” 
“Assassins. They know me well 
enough, from the tavern at 
Brinktown. Tristano is an Earthman. He kills by touches of his 
hand. The other is a Sarkoy 
venefice. He can brew stuff to 
kill from sand and water. All 
three are madmen — but Dasce 
is the worst. He knows every 
horror there is to be known.” 
TAasce at this moment looked 
at his watch. Wiping his 
mouth with the back of his hand 
he rose, crossed the room, bent 
over Teehalt. In a husky whis
per he said, “Grendel waits you 
outside. He will see you now.” 
Teehalt stared at him with 
sagging jaw. Dasce swaggered 
back to his table. 
Now Teehalt rubbed his face 
with quivering fingers, turned to 
Gersen. “I can still evade them 
if I can lose myself in the dusk. 
When I run out the door, will 
you detain the three?” 
“How do you suggest I do 
this?” 
Teehalt was silent a moment. 
“I don’t know.” 
“Nor do I, with the best will 
in the world.” 
Teehalt gave a sad nod. “Very 
well, then. I will fend for myself. Good-by, Mr. Gersen.” He 
rose to his feet, walked to the 
bar. Dasce slanted his eyes at 
him, but otherwise seemed disinterested. Beside the bar, Teehalt stood beyond the reach of 
his vision. Instantly Teehalt 
darted into the kitchen, out of 
sight. Smade looked after him 
with sardonic wonder. 
Dasce and the two assassins 
stolidly continued their meal. 
Gersen watched covertly. Why 
did they sit with such unconcern? Teehalt’s ruse had been 
pitifully obvious. Gersen’s skin 
began to prickle. In spite of his 
resolve, he rose to his feet, went 
to the doorway. Pushing open 
the timber panels, he stepped 
out on the veranda. 
The night was dark, lit only 
by stars. The wind, for a wonder, was still; but the sea, swirl.^^ing and flowing, sent up a muffled sad sound. A short sharp 
scream, a whimper, from behind 
the tavern. Gersen abandoned 
his resolve and started forward. 
A grip like the pinch of steel 
seized his arm, tweaked nerves 
at the back of his elbow; another hand clamped at his neck. 
Gersen let himself fall, broke the 
grip. He rolled over, bounced to 
his feet, stood in a half-crouch, 
shuffled slowly forward. Facing 
him with an easy smile stood 
Tristano the Earthman. “Careful, friend,” said Tristano in the 
clipped flat Earth accent. “Give 
me trouble and Smade pitches 
you into the sea.” 
Dasce came out the door, followed by the Sarcoy poisoner. 
Tristano joined them, the three 
walked to the space-port. Gersen 
remained on the terrace. 
Ten minutes later two ships 
rose into the night. The first was 
a squat armored vessel, with 
weapons fore and aft. The second was a battered old locator’s 
ship. Model 9B. 
Gersen stared in wonder. The 
second ship was his own. 
The ships disappeared, the sky 
once more was empty. Gersen returned into the tavern and sat 
before the fire. Presently he 
brought forth the envelope given 
THE STAR KING 
r 
him by Lugo Teehalt, opened it 
and extracted three photographs, which he examined for 
the better part of an hour. 
'^he fire burnt low. Smade 
took himself to bed, leaving 
a son dozing behind the bar. Outside the night rains began to 
thrash down, lightning crackled, 
the ocean groaned. 
Gersen sat in deep thought. 
Presently from his pocki t he 
brought a sheet of paper, which 
listed five names: 
Grendel (the Monster) 
Howard Alan Treesong 
Viole Falushe 
Kokor Hekkus (the Killing 
Machine) 
Lens Larque 
From his pocket he brought 
a pencil, but still he deliberated. 
If he continually added names 
to his list he would never finish. Of course there was no real 
need to write. There v/as no real 
need for a list: Gersen knew the 
five names as well as he knew 
his own. He compromised. To 
the right and below the last 
name of the original list he appended a sixth name: Hildemar 
Dasce. 
For a space he sat looking at 
the names, with two sides to his 
mind : the one so alive and passionate that the other, the cerebral detached observer, felt a 
trace of amusement. 
The flames settled low, chunks 
of fossilized moss glowed scarlet. The sea-sound was slower 
and lower in pitch. Gersen rose 
to his feet and climbed the stone 
stairs to his room. 
During his life Gersen had 
known little other than a succession of strange beds. Nevertheless sleep came slowly, and he 
lay staring into the dark. Visions 
passed before him, from as early 
as he could remember: a landscape which, as he recalled, 
seemed wonderfully pleasant 
and bright. There were tawny 
mountains, a village painted in 
faded pastel colors along the 
banks of a wide tawny river. But 
this picture, as always, was fol
lowed by another even more vivid: the same landscape, littered 
with hacked and bleeding bodies. 
Men and women and children 
shuffled into the holds of five 
long ships under the weapons of 
two score men in what seemed 
strange and outlandish costumes. 
With an old man who was his 
grandfather, Gersen watched 
horrified from across the river, 
concealed from the slavers by 
the bulk of an old barge. When 
the ships had lifted, they returned across the river. Then his 
grandfather told him, “Many 
things your father had planned 
for you. Learning and useful 
work and a life of satisfaction and 
peace. Do you recall this?” 
THE STAR KING 
“Yes, grandfather.” 
“The learning you shall have. 
You will learn patience and resource, the ability of your hands 
and your mind. You will have 
useful work: the destruction of 
evil men. What work could be 
more useful? This is Beyond; 
you will find that your work is 
never done — so therefore you 
may never know a life of peace. 
However I guarantee you ample 
satisfaction: for I will teach you 
to crave the blood of these men 
more than the flesh of woman.” 
'"T^he old man had been as 
good as his word. Eventually they made their way to Earth, 
the ultimate repository of every 
sort of knowledge. 
Young Kirth learned many 
things, from a succession of 
strange teachers which it would 
be tedious to detail. He killed 
his first man at the age of fourteen: a footpad who had the illluck to accost them in a back 
alley of Rotterdam. While his 
grandfather stood by, in the 
manner of an old fox teaching 
a cub to hunt, young Kirth, 
gasping and sobbing, broke first 
the ankle, then the neck of the 
astonished assailant. 
From Earth they moved to Alphanor, capitol planet of the 
Rigel Concourse, and here Kirth 
Gersen gained more conventional knowledge. When he was 
nineteen his grandfather died, 
bequeathing him a comfortable 
sum of money and a letter which 
read: 
My dear Kirth: 
I have seldom told of my affection and high regard for you; 
I take this occasion to do so. You 
have come to mean more to me 
than ever did my own son. I 
will not say I am sorry that I 
have set your feet in the path 
they now must take, even though 
you will be denied many ordinary pleasures and luxuries. 
Have I been presumptuous in so 
shaping your life? I think not. 
For several years you have been 
self-motivated, and have showed 
no inclination to point yourself 
in any other direction. In any 
event I can think of no more 
useful service for a man to perform than that which I have ordained for you. The Law of Man 
is bounded by the limits of the 
Oikumene. Good and evil, however, are ideas which encompass 
the universe; unluckily, beyond 
the Pale there are few to ensure 
the triumph of good over evil. 
Actually the triumph consists 
of two processes: first evil must 
be extinguished, then good must 
be introduced to fill the gap. It 
is impossible that a man should 
be equally efficacious in both 
functions. Good and evil, in spite 
of a traditional fallacy, are not 
polarities, nor mirror images, 
nor is one merely the absence 
of the other. In order to minimize confusion, your work will 
merely be the destruction of 
evil men. What is an evil man? 
The man is evil who coerces 
obedience to his private ends, 
destroys beauty, produces pain, 
extinguishes life. It must be remembered that killing evil men 
is not equivalent to expunging 
evil, which is a relationship between a situation and an individual. A poisonous spore will 
grow only in a nutrient soil. In 
this case the nutrient soil is Beyond, and since no human effort can alter the Beyond (which 
must always exist), you must 
devote your efforts to destroying the poisonous spores, which 
are evil men. It is a task of 
which you will never see the end. 
Our sharpest and first motivation in this matter, agreed, is no 
more than a primitive ache for 
revenge. Five pirate captains destroyed certain lives and enslaved other who were precious 
to us. Revenge is not an ignoble 
motive, when it works to a productive end. The names of these 
five pirate captains I do not 
know. My best attempts have 
brought me no information. One 
man, an underling, I recognized: 
his name is Parsifal Pankarow, 
and he is no less baneful than 
the five captains, though his po
THE STAR KING 
tentialities for harm are less. 
You must seek him Beyond and 
learn from him the names of the 
five. 
Then you must kill the five, 
and it will do no harm if they 
suffer pain in the process, for 
they have brought an immeasurable amount of pain and grief to 
others. 
There is still much for you to 
learn. I would advise you to join 
the Institute, except I fear that 
the disciplines of this body 
would not set well with you. Do 
as you think best. In my youth 
I thought to become a catechumen, but Destiny ruled otherwise. If I were friends with a 
Fellow I would send you to him 
for counsel — but I have no such 
friend. Perhaps you will be less 
constricted outside the Institute. 
Stringent conditions are imposed 
upon the catechumen through 
the first fourteen degrees. 
In any event, I advise you to 
devote a time to the study of 
Sarkoy poisons and hand-techniques, preferably on Sarkoy itself. There is room for improvement in your ‘marksmanship and 
knife-play, though you need fear 
few men at hand-fighting. Your 
intuitive judgments are good; 
your self control, economy of action, and versatility are to be 
commended. But — you still 
have much to learn. For the next 
ten years, study, train — and be 
cautious. There are many other 
capable men. Do not rashly 
waste yourself against them until you are more than ready. In 
short, do not make an overvirtue 
of courage or heroism. A goodly 
amount of caution — call it fear 
or even cowardice — is a highly 
desirable adjunct for a man such 
as yourself, whose one fault 
might be said to be a mystical, 
almost superstitious, faith in the 
success of your destiny. Do not 
be fooled. We are all mortal, as 
I now attest. 
So, my grandson, I am dead. 
I have trained you to know good 
from evil. I feel only pride in 
my accomplishment, and hope 
that you will remember me with 
affection and respect. 
Your loving grandfather, 
Rolf Harpit Gersen 
T?or eleven years Kirth Gersen obeyed the dictates of 
his grandfather, or exceeded 
them, meanwhile seeking both 
within the Oikumene and Beyond for Parsifal Pankarow, but 
fruitlessly. 
Few occupations offered more 
challenge, more hazard, more 
chilling rebuffs to incompetence 
than weasling for the IPCC. 
Gersen undertook two assignments, on Pharode and Blue 
Planet. During the term of this 
latter, he submitted a preemptive requisition for information 
regarding Parsifal Pankarow, 
and felt himself well rewarded 
to learn that Parsifal Pankarow 
currently resided at Brinktown, 
where he was Ira Bugloss, operator of a prosperous import business. 
Gersen found Ira Bugloss, or 
Pankarow, to be a burly hearty 
man, egg-bald, his skin dyed 
lemon-yellow with mustachios 
which were wide, black and luxuriant. 
Brinktown occupied a plateau 
which stood like an island in a 
black and orange jungle. Gersen 
scrutinized Pankarow’s movements for two weeks, learned his 
routine, which was that of a 
man without a care. Then one 
evening he hired a cab, rendered the operator unconscious, 
waited outside the Jodisei Conversation and Flower Arranging 
Club, until Pankarow tired of 
sporting with the inmates and 
emerged into the humid Brinktown night. Well pleased with 
himself, humming a tune he had 
just learned, he staggered into 
the cab and was conveyed, not 
to his vast and sumptuous home, 
but to a remote clearing in the 
jungle. 
Here Gersen put questions 
which Pankarow had no wish to 
answer. Pankarow made an effort to hold his tongue, to no 
avail. Finally five names were 
wrung from his memory. “Now 
GALAXY PUBLISHING CORP. 
421 HUDSON STREET 
NEW YORK 14, N. Y. 
in. “I will 
“You will 
le again.” 
kfully and 
o Brinksly placid 
ite three-, 
Duses ema, purple 
vilight he 
jiet back 
>use. 
ne stood 
ve monueres and 
a sculpil Pankase, head 
iky, arms 
stood apirteen or 
ped down 
jproached 
n my fawomen?” 
art to the 
put aside 
ting Panig a mes
inquired 
anxious. 
have no 
Your faiway. He 
in return. 
cautious. ' 
capable i 
waste you 
til you ar< 
short, do r 
of courage 
amount of 
or even c< 
desirable £ 
as yourse 
might be 
almost suj 
success of 
be fooled. 
I now att 
So, my 
I have trai 
from evil, 
my accon 
that you w 
affection i 
Your 
Rolf 
■por elev 
sen ol 
his grand 
them, mei 
within the 
yond for F 
fruitlessly. 
Few occ 
challenge, 
chilling rel 
than weas 
Gersen ur 
ments, on 
Planet. Dt 
latter, he 
tive requis 
From 
what will you do with me?” 
croaked the erstwhile Ira Bugloss. 
“I will kill you,” said Gersen, 
pale and quivering after exercise he did not enjoy. “I have 
made you my enemy. FurtherI more you deserve to die a hundred times over.” 
“At one time, yes!” cried the 
sweating Pankarow. “Now I lead 
a blameless life, I injure no 
one!” 
Gersen wondered if every such 
occasion would cause him such 
nausea, misgivings and misery. 
He responded in a voice held 
crisp and even by enormous effort. “What you say perhaps is 
true, but your wealth stinks of 
pain. And certainly you will 
make a report to the first agent 
of any of the five you meet.” 
“No. I swear not. And my 
wealth — take it all.” 
“Where is your wealth?” 
Pankarow tried to make conditions. “I will lead you to it.” 
Gersen shook his head sadly. 
“Accept my excuses. You are 
about to die. It comes to all men. 
You had best feel that you are 
requiting the evil you have 
done — ” 
“Under my tombstone!” 
screamed Pankarow. “Under the 
stone tombstone before my 
house!” 
Gersen touched a tube to Pan. karow’s neck, which spat a Sar
THE STAR KING 
koy poison into the skin. “I will 
go to look,” he said. “You will 
sleep until you see me again.” 
Pankarow relaxed thankfully and 
was dead in seconds. 
^ ersen returned to Brinktown, a deceptively placid 
settlement of tall ornate three-, 
four- and five-story houses embowered among green, purple 
and black trees. At twilight he 
sauntered along a quiet back 
lane to Pankarow’s house. 
The stone tombstone stood 
plain to see: a massive monument of marble spheres and 
cubes surmounted by a sculptured image of Parsifal Pankarow in a noble pose, head 
thrown back to the sky, arms 
outspread. As Gersen stood appraising it a boy thirteen or 
fourteen years old stepped down 
from the porch and approached 
Gersen. “Are you from my father? Is he with the fat women?” 
Gersen steeled his heart to the 
inevitable pangs, and put aside 
all thought of confiscating Pankarow’s wealth. “I bring a message from your father.” 
“Will you come in?” inquired 
the boy, tremulously anxious. 
“I’ll call my mother.” 
“No. Please don’t. I have no 
time. Listen carefully. Your father has been called away. He 
is not sure when he can return. 
Perhaps never.” 
The boy listened round-eyed. 
“Did he — run away?” 
Gersen nodded. “Yes. Some 
old enemies found him, and he 
does not dare show himself. He 
said to tell you or your mother 
that money is hidden under the 
tombstone.” 
The boy stared at Gersen. 
“Who are you?” 
“A messenger, no more. Tell 
your mother exactly what I have 
told you. One more thing. When 
you look beneath the tombstone, 
be careful. There may be . a trap 
to guard the money. Do you imderstand what I’m saying?” 
“Yes. A booby-trap.” 
“That’s right. Be careful. Get 
the help of someone you can 
trust.” 
Gersen departed Brinktown. 
He thought of Smade’s Planet, 
with its elemental quiet and isolation: precisely the antidote to 
his fretful conscience. 
Where, he asked himself, as 
the locater boat skidded down a 
fracture in the continuum, did 
the balance lie? He had by no 
means reached the tipping point. 
Parsifal Pankarow deserved the 
callous execution he had received. But what of wife and 
son? They must bear the pain, 
but why? To protect the women and children of more deserving men from worse pain. So 
Gersen reassured himself. But 
the haunted dark look of the 
boy’s eyes would not leave his 
memory. 
Destiny led him. The first 
night at Smade’s Tavern engaged him with Grendel the 
Monster, the first name Parsifal 
Pankarow had blurted forth. In 
his bed Gersen heaved a deep 
sigh. Pankarow was dead. Poor | 
miserable Lugo Teehalt was | 
probably dead. All men must i 
die; let there be an end to brood- | 
ing. He grinned into the dark, ! 
thinking of Grendel (whoever 
he might be) and Beauty Dasce | 
examining the monitor of his i 
ship. To begin with they would | 
be unable to open the monitor 
with their key. A formidable 
difficulty, even worse if they suspected thief-proofing of explosive, poison gas or acid. When 
after great travail they eventu- i 
ally extracted the filament, it I 
would show blank. Gersen’s i 
monitor was no more than win- : 
dow-dressing; he had never bothered to activate it. 
Grendel would look questioningly at Beauty Dasce, who 
would mutter some sort of objurgation. Perhaps then they 
would think to check the serial 
number of the ship, only to find 
that it was different from that 
issued to Lugo Teehalt. And 
then: swiftly back to Smade’s 
Planet. But by that time, Gersen 
would make sure that he was 
gone. 
m 
Question put to Bale Maurmath. Chief Quaestor of TriPlanetary Police System, during a round-table television 
discussion, broadcast from 
Conover, Cuthbert, Vega. May 
16, 993: 
I know your problems are tremendous, Quaestor Maurmath, 
in fact I don’t really comprehend 
how you get on top of them. For 
instance, how can you possibly 
locate some one particular man, 
or trace his background among 
ninety-odd inhabited planets 
and billions of people of all 
varieties of political complexion, local habit, doctrines of belief? 
Answer: 
Usually we can’t. 
Message of Lord Jaiko Jaikoska. Chairman of the Executive Board, to the Valhalla 
General Legislative Assembly, 
Valhalla, Tau Gemini, August 
9, 1028 L 
I urge you not endorse this 
sinister measure. Humanity 
many times has had sad experience of super-powerful police 
forces. As soon as (the police) 
slip from under the firm thumb 
of a suspicious local tribune, 
they become arbitary, merciless, a law to themselves. 
They think no more of justice, 
THE STAR KING 
but only of establishing themselves as a privileged and envied 
elite. They mistake the attitude 
of natural caution and uncertainty of the civilian population 
as admiration and respect, and 
presently they start to swagger 
back and forth jingling weapons, in megalomaniac euphoria. People thereupon become 
not masters, but servants. 
Such a police force becomes 
merely an aggregate of uniformed criminals, the more baneful 
in that their position is unchallenged and sanctioned by law. 
The police mentality cannot regard a human being in terms 
other than an item or object to 
be processed as expeditiously as 
possible. Public convenience or 
dignity means nothing. Police 
prerogatives assume the status of 
divine law. Submissiveness is demanded. If a police officer kills 
a civilian, it is a regrettable circumstance: the officer was possibly over-zealous. If a civilian 
kills a police officer all hell 
breaks loose. The police foam 
at the mouth. All other business 
comes to a standstill until the 
perpetrator of this most dastardly act is found out. Inevitably, 
when apprehended, he is beaten 
or otherwise tortured for his intolerable presumption. The 
police complain that they can
not function efficiently, that 
criminals escape them. Better a 
hundred vmchecked criminals 
than the despotism of one unbridled police force. Again I 
warn you, do not endorse this 
measure. If you do, I shall surely veto it. 
Excerpt from address of Richard Parnell, Commissioner of 
Public Weal, Northern Territory, Xion, Rigel Concourse, 
to the Association of Police 
Crime Detection Agencies, at 
Parilia, Pilgham, Rigel, December 1, 1075; 
... It is not enough to say that 
our problems are unique, they 
have become catastrophic. We 
are held responsible for the efficient conduct of our jobs, but 
are refused the necessary tools 
and powers to do so. A man can 
murder and rob anywhere within the Oikumene, jump into a 
waiting space-ship and be lightyears away before his crime is 
discovered. If he passes beyond 
the Pale, our jurisdiction ends 
— at least officially, although 
all of us know of courageous officers who have put justice ahead 
of expediency and caution, and 
have gone beyond the Pale to 
make their arrests. This of course 
they have a right to do, since 
every human law becomes invalid Beyond. But the risk is their 
own. 
More often the criminal who ] 
goes Beyond escapes scot-free. 
When he chooses to return into 
the Oikumene he may have 
changed his appearance, his 
LOS I coordinates, his fingerprints, and is safe unless he has 
the misfortune to be arrested for 
a new infraction in the community where he committed his 
original crime and was there 
genified*. Essentially, in this 
day of the Jarnell Intersplit, any 
criminal who takes a few elementary precautions can go unpunished. 
This association many times 
has sought to establish a more 
satisfactory basis for crime-detection and prevention. Our 
main problem is the diversity 
with their totally disparate standards, goals and range of problems, and the consequent chaos 
of information files and retrieval systems. An obvious solution 
exists, and the association’s 
standing recommendation is the 
formation of a single official 
police system to maintain law 
and order throughout the Oikumene. 
The advantages of such a system are obvious: standardization 
of procedure, use of new equipment and ideas, unified control, 
a central office for the filing, 
♦The noun is gene-classification, 
thence to adjective gene-classified. 
abbreviated to genified. 
indexing and cross-indexing of 
information, and perhaps of 
highest importance, the creation 
and maintenance of an esprit, 
a pride of profession, to attract 
and hold men and women of the 
highest abilities. 
As we all know, this centralized agency has been denied us, 
no matter how urgently we plead 
its virtues. The ostensible motive behind this refusal is known 
to us all, and I will not dignify 
it by mentioning it. I will say 
that police morale is sinking to 
an ever lower level and soon 
may vanish — unless something 
is done. 
Today I wish to put before the 
convention a proposal for the 
“something”. Our association is 
the private organization of a 
group of private individuals. It 
has no official status or connection with any governmental office whatever. In short, we are 
free to do what we please, enter 
into any kind of business we 
please, so long as we contravene 
no laws. 
I propose that this association 
go into business, that we found 
a private crime detection agency. The new company will be 
strictly a commercial proposition, financed by association 
money and by private subscription. Headquarters will be established at some central and convenient location, but there will 
be branches on every planet. 
Our staff will be recruited from 
among members of this association and any other qualified F>ersons. They will be well paid, 
from fees and profits. Where 
will these fees and profits derive? Primarily from local police organizations, who will use 
certain of the facilities of this 
new interplanetary agency, instead of expending large sums to 
maintain redundant facilities of 
the same sort. Since the proposed 
agency will be a private business organization subject to all 
local and interplanetary laws, 
the critics of our former schemes 
must be silenced. 
. Eventually the Interworld 
Police Coordination Company 
would automatically be called 
upon to handle all problems of 
crime detection and prevention, 
other than those purely local, 
and even here the IPCC may 
function usefully. In due course 
the IPCC will certainly dwarf 
in scope all present and future 
official police groups. We will 
have our own laboratories, research programs, absolutely 
complete files, and an absolutely 
high-class staff — recruited as I 
say from members of the association, and others. Are there 
any questions? 
A question from the floor: Is 
there any reason why police of- , 
ficers of a municipality or a 
THE STAR KING 
state should not simultaneously 
be a member of the IPCC staff? 
Answer : This is a very important point. No, there is none 
whatever. I see no conflict between the two agencies, and 
there is every reason to hope 
that local police officials will 
automatically wish to become 
affiliated with the IPCC. This 
would be to ttie advantage of 
the IPCC, the local police group 
and the individual himself. In 
other words, the local police officer would have nothing to lose 
and everything to gain by referring cases to the IPCC and authorizing the subsequent fee if 
he himself were a staff member. 
From Chapter III, The IPCC'. 
Men and Methods, by Raoul 
Past. 
. Nominally an intra-Oikumene organ, the IPCC has been 
forced by the dynamics of its 
basic rationale to operate Beyond. Here, where the only laws 
are local ordinances and taboos, 
the IPCC finds little cooperation: indeed the very opposite. 
The IPCC operative is known as 
a weasel. His life is constantly 
balanced on a knife-edge. The 
Central Agency shrouds in secrecy the exact number of “weasels”, and also the percentage of 
casualties. The first figvue is 
suspected to be low, through difficulties of recruitment; the sec
ond high, through both the exigencies of the work and the efforts of that most fantastic of 
human constructions, the Deweaseling Corps. 
. The universe is infinite; 
worlds without end exists ; but 
certainly one must travel far to 
find a situation so paradoxical, 
whimsical, and grim as this: that 
the single discipline organization 
of the Beyond exists only to extirpate the nominal forces of 
law and order. 
G ersen awoke in the strange 
bed, the sky through the 
small square window only 
vaguely gray. He dressed, descended the stone steps to the 
hall where he found one of 
Smade’s sons, a dour dark lad 
of twelve, fanning the coals in 
the fireplace to life. He bade 
Gerson a gruff “Good morning”, 
but seemed indisposed for further conversation. Gersen 
stepped outside on the terrace. 
Pre-dawn mist concealed the 
ocean, rolling in sheets and curls 
across the heath — a dreary 
monochromatic scene. The sense 
of isolation was suddenly oppressive. Gersen returned inside 
to warm himself at the new fire. 
The boy was sweeping the 
hearth. “Killing last night,” he 
told Gersen in gloomy satisfaction. “Little thin man got it. 
Right behind the moss-shed.” 
“Is the body there?” Gersen 
asked presently. 
“No. No body. They took it 
with them. Three bad oneS; maybe four. Father is black mad 
they did their dirt inside the 
fence.” 
Gersen grunted, displeased 
with every aspect of the situation. He asked for breakfast, 
which was presently forthcoming. As he ate, the dwarf sun 
lifted above the mountains, a 
brittle white wafer barely visible through the mist. An onshore wind came. When Gersen 
once more went outside the sky 
was clear, though fog wisps still 
blew in from the oily sea. 
Gersen walked north along the 
shelf between ocean cliffs and 
mountains. Underfoot was a carpet of spongy gray moss, redolent with a musty resinous odor. 
The sunlight streamed over his 
head, out to sea, the black water 
giving back no glint or reflection. He went to the edge of the 
cliff and looked down two hundred feet to the rise and fall of 
the water. He tossed a stone, 
watched the splash, and the ripples quickly absorbed in the 
larger motion. What would it 
be like, he wondered, to sail a 
boat on this ocean? Out across 
the horizons, with the whole 
world to explore; barren coasts, 
bleak headlands, tall stern islands, with no sight of human 
THE STAR KING 
being or dwelling until the re. 
turn to Smade’s Tavern. Gersetf 
turned away from the cliff and 
continued north. He passed the 
mouth of a valley fenced in 
against Smade’s cattle. Teehalt 
certainly had not left his boat 
here. A quarter mile ahead a 
spur of the mountains humped 
down almost to the sea. In the 
shadow of the ridge Gersen 
found Teehalt’s boat. 
He made a quick inspection. 
The vessel was indeed a Model 
9B, identical to his own. The 
gear and machinery seemed in 
good order. In a housing under 
the bow-bulge himg the monitor 
which had cost Teehalt his life. 
Gersen returned to the tavern. 
His original plan had been to 
spend several days. It must be 
altered: Grendel might discover 
his mistake and return with Hildemar Dasce and the two assassins. They would wish to take 
Teehalt’s monitor, and this Gersen was resolved they should not 
do, though he did not care to 
risk his life in the effort. 
O eturning to the taven he 
noted that the landing field 
was empty. The Star King had 
departed. This morning? Or 
during the night? Gersen had 
no idea. He settled his score 
and, moved by some obscure impulse paid Lugo Teehalt’s bill. 
Smade made no comment. He 
was clearly consumed by cold 
fury. His eyes showed white 
around the drab irises, his nostrils were distended, his chin 
jutted forward. The rage was not 
on Lugo Teehalt’s behalf, Gersen realized. The murderer, whoever he might be — Dasce had 
mentioned Grendel — had flouted Smade’s law, he had disturbed the serenity of Smade’s Tavern, he had wronged Smade. Politely Gersen inquired, “When 
did the Star King leave?” Smade 
merely glared silently back at 
him like an angry Black Angus 
bull. 
Gersen gathered his small 
packet of belongings and departed the tavern, declining the 
twelve-year-old boys proffer of 
assistance. Once more he walked 
north. Crossing the ridge, he 
looked back toward the tavern. 
Staunch and secure it stood facing the sea, utterly alone. Gersen shook his head dubiously 
and turned away. “Everyone is 
the same,” he told himself. “Anxious to arrive. And when they 
leave, wondering why they 
came.” 
A few minutes later he took 
Teehalt’s boat aloft on its boosters, then pointed it back toward the Oikumene and cut in 
the oversplit. Smade’s Planet 
dwindled astern, and with its 
white dwarf sun, presently became lost, a single spark among 
a million. Stars slid by like fireflies blown on a dark wind, the 
light reaching Gersen’s eyes by 
back-splash or back-curl, wherein the Doppler effect played no 
role. Perspective was lost; the 
eye was fooled. Stars moved astern, the near slipping across 
the far. Within hand-reach? A 
hundred yards distant? Ten 
miles? The eye had no tool by 
which to judge. 
Gersen set the star-finder to 
the index of Rigel, engaged the 
auto-pilot and made himself as 
comfortable as the spartan facilities of the Model 9B permitted. 
The visit to Smade’s Tavern 
had served him well, though the 
profit had been bought by Lugo 
Teehalt’s death. Grendel wanted 
Lugo Teehalt’s monitor: this 
was the premise which controlled the shape of the future. 
Grendel would be willing to enter negotiations, and with equal 
certainty he would act through 
an agent. Although, thought 
Gersen, he had seen fit to kill 
Lugo Teehalt at first hand . 
There was something puzzling 
here. Why need Lugo Teehalt 
die? Sheer malice on the part 
of Grendel? Not impossible. But 
Grendel had killed and ravaged 
so extensively that taking the life 
of one thin miserable man could 
provide him only the smallest 
gratification. The motive more 
likely was habit; sheer off -hand
ed casual habit. To sever relations with a man who might be 
inconvenient, you killed him. 
A third possibility: had Teehalt penetrated the anonymity 
which Grendel, among all the 
Demon Princes, held of supreme 
importance? Gersen reviewed 
his conversation with Teehalt. 
For all his ravaged and woebegone appearance, Teehalt had 
used educated speech. He had 
seen better days. Why had he 
turned to the disreputable profession of locating? Gersen 
shrugged. Why did a man set 
himself in any specific direction? Why did a man, presumably born of ordinary parents, 
become Grendel the Monster? 
''T^eehalt had hinted or implied that Grendel was 
somehow involved in the leasing 
of the locater-ship. With this 
thought in mind Gersen made a 
careful inspection of the ship. 
He found the traditional brass 
plate, naming the place of manufacture: Liverstone on Fiame, a 
planet of the Rigel Concourse. 
The monitor likewise carried a 
bronze flake detailing its serial 
number and the manufacturer: 
the Feritse Precision Instruments Company, at Sansontiana 
on Olliphane, also of the Concourse. But there was no indication of the owner, no evidence 
of registration. 
It would be necessary, then, to 
trace ownership of the boat indirectly. Gersen set himself to 
consider the problem. 
Estate houses maintained twothirds of all locator ships, their 
stock in trade consisting of 
worlds with specific attributes: 
planets highly mineralized, 
planets suitable for colonization 
by dissident groups, planets 
pleasant enough to serve as a 
millionaire’s reserve, planets distinguished by a sufficiently interesting flora and fauna to attract curio dealers or biologists; 
most rarely, planets supporting 
intelligent or semi-intelligent 
life, of interest to sociologists, 
cultural taxonomists, linguists 
and the like. The estate houses 
were concentrated in the cosmopolitan centers of the Oikumene: three or four worlds of 
the Concourse, chief among 
them Alphanor; Vega’s Cuthbert, Boniface, Aloyisius Novel; Pi Cassiopeia’s Copus and 
Orpo; Quantique; Old Earth. 
The Concourse would be the logical starting-place, if in fact Lugo Teehalt worked for an estate 
house. 
But this was by no means certain. In fact, as Gersen seemed 
to recall, Teehalt had implied 
otherwise. If so, the investigation was narrowed considerably. 
Next to the estate houses, universities and research institutes 
THE STAR KING 
were the chief employers of locators. And Gersen had a new 
thought. If Teehalt had been either a student or faculty member at some specific lyceum, college or university, he would 
probably apply to this same 
i n stitution for employment. 
Gersen corrected his thinking; 
the conjecture was not necessarily probable. A proud man, 
with friends and associates who 
might remember him, would use 
his old school in this fashion 
only as a last resort. Was Lugo 
Teehalt proud? Not in this way, 
or so it seemed to Gersen. Teehalt had seemed a man who 
might easily turn to his old 
haven for security. 
^"T^here was another obvious 
source of information: the 
Feritse Precision Instrument 
Company at Sansontiana, where 
the monitor would be registered 
in the name of its purchaser. 
And another reason for visiting 
the Feritse Precision Instrument 
Company : Gersen wanted to 
open the monitor and remove 
the filament. To this end he 
needed a key. Monitors were 
often tamper-proofed with explosive capsules or corrosive; 
violent extraction of the filament seldom jdelded useful information. 
The officials of the Feritse 
Company might or might not 
prove accommodating. Sansontiana was a city of Braichis, one 
of Olliphane’s nineteen independent nations. The Braichish 
were a headstrong, involute, altogether peculiar people. Concourse law, however, repudiated 
private claims beyond the Pale, 
and discouraged the use of explosive traps. Hence, in an ordinance detailing the equipment required aboard spacecraft: “The manufacturers of 
such devices (referring to monitors) are thereupon enjoined 
and required to furnish keys, 
switching devices, code-sticks, 
number sequences or any other 
tool, appliance or information 
necessary to the safe opening of 
the instrument in question, without delay, complaint, error, exorbitant charge, or any behavior 
or act calculated to deter the 
petitioner from obtaining the 
key, coded device or information demanded, if and when the 
petitioner is able to demonstrate 
ownership of said instrument. 
Presentation of the serial plate 
affixed by the manufacturer to 
the instrument shall be deemed 
sufficient and adequate evidence 
of ownership.” 
All well and good. Gersen 
could secure the key, but the 
company need not furnish information as to previous registration of the instrument. Especially if Grendel should sus
pect that Gersen might come to 
Sansontiana with such a purpose 
in mind, and take steps to preclude the contingency. 
The thought opened a set of 
new vistas. Gersen frowned. Had 
his temperament been other than 
careful and orderly, these various options and possibilities 
might not occur to him. He 
would be saved a great deal of 
difficulty, but he probably 
would die sooner. 
He shook his head in resignation and reached for the starcharts. 
Not far off his line of fission 
was the star Cygnus T342, and 
its planet Euville where an un
pleasant and psychotic population lived in five cities: Oni, Me, 
Che, Dun and Ve, each compulsively built in pentagonal patterns, from a central five-sided 
citadel. The space-port, on a remote island, was opprobriously 
named “Orifice”. Everything 
Gersen needed could be found 
at the space-port; he had no desire to visit the cities, especially 
since each required in lieu of 
passport, the tattooing of a star 
on the forehead, a different color 
for each city. To visit all five 
cities the prospective tourist 
must display five colored stars: 
orange, black, mauve, yellow and 
green. 
From New Discoveries in 
Space, by Ralph Quarry; 
. Sir Julian Hove apparently derived his attitudes from the 
late Renaissance explorers. Upon 
return to Earth members of his 
crews imposed upon themselves 
(or had imposed) a strict rule of 
discretion and secrecy. Details 
nevertheless leaked out. Sir Julian Hove was, to use the most 
comprehensive term, a martinet. 
He was likewise a man utterly 
without humor. His eye was 
bleak, he spoke without moving 
his lips, his hair was combed 
day after day in photographically identical furrows. While he 
IV 
did not actually require that the 
personnel wear dinner jackets to 
meals, certain of his rules imposed an almost equivalent 
punctilio. The use of first 
names was eschewed; salutes 
were exchanged at the beginning 
and termination of each watch, 
even though the personnel was 
by and large civilian. Technicians whose specialties were 
without scientific pertinence were 
forbidden to set foot on the fascinating new worlds, an order 
which came close to fomenting 
mutiny, until Sir Julian’s second 
in command prevailed upon Sir 
Julian to ameliorate it. 
THE STAR KING 
The Rigel Concourse is Sir Julian’s most noteworthy discovery: twenty-six magnificent 
planets, most of them not only 
habitable but salubrious, though 
only two display even quasi-intelligent autochthones. Sir Julian, exercising his prerogatives, 
named the planets for boyhood 
heroes: Lord Kitchener, Wil 
Ham Gladstone, Archbishop Rollo Gore, Edythe MacDevott, 
Rudyard Kipling, Thomas Carlyle, William Kircudbright, 
Samuel B. Gorsham, Sir Robert 
Peel, and the like. 
But Sir Julian was to be deprived of his privilege. He telegraphed ahead the news of his 
return to Maudley Space Station, 
together with a description of 
the Concourse and the names he 
had bestowed upon the members 
of this magnificent group. The 
list passed through the hands of 
an obscure young clerk, one 
Roger Pilgham, who rejected 
Sir Julian’s nominations in disgust. To each of the twenty-six 
planets he assigned a letter of 
the alphabet and hurriedly supplied new names : Alphanor, 
Barleycorn, Chrysanthe, Diogenes, Elfland, Fiame, Goshen, 
Hardacres, Image, Jezebel, Krokinole, Lyonnesse, Madagascar, 
Nowhere Olliphane, Pilgham, 
Quinine, Raratonga, Somewhere, Tantamount, Unicom, 
Vakwnde, Walpurgis, Xion, Ys 
and Zacaranda — the names derived from legend, msrth, romance and his own whimsy. 
Only one of the worlds was accompanied by a satellite, described in the dispatch as “an 
eccentric, tumbling, odd-shaped 
fragment of chondritic pumice”, 
and this Roger Pilgham named 
Sir Julian. 
The press received and published the list and Rigel’s planets became so known, though 
Sir Julian’s acquaintances wondered about the sudden extravagance of his imagination. And 
who, or what, was “Pilgham”? 
Sir Julian presumably would explain upon his arrival. 
The clerk, Roger Pilgham, 
presently returns to the obscurity from which he sprang, and 
there is no record of his conduct 
or state of mind as Sir Julian’s 
return became imminent. Did he 
feel apprehension? Uneasiness? 
Indifference? Beyond all doubt 
he had become resigned to the 
prospect of discharge from his 
position. 
In due course Sir Julian made 
a triumphant return, and in due 
course used the phrase, “most 
impressive perhaps are the New 
Grampian Mountains on the 
North Continent of Lord BulwerLytton”. A member of the audience politely asked the whereabouts of Lord Bulwer-Lytton, 
and the change was revealed. 
Sir Julian’s reaction to the 
deed was one of extraordinary 
fury. The clerk prudently went 
into seclusion; Sir Julian was 
encouraged to reintroduce his 
own nominations, but the damage had been done; Roger Pilgham’s brash deed caught the 
fancy of the public, and Sir Julian’s terminology gradually 
faded from memory. 
From popular Handbook ot 
the Planets, 303rd Edition, published 1292: 
Alphanor, a planet considered 
the administrative node and cultural center of the Rigel Concourse. It is eighth in orbital 
order. 
Planetary Constants: 
Diameter, 9300 miles. 
Mass, 102. 
Mean Day, 29 hours, 16 minutes, 29.4 seconds. 
etc. 
General Remarks : Alphanor 
is a large bright sea-world, with 
a generally bracing climate. 
Ocean occupies three-quarters of 
the total surface, including the 
polar ice floes. The land mass 
is divided into seven nearly contiguous continents : Phrygia, 
Umbria, Lusitania, Scythia, Etruria, Lydia and Lycia, in a configuration suggesting seven pettals of a flower. There are uncounted islands. 
Autochthonous life is complex 
and vigorous. The flora has in 
no way yielded to terrestrial 
imports, which must be carefully 
tended and nurtured. The fauna 
is likewise complex, and on occasion actively savage, to cite 
the clever hyrcan major of upper Phrygia, and the invisible 
eel of the Thaumaturge Ocean. 
The political structure of Alphanor is a pyramidal democracry — simple in theory, intricate in practice. The continents 
are divided into provinces, 
thence prefectures, districts and 
wards: these latter defined as 
population blocs of five thousand persons. Each ward committee sends a representative to 
the district council, which elects 
a delegate to the prefectural diet, 
which in turn is represented at 
the district assembly, which 
sends a member to provincial 
congress, which does likewise for 
the continental parliament. 
Each parliament elects seven 
rectors to the grand Council at 
Avente, in the Sea Province of 
Umbria, which thereupon 
chooses a chairman. 
From Preface to Peoples ot 
the Concourse, by Strick and 
Chemitz : 
The concourse populations are 
far from homogeneous. During 
the migrations from Earth racial 
groups tended to follow their 
own, and in the new environ
THE STAR KING 
4 / 
menta, under the influence of 
interbreeding and new behavior 
patterns, such groups specialized 
even further. The folk of Alphanor in general are fair, 
brown-haired, of medium stature, 
though an hour’s walk along the 
Grand Esplanade at Avente will 
show the observer every conceivable style of human being. 
The Alphanor psychology is 
more difficult to express. Every 
inhabited world is different in 
this regard; and though the differences are real and distinct 
enough, it is hard to present 
them accurately without discursiveness — especially since each 
planet-wide generalization is 
compounded, vitiated, or contradicted by regional differences. 
"D igel, dead ahead, was a 
bright blue - white point 
from which every other star 
seemed to flee. Gersen had little 
to do but contemplate his destination, speculate regarding 
Grendel’s probable intentions 
and formulate his own set of responses. The first problem: 
where to land? One hundred and 
eighty-three spaceports on twenty-two of the twenty-six worlds 
were convenient to his lawful 
use — as well as unlimited desert 
and wasteland, should he choose 
the quarantine laws. 
How intensely did Grendel 
want Teehalt’s monitor? Would 
he arrange a watch at every 
space-port? Theoretically, this 
could be done, by the suborning 
of port officials. The cheapest 
and perhaps most effective system would be to offer a resounding reward to the man who reported Gersen’s arrival. Gersen 
of course might choose to set 
down at another star system. It 
would be difficult to mount 
guard over every space-port of 
the Oikumene. 
But it was by no means Gersen’s purpose to go into hiding. 
In the next phase of proceedings he must necessarily expose 
himself. This next phase was the 
identification of Grendel. Two 
methods to this end suggested 
themselves : he could either trace 
the registry of the monitor,, or 
await the approach of some 
member of Grendel’s organization, and then try to trace the 
nerve of authority back to its 
source. 
Grendel would take for granted Gersen’s intent to investigate 
the monitor, and would presumably concentrate his vigilance at 
the Kindune space-port, which 
served Sansontiana. 
Nevertheless, for a series of indefinite reasons, little more than 
himches, Gersen decided to land 
at the Grand Interplanetary 
Space-port at Avente. 
He approached Alphanor, 
coasted down into landing orbit. 
locked his auto-pilot into the official landing program and once 
more sat back. The boat settled, 
bumped in a roar of expiring 
jets upon the scorched red earth. 
The jets died there was silence. 
Automatically the pressureequalizing valve began to hiss. 
The port officials approached 
in a slide-car. Gersen answered 
questions, submitted to a brief 
medical inspection and received 
an entry permit. The officials 
departed. A mobile crane tmndled up, lifted the boat, carried 
it to a bay in the storage line at 
one side of the field. 
Gersen descended to the 
ground and started to detach the 
monitor, keeping a careful lookout in all directions. 
Two men sauntered along the 
storage line, casually, or so it 
seemed. Gersen recognized one 
of them instantly; the Sarcoy 
who had followed Hildemar 
Dasce into Smade’s Tavern. 
As they approached, Gersen 
gave no overt heed, but they 
made no twitch or move that he 
did not observe. The Sarkoy wore 
a modest suit of dark gray wnth 
epaulettes embroidered with 
opals; his companion, a thin 
sandy-haired man with dancing 
white-gray eyes, wore a laborer’s 
loose blue coverall. 
The two stopped a few feet 
from Gersen, stood watching as 
if in casual interest. Gersen, af
ter a glance, ignored them. The 
Sarkoy muttered something to 
his associate, came a little forward. “I think we’ve met?” IBs 
voice was soft, sardonic. 
“Your name evades me,” said 
Gerson politely. 
“I am Sivij Suthiro.” 
ersen examined him carefully, seeing a man^f middle weight, with the curious flat 
head of the Sarkoy Steppe-man,* 
the face wider than high. Suth
*The Sarkoy were held in low esteem 
by other peoples of the Oikumene, by 
virtue of repugnant eating habits, 
gross and exhibitionistic sexual conduct. Also despised was the popular 
Sarkoy sport known as harbite, or 
the baiting of a harikap, a large 
bristle-furred semi-intelligent biped 
of the north forests. The wretched 
creature, brought to a state of tension by hunger, would be thrust into 
a circle of men armed with pitchforks and torches, stimulated to wild 
activity by being set on fire, thrust 
deftly with pitchforks back into the 
center of the circle as it sought to 
escape. 
Sarkovy, the single planet of Phi 
Ophiuchi, was a dim world of 
steppes, swamps, black forests, morasses. The Sarkoy lived in tall 
wooden houses behind timber palisades; not even the largest of the 
towns was secure from the attack of 
bandits and nomads from the wastelands. By practice and tradition the 
Sarkoy were accomplished poisoners. 
A Master Venefice reportedly could 
kill a man merely by walking past 
him. 
THE STAR KING 
iro’s eyes were soft dead olivedrab, the nose snub and dark of 
nostril, the mouth wide, thicklipped — a face shaped by more 
^ than a thousand years of specialization and inbreeding. 
Gersen could not detect the 
“breath of death”: an accomplishment forced upon indentured assassins, which shortened 
their lives, gave the skin a yellowish glaze and caused the hair 
to stiffen. Suthiro’s skin was untoned pallid ivory. His hair was 
a glossy black pelt, and he wore 
tattooed on his right cheek the 
small Maltese cross of the Sarkoy hetman. 
Gersen said, “My apologies. 
Scop Suthiro. I don’t remember 
the occasion you mention.” 
“Ah.” Suthiro’s eyes widened 
at Gersen’s use of the honorific. 
“You have visited Sarkovy. Dear 
green Sarkovy, its boundless 
steppes, its merry festivals!” 
“Merry, so long as the harikap 
last. Then what will you torture?” ' 
Suthiro, of a race inured to 
insult, took no offence. “We always have each other. I see you 
know my planet well.” 
“Fairly well. Perhaps you remember me from Sarkovy.” 
“No,” said Suthiro wryly. 
“Elsewhere and more recently.” 
Gersen shook his head. “Impossible. I have just come in 
from Beyond.” 
“Exactly. We met Beyond. At 
Smade’s Tavern.” 
“Indeed.” 
“Yes. With certain others I 
came to meet my friend Lugo 
Teehalt. In the confusion and excitement Lugo left Smade’s Planet in your space-ship. Surely you 
are aware of this?” 
Gersen laughed. “If Teehalt 
has either apologies or complaints, I’m sure he will seek me 
out.” 
“Exactly,” said Suthiro. “Lugo Teehalt sent me to make adjustment. He begs forgiveness for 
his mistake, and wishes only 
that I recover his monitor.” 
Gersen shook his head. “You 
can’t have it.” 
“No?” Suthiro moved closer. 
“Lugo offers a thousand SVU* 
to indemnify you for his mistake.” 
“I accept with thanks. Give me 
the money.” 
“And the monitor?” 
“I will return it when he 
comes for it.” 
'"T^he thin-faced man made an 
irritable clicking sound, but 
Suthiro grinned. “This is not exactly feasible. You will have the 
money, but we will not have the 
monitor.” 
“There is no reason why you 
*SVU : Standard Value Unit of the 
Oikumene. 
5U 
I 
should have the monitor. I will 
give Lugo Teehalt his monitor. 
However it is perfectly legitimate for you to give me the 
money. Unless, of course, you 
distrust my honesty.” 
“By no means, since we do not 
intend to put it to the test. We 
propose, in fact, to take the moniter at this moment.” 
“I think not,” said Gersen. “I 
plan to take possession of the 
filament.” 
“This is out of the question!” 
said Suthiro gently. 
“Try to stop me.” Gersen returned to work, disengaged the 
seals from the monitor housing. 
Suthiro watched placidly. He 
made a signal to the thin-faced 
man who backed away and kept 
lookout. “I could stop you so 
suddenly you’d become a marble 
statue.” He looked over his 
shoulder to the thin-faced man, 
who nodded. Suthiro exhibited 
a weapon he carried in his hand. 
“I can provide you a heart 
spasm, a brain hemorrhage, or 
a convulsion of the small intestine, whichever you prefer.” 
Gersen paused in his work. 
“Your arguments are impressive. 
Pay me five thousand SVU.” 
“I need pay you nothing. But 
here is the thousand I mentioned.” He tossed Gersen a packet 
of notes, motioned to the thinfaced man who came forward, 
took Gersen’s tools and expertly 
THE STAR KING 
detached the monitor. Gersen 
counted the money, moved to the 
side. The two dropped the monitor into a bag, and without another word departed. 
Gersen laughed quietly. This 
was the monitor he had bought 
and installed at Euville, at a 
cost of four hundred SVU. Teehalt’s monitor was safe inside 
the ship. 
Gersen returned into the ship, 
closed the ports. Time now was 
of the essence. Suthiro would require about ten minutes to communicate his success, either to 
Dasce or conceivably to Grendel 
himself. Messages would then go 
out to various other space-ports 
of the Concourse, calling off the 
alert. Grendel would not receive 
the monitor, if Gersen were in 
luck, for several hours, perhaps 
not for days, depending upon his 
whereabouts. There would be an 
additional delay while the deception was discovered, and then 
Grendel’s organization would 
once again be mobilized, the focus now upon the Feritse Precision Instrument Company at 
Sansontiana, on the planet of 
Olliphane. 
By this time Gersen hoped to 
be there and gone. Certainly he 
would have no time to spare. 
Without further delay he started 
the jets, rose into the blue Alphanor sky and pointed the boat 
toward Olliphane. 
V 
r
From Popular Handbook of 
the Planets; 
Olliphane, nineteenth planet of 
the Rigel Concourse. 
Planetary Constants: 
Diameter, 6700 miles 
Mass, 0.9 
etc. 
General Remarks : Olliphane 
is the most dense of the Rigel 
planets, and orbits close at the 
outer edge of the Habitable 
Zone. It has been speculated that 
when the proto-planet of the 
Third Group disintegrated Olliphane received and unduly large 
share of core materials. In any 
event, until recent astronomic 
times, Alliphone was subject to 
intense plutonic activity, and 
even today boasts ninety-two active volcanoes. 
Olliphane is highly mineralized. An imposing relief provides vast hydro-electric potential, furnishing cheaper energy 
than is possible from traditional 
sources. A diligent, disciplined 
population, utilizing these advantages, has made Olliphane 
the most highly industrialized 
world of the Concourse, rivaled 
only by Tantamount, with its 
shipyards, and Lyonnesse, with 
its monumental Gnome Iron 
Works. 
Olliphane is relatively cool 
and wet, with the population 
concentrated in the Equatorial 
Zone, notably around the shores | 
of Lake Clare. Here the visitor! 
will find the ten largest cities 
of the planet, led by Kindune, 
Sansontiana and New Ossining. 
Olliphane is likewise nutritionally self-sufficient. Few other than natural foods are consumed, of which per capita consumption is highest in the Concourse, third highest among major worlds of the Oikumene. The 
alpine valleys surrounding the 
lake are devoted to dairying and 
the production of greenstuffs. 
The Olphs are a mingled 
stock, derived primarily from a 
colony of Hyperborean Skakers. 
They are typically blond to 
brown of hair, large-boned, of, 
ten inclined to corpulence, with 
fair undyed skins. They are respectful of orthodoxy, sedate in 
personal lives, but notoriously 
enthusiastic during the public 
fetes and celebrations which 
serve as emotional release to an 
otherwise conventional and reserve folk. 
A caste system, though without legal status, permeates every 
phase of the social structure 
Prerogatives are carefully defined, jealously observed; thf 
language has expanded and loos
GAUXl 
THE STAR KING 
ened to provide at least a dozen 
styles of address. 
From A Study of Inter-Class 
Accommodations, by Frerb 
Hankbert, in Journal of the 
Anthropicene, Vol. MCXIII: 
It is a remarkable experience 
for a visitor to watch a pair of 
Olphs, strange to each other, appraising each other for caste. 
The operation requires no more 
than an instant, and appears almost intuitive, for the persons 
concerned may well be wearing 
standard garments. 
I have questioned many Olphs 
in this matter, and can still make 
no definite assertions. In the 
first place most Olphs blandly 
deny the existence of caste structure, and consider their society 
completely egalitarian. In the 
second place, the Olphs themselves are not quite sure how 
they divine the caste of a stranger. He either has more of the 
quality known as haute than 
oneself, or less. 
I have theorized that rapid, 
unconscious and almost undetectable eye-movements are the 
key to the assessment of haute, 
with characteristic shifts or 
steadiness indicative of each 
caste. Hands and hand motions 
may play a similar function. 
As might be expected high officials of the bureaucracy enjoy 
the most exalted caste, and espe
cially the Civic Tutelars, as the 
Olphs name their police. 
ersen landed at the Kindune space-port and, with 
Teehalt’s monitor in a suitcase, 
boarded a subway for Sansontiana. To the best of his knowledge no one had heeded his arrival, no one had followed him. 
But now time was growing 
short. At any moment Grendel 
must realize he had been duped 
and would seek to re-establish 
contact. For the moment Gersen 
considered himself safe; nevertheless, he performed a few 
classic maneuvers to disengage 
himself from stick-tight* or 
tracker. Finding nothing to dis
* Stick-tight — these come in at least 
least five varieties, suitable to various applications: 
The servo-optical: a spy-cell supported on rotary wings, remotely 
guided by an operator. 
The automatic: a similar cell to 
follow a radioactive or monochromatic tag fixed to, oi smeared upon, 
man or vehicle. 
The Culp spy-master: a semiintelligent flying creature trained to 
follow any subject of interest; clever, 
cooperative, reliable, but relatively 
large and noticeable. 
The Manx spy-bird : a smaller, less 
obtrusive creature, trained to perform similarly; less docile and intelligent, more aggressive. 
The Manx spy-bird modification: 
similar to the above, equipped with 
control devices. 
concert him, he deposited the 
monitor in a public locker, at 
the subway interchange under 
the Rapunzel Hotel, retaining 
only the brass serial plate. Then, 
boarding an express car, he 
was delivered in fifteen minutes 
to Sansontiana eighty miles 
south. He consulted a directory, 
transferred to a local for the 
Ferristoun District, and presently was discharged into a station 
only a few hundred yards from 
the Feritse Precision Instrument 
Company. 
Ferristoun was a dismal district of industrial structures, 
warehouses, an occasional tavern: these latter cheerful little 
nooks, lavish with ornament, 
colored glass and carved wood, 
in emulation of the grand pleasure arcades along the lakeshore. 
The time was middle morning. Rain had darkened the black 
cobblestone pavement. Sixwheel drays lumbered along the 
streets. The entire district sounded to a subdued hum of engines. 
As Gersen walked, a short sharp 
bleat of whistle signaled a 
change of shift, and the sidewalks at once became crowded 
with workers. They were pale 
people, blank and humorless of 
face, wearing warm, well-made 
coveralls in one of three colors, 
gray, dark-blue or mustard yellow; a contrasting belt, either 
black or white; black round
topped kaftans. All were standard issue, the government being an elaborate syndicalism, as 
thoroughgoing, careful and 
humorless as its constituency. 
Two further bleats of the 
whistle sounded. As if by magic 
the streets cleared, the workers 
ducking into buildings like cockroaches exposed to the blinding 
light. 
A moment later Gersen came 
to a stained concrete facade on 
which large bronze letters read 
FERITSE, and below, in the 
hooked Olph script: Precision 
instruments. A single small door 
led into the building. Gersen entered, to find himself in a long 
dim hallway, a concrete tunnel, 
which after a hundred feet 
brought him to the administration offices. He went to stand at 
a counter, and was approached 
by an elderly woman of pleasant appearance and manner. By 
local custom, she wore masculine garments while at work: a 
dark blue suit with a black belt. 
Recognizing Gersen as an offworlder, of unguessable caste, 
she bowed with unctuous courtesy, and asked in a low reverent 
voice: “How, sir, may we serve 
you?” 
Gersen tendered the brass 
plate. 
“I have lost the key to my 
monitor, and I want to get a 
duplicate made.” 
THE STAR KING 
T he woman blinked. Her manner underwent an instant, if 
unconscious, change. She reached hesitantly for the plate, held 
it between thumb and forefinger as if it were tainted, looked 
over her shoulder. 
“Well?” asked Gersen in a 
voice made suddenly harsh by 
tension. “Is there any difficulty?” 
“There are new regulations,” 
the woman muttered. “I have 
had instructions to. I must consult Director- Controller Masensen. Excuse me, sir.” 
She went almost at a trot to 
a side door, disappeared. Gersen 
waited, the subconscious perceptors in his brain ticking and 
prickling. He was more nervous 
than he cared to be. Nervousness clouded the judgment, affected the accuracy of observation. 
The woman slowly returned to 
the counter, looking to right and 
left, evading Gersen’s eyes. “Just 
a moment, sir. If you will wait. 
There are records to be inspected isn’t this the way always? 
When a person wishes haste. .” 
“Where is the serial plate?” 
asked Gersen. 
“Director- Controller Masen
sen has taken it into charge.” 
“In that case. I’ll speak to Director-Controller Masensen at 
once.” 
“I will inquire,” she said. 
“Please don’t bother,” said 
Gersen. Ignoring her startled 
squeak of protest he let himself 
through a swinging door, passed 
ahead of her into the inner 
chamber. A portly thick-faced 
man in faddish Special Issue 
blue and dove gray sat at a desk 
talking into a telephone. He 
looked at the brass serial plate 
as he spoke. At the sight of Gersen his eyebrows rose, his mouth 
sagged in irritation and dismay. 
Quickly he laid down the telephone. There was an instant 
while his eyes flicked up and 
down Gersen’s clothes before he 
shouted, “Who are you, sir? Why 
do you come into my room?” 
Gersen reached across the 
desk, took possession of the serial plate. “Who do you telephone in connection with this 
matter?” 
Masensen became fiercely 
haughty. “None of your concern, 
whatsoever! Impudence! Here in 
my office!” 
Gersen spoke in a soft even 
voice. “The Tutelars will be interested in your illegal actions. 
I am puzzled that you choose to 
defy the law.” 
Masensen sat back, in puffcheeked alarm. The Tutelars, of 
caste so elevated that the distinction between Masensen and his 
office-clerk would seem insignificant, were not to be trifled 
with. They were no respecters of 
person they tended to believe 
the accusation rather than the 
protestation of innocence. They 
wore uniforms of a sumptuous 
thick pile which showed various 
sheens according to the light: 
plum, dark-green, gold. Not so 
much arrogant as intensely serious, they conducted themselves 
to the full implications of their 
caste. On Olliphane penal torture was administered as a 
cheaper, if not more effective, 
deterrent than fines or imprisonment; the threat of a police accusation could therefore bring 
consternation to the most innocent. 
Director-Controller Masensen 
cried out, “I have never defied 
the law! Do I refuse your request? No, indeed!” 
“Then furnish my key immediately, as the law requires.” 
“Softly, then,” said Masensen. 
“We can not go so fast. There 
are records to inspect. Don’t forget, we have more important affairs than leaping to serve ever 
raggle-taggle vagabond of a locator who marches into our 
room to insult us.” 
Gersen stared into the round, 
pale face, which gave back hostility and defiance. “Very well,” 
said Gersen. “I will go to complain before the Board of Tutelars.” 
“Now then, be reasonable!” 
blurted Masensen in heavy af
THE STAR KING 
fability. “All things do not come 
at once.” 
“Where is my key? Do you 
still plan to defy the law?” 
“Naturally, no such thing is 
possible. I will see to the matter. 
Come, be patient. Take a chair 
and compose yourself for just 
these few minutes.” 
“I do not care to wait.” 
“Go then!” bellowed Masensen. “I have done exactly as the 
law requires!” His lips were 
pushing in and out; his face was 
pink with fury; he hammered 
the desk with his fists. The clerk, 
standing horrified in the doorway, emitted a low wait of terror. 
“Bring the Tutelars!” raged 
Masensen. “I will accuse you of 
molestation and threats! I will 
see you whipped!” 
Gersen turned, departed. He 
passed through the outer office, 
and out into the concrete tunnel. He paused, turned a quick 
look behind him. The receptionist, fluttering in excitement, paid 
him no heed. Gersen walked up 
the hall, away from the entrance, 
and presently came to an arched 
opening, giving upon the production chambers. 
Standing to the side, inconspicuous in the shadow of a pilaster, Gersen made a carefxil 
appraisal of the rooms, tracing 
the various production lines. 
Certain phases were under biomechanical control, others were 
performed by debtors, moral deviants, vagrants or drunks, 
leased by the dozen from the 
city. They sat chained to their 
benches, guarded by an old warden, and worked with apathetic 
efficiency. The room supervisor 
sat on an elevated platform, 
which swung on a boom to any 
area of the room. 
Gersem located the process 
where monitors were constructed, identified the area where 
locks were installed: an alcove 
two hundred feet along the wall, 
beside a cubicle where a clerical 
worker, perhaps a time-keeper, 
sat on a high chair. 
He made a final survey of the 
room. No one had showed the 
slightest interest in him. The supervisor’s attention was turned 
elsewhere. 
T Te walked quickly along the 
wall to the cubicle where 
the clerk sat. The clerk was 
a harassed, hollow-cheeked, 
young-old man, with sardonic 
black eyebrows, a wrinkled, sallow skin, a cynical hook of nose 
and curl of mouth: a man not 
necessarily a pessimist, but apparently one without optimism. 
Gersen stepped to the back of 
the cubicle where there were 
shadows. The clerk looked 
around in astonishment. “Well, 
sir? What do you wish? This is 
not permitted.” 
Gersen asked, “Would you 
care to earn a hundred SVU — 
very quickly?” 
The clerk grimaced sadly. “Of 
course. Who must I kill?” 
“My wants are less demanding,” said Gersen. He displayed 
the brass plate. “Get me the key 
for this instrument, and fifty 
SVU is yours.” He placed five 
purple notes on the table. “Find 
out to whom the serial number 
is registered — fifty SVU more.” 
He counted down the notes. 
The clerk looked at the money, 
turned a speculative glance over his shoulder, out across the 
shop. “Why not go to the front 
office? The Director- Controller 
usually handles such things.” 
“I have irritated DirectorController Masensen,” said Gersen. “He makes difficulties, and 
I am in a hurry.” 
“In other words. Directorcontroller Masensen would not 
approve of my helping you.” 
“Which is why I offer you the 
hundred SVU to perform an entirely legal errand for me.” 
“Is it worth my job?” 
“If I leave the back way no 
one need know. And Masensen 
will never know the difference.” 
The clerk considered. “Very 
well,” he said. “I can do it. But 
I’ll need another fifty SVU, for 
the key-maker.” 
Gersen shrugged, brought 
forth an orange fifty SVU note. 
“I will appreciate haste.” 
The clerk laughed. “From my 
viewpoint the sooner you are 
gone, the better. I’ll have to look 
through two sets of records. 
We’re not too efficient here. 
Meanwhile keep to the back, out 
of sight.” He noted the serial 
number, left the cubicle, disappeared behind a partition. 
Time passed. Gersen noticed 
that the back wall was paneled 
with painted glass. Bending, he 
put his eye to a scratch and obtained a blurred view of the 
room behind the partition. 
The clerk stood at an oldfashioned filing case, flipping 
cards. He found the file, made 
a set of notes. But now from a 
side door Masensen lumbered into the room. The clerk closed 
the file, walked away. Masensen 
stopped short, fired a question 
at the clerk, who responded with 
an indifferent word or two. Gersen paid silent tribute to his 
sang-froid. Masensen glared after him, then wheeled and went 
to the files. 
With one eye on Masensen’s 
burly back, the clerk bent over 
the key-maker, whispered in his 
ear, departed. Masensen looked 
around suspiciously, but the 
clerk had left the room. 
The machinist dropped a key 
blank into the machine, consulted a paper, punched a set of 
buttons, to control the notches, 
twists, conductivities and magnetic nodes of the key. 
Masensen rummaged through 
the files, extracted a card, 
marched from the room. The 
clerk at once returned. The machinist tossed him the key; the 
clerk returned to the cubicle. He 
handed the key to Gersen, took 
five purple notes from the table. 
“And the registration?” asked 
Gersen. 
“I can’t help you. Masensen 
got to the files ahead of me, and 
removed the card.” 
ersen glumly considered 
the key. His main purpose 
had been to learn the registered 
owner of the monitor. The key 
of course was better than nothing. The record filament was 
easier to hide than the monitor 
itself. But time was short; he 
dared delay no longer. “Keep 
the other fifty,” he said. The 
money, after all, had come from 
Grendel. “Buy your children a 
present.” 
The clerk shook his head. “I 
accept pay only for what I 
achieve. I need no gift.” 
“As you wish.” Gersen returned the money to his pocket. “Tell 
me how to leave.” 
"You had better go the way 
you came,” said the clerk. “If 
you try to go out the back way, 
you will be stopped by the patrol.” 
THE STAR KING 
"Thank you,” said Gersen. 
‘You are not Olph?” 
“No. But I’ve lived here so 
long I’ve forgotten anything better.” 
Gersen looked cautiously from 
the cubicle. The situation was 
as before. He slipped out, walked 
quickly along the wall to the 
arch, passed through into the 
concrete tunnel. Passing the 
door which led into the administration offices, he looked 
through, saw Masensen pacing 
back and forth, evidently in a 
vicious mood. Gersen stepped 
past, hurried down the hall toward the outside door. 
But now this door opened. A 
man entered, his features dark 
against the outside light. Gersen 
continued forward briskly, confidently, as if his business were 
the most legitimate in the world. 
The man approached; their 
eyes met. The newcomer 
stopped. It was Tristano the 
Earthman. 
“Luck!” declared Tristano in 
a voice of hushed pleasure. 
“Luck indeed.” 
Gersen made no reply. Slowly, 
carefully, he sought to sidle past. 
Tristano took a step, blocked his 
way. Gersen halted, appraised 
him. Tristano was shorter than 
himself by an inch, but thick in 
the neck and shoulders, flat but 
rather wide at the hip: an attribute indicating agility and 
good muscular leverage. His 
head was small, almost hairless; 
his features were neat. The ears 
were surgically cropped, the 
nose flat, the area around the 
mouth thick with muscle. His expression was calm, with a serene, 
secret half-smile twisting up the 
comers of his mouth. He seemed 
reckless rather than vicious; a 
man who would feel neither hate 
nor pity, a man driven only by 
the need to fulfill the extremes 
of his capabilities. 
A highly dangerous man, 
thought Gersen. He said quietly, 
“Stand aside.” 
Tristano extended his left 
hand almost affably. “Whatever 
your name is, be wise. Come with 
me.” Flicking and weaving the 
extended hand he leaned forward. Gersen watched Tristano’s 
eyes, ignoring the distracting 
left hand. When the right hand 
darted forth he knocked it aside, 
drove his fist into Tristano’s 
face. 
'^ristano reeled back, as if in 
desperate pain, and Gersen 
pretended to be deceived. He 
mshed forward, arm cocked 
back to administer another blow, 
then halted abruptly as with incredible agility Tristano swung 
up his leg: a kick intended to 
cripple or kill. As the foot swung 
by, Gersen seized toe and heel, 
twisted hard. Tristano, relaxing 
instantly, turned in mid-air, 
pulled himself into a ball, used 
the momentum of his turn and 
fall to wrench the foot harmlessly from Gersen’s grasp. He 
caught himself cat-like on hands 
and feet, started to bounce away, 
but Gersen caught the back of 
Tristano’s head, yanked Tristano’s face down against his knee. 
Cartilage cmshed, teeth broke. 
Tristano fell back, now startled. For an instant he sat laxly 
asprawl. Gersen caught Tristano’s leg and ankle in a lock, 
threw over his weight, and felt 
the bone snap. Tristano sucked 
in his breath. Snatching for his 
knife, he left his throat exposed; 
Gersen hacked backhand at the 
larynx. Tristano’s throat was 
well-muscled, and he retained 
consciousness, to fall back, feebly waving his knife. Gersen 
kicked it away, edged forward 
carefully, for Tristano might be 
equipped with one or a dozen 
secret built-in weapons. 
“Leave me be,” croaked Tristano. “Leave me be, go your 
way.” He dragged himself to the 
wall. 
Gersen cautiously reached 
forth, giving Tristano the option 
to counter. Tristano refused; 
Gersen made contact with the 
massive shoulders, gripped. Tristano suffered this. The two 
stared eye to eye. Tristano made 
a sudden grab for an arm-lock, 
simultaneously bringing up his 
good leg. Gersen avoided the 
arm-lock, seized the leg, prepared to break the other ankle. 
Behind him there was an outcry and a flurry of movement. 
Director- Controller Masensen, 
face contorted, came running 
awkwardly down the hall. Behind him trotted two or three 
underlings. “Stop this!” cried 
Masenson. “What do you do 
here, in this building?” He fairly spat in Gersen’s face, “You 
are a devil, a crinriinal of the 
worst sort! You insult me, you 
attack my customer! I will have 
the Tutelars attend to you!” 
“By all means,” said Gersen. 
“Call the Tutelars.” 
Masensen raised his eyeborws. 
“What? You have this insolence, too?” 
“No insolence is intended,” 
said Gersen. “A good citizen assists the police in apprehending 
criminals.” 
“What do you mean!” 
“There is a certain name 
which I need speak only once 
to the Tutelars. I need only hint 
that you and this person are in 
collusion. For proof? This 
man — ” he looked down at the 
half-smiling, half-dazed Tristano — “do you know him?” 
“No. Of course I do not know 
him.” 
“But you identified him as a 
customer?” 
THE STAR KING 
“So I thought him.’' 
“He is a notorious murderer.” 
“Wrong, my agile friend,” 
croaked Tristano. “No murderer 
I.” 
“Lugo Teehalt is not alive to 
contradict you.” 
T ristano essayed a grimace 
of outraged innocence. “We 
spoke, you and I, while the old 
man died.” 
“In this case, neighbor Dasce 
nor the Sarkoy killed Teehalt. 
Who came with you to Smade’s 
Planet?” 
“We came alone.” 
“I find this hard to believe. 
Hildemar Dasce told Teehalt 
that Grendel awaited him outside.” 
Tristano’s response was a faint 
shrug. 
Gersen stood looking down at 
him. “I respect the Tutelars and 
their scourges. I dare not kill 
you. But I can break more bones, 
and you will walk sideways like 
a crab. I can spread apart your 
eyes, and you will look in two 
different directions the rest of 
your life.” 
The lines bracketing Tristano’s mouth became deep and 
melancholy. He slumped heavily back against the wall, disinterested, sodden with pain. He 
mumbled, “And when is killing 
beyond the Pale called murder?” 
“Who killed Teehalt?” 
“I saw nothing. I stood with 
you, by the door.” 
“But the three of you came 
together to Smade’s.” 
Tristano made no response. 
Gersen leaned forward, performed a quick viscious act. Masensen 
made an inarticulate sound, 
stumbled away, then halted as 
if caught by a wire and slowly 
turned once more to stare. Tristano looked numbly at his dangling hand. 
“Who killed Teehalt?” 
Tristano shook his head. “I 
will say no more. I would rather 
limp and squint than die of the 
Sarkoy’s cluthe.” 
“I can infect you with cluthe.” 
“I will say no more.” 
Gersen leaned forward, but 
Masensen uttered a short quavering cry. “This is intolerable! 
I will not allow it! Must you 
give me nightmares? I do not 
sleep well.” 
Gersen examined him without 
friendliness. “You would do well 
not to interfere.” 
“I will call in the Tutelars. 
Your acts are grossly illegal, you 
have broken laws of the state.” 
Gersen laughed. “Call the Tutelars. We will learn who has 
broken laws and who will be 
punished.” 
Masensen rubbed his pallid 
cheeks. “Go then. Never return, 
and I will say no more.” 
“Not so fast,” said Gersen. 
“You are in serious difficulties. 
I came here on a legal errand; 
you telephone for a murderer, 
who attacks me. This conduct no 
one should ignore.” 
TV T asensen licked his lips. 
iVJ. “You are making false 
charges. I will add this to my 
particulars.” It was a poor effort. Gersen laughted. He went to 
Tristano, turned him over on his 
face, pulled the jacket down the 
broad back to constrict the amfs, 
tied it in place with Tristano’s 
sash. With his broken ankle Tristano was now immobilized. 
Gersen stepped down the hall, 
motioned to Masensen. “Let us 
go to your office.” 
Gersen led the way, with Masensen stumping reluctantly behind; once in the office Masensen sank into his chair. 
“Now then,” said Gersen. 
“Call the Tutelars.” 
Masensen shook his head. “It 
— it is better to make no difficulties. The Tutelars are sometimes unreasonable.” 
“In that case you must tell me 
what I want to know.” 
Masensen bowed his head. 
“Ask.” 
“Who did you telephone when 
I appeared?” 
Masensen showed extreme agitation. “I cannot tell you,” he 
said huskily. “Do you insist that 
I be killed?” 
“The Tutelars will ask the 
same question, as well as many 
others.” 
Masensen looked in anguish to 
right, left, up at the ceiling. “A 
man,” he said, “at the Grand 
Pomador Hotel. His name — 
Spock.” 
“I know better,” said Gersen. 
“You are Isdng. I give you one 
more chance. Who did you 
call?” 
Masensen shook his head 
desperately. “I do not lie.” 
“Have you seen the man?” 
“Yes. He is tall. He has short 
pink hair, a long big head and 
no neck. His face is a peculiar 
red color, and he wears dark 
spectacles, and a nose-guard — 
very unusual. He has no more 
feeling than a fish.” 
Gersen nodded. Masensen was 
telling the truth. This would be 
Hildemar Dasce. 
He turned. “Now then, this is 
most important. I wish to know 
to whom the monitor is registered.” 
Masensen started to shake his 
head, then gave a fatalistic shrug 
and rose to his feet. “I will go 
for the record.” 
“No,” said Gersen. “We will 
go together. And if we cannot 
find the record, I swear to you, I 
will lodge the strongest possible 
charges.” 
Masensen rubbed his forehead wearily. “I remember now. 
THE STAR KING 
The record is here.” He brought 
forth a card from his desk. “Sea 
Province University, Avente, Alphanor. Beneficial Grant 291.” 
“No name?” 
“No. And there is no value to 
you in the key. The University 
uses a coder in each of its monitors. We have sold them several.” 
“Indeed.” The use of a coder, 
to thwart the double-dealing of 
an unscrupulous locator, was 
common enough. 
M asensen’s voice became 
heavily ironic. “The University has evidently sold you a 
coded monitor without the descrambling strip. If I were you 
I would complain to the Avente 
authorities.” 
Gersen considered the implications of the information. They 
were far-reaching indeed, if one 
certain condition was met. 
“Why did you telephone the 
man Spock? Did he offer you 
money?” 
Masensen nodded miserably. 
“Money. And — he made threats. 
An indiscretion of my past — ” 
He made a vague gesture. 
“Tell me, did Spock realize 
that the monitor was coded?” 
“Certainly. I mentioned this 
to him, but he was already aware 
of it.” 
Gersen nodded. The condition 
had been met. Grendel must necessarily have access to the de
scrambling strip at the Sea Province University. 
He reflected a moment. Informatio» was accumulating. Grendel himself had killed Teehalt, 
if Hildemar Dasce were to be believed. Tristano indirectly had 
verified this. He had conveyed 
more information than he 
meant. He had also confused the 
situation. If Dasce, the Sarkoy 
poisoner and Tristano had come 
together, with no fourth person, 
how was the presence of Grendel 
to be explained? Had he arrived 
simultaneously in another ship? 
Possible, but unlikely. Masensen was staring at him anxiously, 
miserably. “I’m going now,” said 
Gersen. “Do you plan to tell this 
Spock that I was here?” 
Masensen nodded, all his bluster departed. “I must.” 
“But you will wait one hour.” 
Mansensen made no protest. 
He might or might not respect 
Gersen’s wishes. Most likely not. 
But there was no help for this. 
Gersen turned and departed the 
office, leaving Masensen utterly 
deflated. 
Walking down the hall, Gersen overtook Tristano who somehow had managed to squirm and 
writhe himself erect. Now he 
hopped down the hall, one foot 
dragging at a queer angle. He 
looked over his shoulder at Gersen, still wearing the quiet halfsmile, though the muscles 
around his mouth were tight. 
Gersen stopped to consider the 
man. It would be wise and desirable to kill him, except for 
the possibility of police interference. So, contenting himself 
with a polite nod and stepping 
past Tristano, he went his way. 
VI 
Preface to Men of the Oikumene, by Jan Holberk Vaenz 
LXII 
There is a stifling quality to 
his age which has been observed, 
remarked and lamented by a 
number of the contemporary anthropologists: a curious para
dox, for never before have such 
variegated opportunities and 
possible channels of life existed. 
The most important fact of human life is the infinity of space: 
the bounds which can never be 
reached, the worlds without 
number still unseen. In short, 
the Beyond. It is my belief that 
the awareness of these awesome 
possibilities have somehow 
clotted at the core of human consciousness, and have diminished 
or dampened human enterprise. 
An instant qualification is 
necessary. Men of enterprise indeed exist, though sadly enough 
most of them work Beyond, and 
their enterprise is not entirely 
constructive. (The statement is 
not completely ironical: many 
of the most noxious forms of life 
exert some sort of useful sideeffect.) 
But, in general, ambition is 
turned inward, rather than out 
toward the obvious goals. Why? 
Does infinity, as an object of experience instead of a mathematical abstraction, daunt the human mind? Are we complacent 
and secure, knowing that the 
riches of the galaxy are always 
there for the taking? Is contemporary life already sated by too 
rich a diet of novelty? Is it conceivable that the Institute wields 
more control over the human 
psyche than we suspect? Or is 
there current a feeling of frustration and staleness, the conviction that all glory has been 
won, that all the meaningful 
goals have been achieved? 
Undoubtedly there is no single 
answer. But several points are 
noteworthy. First (to be mentioned without comment) is the 
peculiar situation where the 
most influential and effective 
systems of the day are the private, or at best semi-public, associations: the IPCC, the Institute, the Jamell Corporation. 
Second is the decline of the 
general level of education. The 
extremes are certainly farther 
THE STAR KING 
apart; the savants of the Institute on the one hand, and, say, 
the serfs of a Tertullian estate 
on the other. If we consider the 
condition of men beyond the 
Pale, the polarity is even more 
pronounced. There are obvious 
sources to the decline. Pioneers 
settling in strange and often hostile environments have sheer 
survival for their first concern. 
Possibly even more daunting is 
the unmanageable mass of accumulated knowledge. The trend 
toward specialization began with 
modem times, but after the 
break-out into space, and the 
consequent new amplitude of information, specialization has become even more narrowly focused. 
It is perhaps pertinent to consider the manner of man who 
has become the new specialist. 
He lives in a materialistic age, 
where comparatively small interest is given to absolutes. He 
is a man of charm, wit, sophistication, but no profundity. His 
ideals are not abstract. His field 
of endeavor, if he is a scholar, 
may be mathematics or one of 
the physical sciences: but a hundred times more likely will be 
a phase of what loosely are 
called humanistic studies: history, sociology, comparatives, 
symbology, esthetics, anthropology, the varieties of experience, 
penology, education, communi
66 
cation, administration and coercion, not to mention the morass 
of psychology already trampled 
by generations of incompetents, 
and the still unexplored wilderness of psionics. 
There are also those who, like 
the author, ensconce themselves 
on a thunderous crag of omniscience and, with protestations 
of humility which are either unconvincing or totally absent, assume the obligation of appraisal, 
commendation, derogation or 
denunciation of their contemporaries. Still, by and large it is 
an easier job than digging a 
ditch. 
From Ten Explorers: A Study 
of a Type, by Oscar Anderson : 
Every world has its distinctive 
psychic aroma: this is a matter 
attested to by each of the ten 
explorers. Isack Canaday is willing to wager that if blindfolded 
and taken to any planet of the 
Oikumene or the immediate Beyond, he will correctly identify 
this planet immediately upon removal of the blindfold. How 
does he perform such a feat? At 
first glance it seems incomprehensible. Canaday himself professes not to know the source of 
his knowledge. “I just raise my 
nose, I Ipok around the sky, I 
take a couple jumps — and it 
comes to me.” 
Canaday’s explanation is of 
GALAXY 
course arch and consciously 
quaint. Our senses are undoubtedly much more acute than we 
suspect. The composition of the 
air, the color of the light and 
the sky, the curvature and proximity of the horizon, the tension 
of gravity: these are presumably 
interpreted in our brains to produce an individuality, exactly as 
the sight of eyes, a nose, hair, a 
mouth, ears, creates the look of 
a face. 
All of this without mention of 
flora and fauna, the artifices of 
autochthone or man, the possibly distinctive look of sun or 
suns. 
From Life, Volume III, by 
Unspiek, Baron Bodissey : 
As a society matures the struggle for survival imperceptibly 
graduates and changes emphasis, 
and becomes what can only be 
termed the quest for pleasure. 
This is a large statement, possibly of no startling novelty. Nevertheless, as a generality, it affords a rich resonance of implications. The author suggests as 
a lively topic for a dissertation 
a survey of various environmentsurvival situations and the special types of pleasure-goals deriving therefrom. It seems probable, from a moment’s reflection, 
that every particular scarcity or 
compulsion or danger generates 
a corresponding psychic tension 
demanding a particular gratification. 
^ersen returned to the subway terminal at Sansontiana. He recovered the monitor 
and immediately made a trial of 
the key. To his gratification the 
lock moved smoothly. The case 
slid open. 
There was neither explosive 
nor acid present. He extracted 
the little cylinder containing the 
filament and weighed it in his 
hand. Then he stepped into a 
post-office booth and mailed the 
cylinder to himself, at the Hotel 
Credenza, Avente, Alphanor. He 
rode the subway back to Kindune and the space-port, and 
with no untoward incident took 
his ship aloft. 
The blue crescent of Alphanor 
presently bulged across the sky, 
with Rigel dazzling beyond. 
When the seven continents began to -emerge from the dark, 
Gersen engaged his auto-pilot into the Avente landing program, 
and so was guided down to the 
space-port. The crane lifted the 
boat, carried it to a storage bay. 
Gersen emerged and made a 
cautious reconnaissance. 
Finding no evidence of his enemies, he proceeded down the 
ranks of stored space-craft to the 
terminal building. Here he 
breakfasted and considered his 
plans. They were, he decided, 
THE STAR KING 
completely straightforward, deriving from a progression of logical steps in which he could see 
no flaw: 
a. Lugo Teehalt’s monitor was 
registered to the Sea Province University. 
b. The information on the 
monitor filament was 
coded, accessible only upon 
application of the decoding, or descrambling, strip. 
c. The decoding strip was in 
possession of the Sea Province University at Avente. 
d. 
1. According to Lugo Teehalt, Grendel had been 
his original sponsor. (A 
fact he had apparently 
understood for the first 
time at Brinktown. Indiscretions by Hildemar 
Dasce? Everything considered, Grendel probably still regarded his 
incognito secure.) 
2. Grendel vigorously sought 
possession of the monitor 
and its filament, and hence 
must have access to the decoding strip. 
f. Gersen’s course of action 
would therefore be: 
1. Identify the persons who 
had access to the decoding strip. 
2. Learn which of these fulfilled a set of conditions 
consistent with the identity and activities of 
Grendel. Which, for example, had been gone 
long enough for a visit 
to Smade’s Planet? 
A str.ightforward and logial line cf attack indeed. 
But, Gersen reflected, the implementation of his logic might 
not be quite so easy. He dare 
not arouse Grendel’s apprehensions. To a certain extent, possession of Teehalt’s filament 
provided security. However, if 
Grendel felt a personal threat, 
and no qualms in arranging an 
assassination. To this moment, 
Grendel had no reason to fear 
exposure, and it would be foolhardy to convince him otherwise. The initiative, for the present, was his; there was no occasion for break-neck haste. 
His attention became distracted. In a booth nearby sat a pair 
of pretty girls who evidently had 
come to the terminal to welcome 
a friend, or to see one off. Gersen contemplated them wistfully, 
aware, not for the first time, of 
an empty area in his life. Frivolity. 
The two girls evidently had 
very little else on their minds. 
One had dyed her hair forest 
green and toned her skin a delicate lettuce green. The other 
wore a wig of lavender metal 
GALAXV 
shavings with dead-white skintoning; an elaborate cloche of 
silver leaves and tendrils clung 
to her forehead and clasped her 
cheeks. 
Gersen drew a deep breath. 
Undoubtedly he had lived a 
grim cheerless existence. Thinking back across the years, scenes 
came crowding into his mind, 
all of which were variations on 
a single theme: other children 
occupied with irresponsible 
pleasure, while he, a rather thin 
boy with a grave face, watched 
from a distance. He had felt only 
interest and wonder at the easy 
gaiety — so he recalled — never 
relating the scenes to himself. 
His grandfather had seen to that. 
One of the girls at the nearby 
booth had noticed his attention; 
she whispered to her friend. 
Both glanced across the aisle, 
then ostentatiously ignored him. 
Gersen smiled ruefully. He felt 
no confidence in his dealings 
with women; he had known few 
intimately. He frowned, turned 
the two a wary side-glance. Not 
impossibly Grendel had sent 
these girls to beguile him. Ridiculous. Why two? 
They rose and departed the 
restaurant, each turning him one 
swift covert glance. 
Gersen watched their retreat, 
resisting the sudden urge to run 
after them, to introduce himself, 
to make them his friends. Ri
diculous again, doubly ridiculous. What would he say? He 
pictured the two pretty faces at 
first puzzled, then embarrassed, 
while he stood making lame efforts to ingratiate himself. The 
girls were gone. 
Just as well, tliought Gersen, 
half-amused, half-angry with 
himself. Still, why deceive himself? Living the life of half a 
man was difficult, a source of 
dissatisfaction. The circumstances of his life had given him 
small command of the social 
graces. Still, what of that? He 
knew his mission in life, and he 
was superbly prepared to fulfill 
this mission. He had no doubts, 
no uncertainties; his goals were 
exactly defined. 
A sudden idea disturbed the 
flow of his self-reassurances : 
where would he be without this 
clear purpose? If he were less 
artificially motivated, he might 
not show so well in comparison 
with the easy men around him, 
with their pleasant manners and 
fluent talk. 
'"T^urning the thought over, 
back and forth, Gersen began to feel spiritually deficient. 
No phase to his life had occurred 
by his own free choice. He felt 
no slightest tremor in his dedication : this was not the point 
at issue. But, he thought, a man’s 
goals should not be imposed up
THE STAR KING 
on him until he knew enough of 
the world to make his own survey, to weigh his own decisions. 
He had not been given this 
option. The decision had been 
made, he had accepted it. After all, what matter? More to 
the point, what would he do 
when and if he succeeded in his 
aims? 
The chances were small, of 
course. But — assuming the 
death of five men — what then 
would he do with his life? Once 
or twice before he had reached 
this point in his reflections. 
Warned by some subconscious 
signal, he had never gone beyond 
it. Nor did he do so now. 
His breakfast was finished; 
the girls, who had prompted 
him to his brooding, had taken 
themselves off. Evidently they 
were not agents of Grendel the 
Monster. 
Gersen sat a few minutes longer considering the best approach 
to his problem, and again decided upon simple directness. 
He went to a communication 
booth and was connected to the 
Information Bureau at the Sea 
Province University in the suburb of Remo, ten miles south. 
The telescreen flickered first 
with the university seal, then a 
conventional reception presentation, printed with the words 
Please speak clearly. Simultaneously a recorded voice asked. 
“How may we serve you?” 
Gersen spoke to the still unseen receptionist. “I want information regarding tlie university’s exploration program. Which 
department is directly concerned?” 
The screen clarified through 
a decorative cross-hatching, to 
show the gold-toned face of a 
young woman with blonde hair 
in flamboyant puffs at each ear. 
“That depends on the type of 
exploration.” 
“It would be connected with 
Beneficial Grant 291.” 
“Just a moment, sir, and I’ll 
inquire.” The scene retreated 
behind the cross-hatching. 
Presently the girl’s face reappeared. “I’ll connect you with 
the Department of Galactic Morphology, sir.” 
Gersen looked into another 
pale receptionist face. This 
young woman had an arch piquant face toned nacreous silver, 
and wore her hair in a dark 
nimbus of ten thousand tiny 
varnished spikes. “Galactic 
Morph.” 
“I want to inquire about Beneficial Grant 291,” said Gersen. 
The girl considered a moment. 
“You mean the grant itself, sir?” 
“The grant, how it operates, 
who administers it.” 
The arch young face pursed 
its mouth dubiously. “There’s 
not much I can tell you, sir. It’s 
the fund which finances our exploration program.” 
“I’m particularly interested in 
a locater named Lugo Teehalt, 
who worked under the grant.” 
She shook her head. “I 
wouldn’t know anything about 
him. Mr. Detteras could tell you, 
but he’s not available for appointments today.” 
“Mr. Detteras hires the locaters?” 
T he girl twisted her eyebrows, 
squinted; she had a mobile 
expression, a wide mouth with 
a merry upward twitch at the 
corners. Gersen watched her in 
fascination. “I don’t know too 
much about things like that, sir. 
We have our part in the Master 
Exploration Program, of course. 
That’s not under Grant 291, 
though. Mr. Detteras is Director 
of Exploration; he could tell 
you whatever you wanted to 
know.” 
“Is there anyone else in the department who might sponsor a 
locater on Grant 291?” 
The girl looked speculatively 
sidewise at Gersen, wondering as 
to the nature of his interest. 
“Are you a police official?” she 
asked timidly. 
Gersen laughed. “No. I’m a 
friend of Mr. Teehalt’s, trying 
to finish up some business for 
him.” 
“Oh. Well, there’s Mr. Kelle, 
who is Chairman of the Research 
Planning Committee. And Mr. 
Warweave, the Honorary Provost, who made the donation for 
Grant 291. Mr. Kelle is gone for 
the morning: his daughter is 
marrying tomorrow and he’s very 
busy.” 
“What about Mr. Warweave? 
Can I see him?” 
“Well — ” The girl pursed her 
lips, bent her head over an appointment panel. “He’s busy until three, and then he keeps an 
open hour, for students or persons without appointments.” 
“That would suit me very 
well.” 
“If you’d care to leave your 
name,” said the girl demurely, 
“I’ll put it at the head of the 
list. Then you won’t have to wait, 
in case there are lots of others.” 
Gersen was startled by her 
solicitude. He searched her face, 
and was further surprised to 
find her smiling at him. “That’s 
very kind of you,” he said. “My 
name is Kirth Gersen.” 
He watched her write. She 
seemed in no hurry to terminate 
the conversation. He asked, 
“What does an Honorary Provost do?” 
She shrugged. “I don’t know, 
really. He comes and goes. I 
think he does just what he wants. 
Anyone who is rich does just 
what he wants. Wait till I’m 
richl” 
THE STAR KING 
“One more thing,” Gersen 
said. “Are you familiar with the 
routine of the department?” 
“Why, yes, I should say so.” 
The girl laughed. “Insofar as 
there is a routine.” 
“The recording filament of 
the monitor in a locater boat is 
coded. You’re aware of this?” 
“So I have been told.” The girl 
was definitely speaking to Gersen as an individual, rather than 
a face on a screen. Gersen 
thought her deliciously pretty, 
in spite of her rather extravagrant hair style. Definitely he 
had been in space too long. He 
kept his voice even with an effort. “Who unscrambles the filaments? Who is in charge of the 
code?” 
Again the girl was doubtful. 
“Mr. Detteras for one. Perhaps 
Mr. Kelle.” 
“Can you find out definitely?” 
T he girl hesitated, examining 
Gersen’s face. It was always 
wise to refuse to answer questions whose motives she could 
not fathom. Still — where could 
be the harm? The man who inquired seemed interesting. Wistful and sad, she thought, and a 
trifle mysterious . and definitely not unattractive, after a 
plain hard-bitten fashion. “I can 
ask Mr. Detteras’ secretary,” she 
said brightly. “Will you wait?” 
The screen dimmed, and a 
minute or two later brightened 
again. The girl smiled back at 
Gersen. “I was right. Mr. Detteras, and Mr. Keller and Mr. 
Warweave — these are the only 
people who have access to the 
decoding strip.” 
“I see. Mr. Detteras is Director 
of Exploration, Mr. Kelle is 
Chairman of the Research Planning Committee, and Mr. Warweave is — what?” 
“Honorary Provost. They gave 
him the title when he endowed 
the department with Grant 291. 
He’s a very wealthy man, and 
very interested in space exploration. He frequently goes Beyond. 
Have you ever been Beyond?” 
“I’ve just returned.” 
She leaned forward, her face 
alive with interest. “Is it really 
as wild and dangerous as everyone says?” 
Gersen threw caution to the 
winds, with a bravado that startled even himself. “Come out 
with me and see for yourself.” 
The girl did not appear unduly perturbed. But she shook 
her head. “I’d be alarmed. I’ve 
been taught never to trust 
strange men from the Beyond. 
You might be a slaver and sell 
me.” 
“Such things have happened,” 
said Gersen. “You’re probably 
safer where you are.” 
“Still,” she said coquettishly, 
“who wants to be safe?” 
Gersen hesitated, started to 
speak, stopped short. The girl 
watched him with an expression 
of bland innocence. Well, why 
not? Gersen asked himself. His 
grandfather had been old and 
parched. “In that case — if 
you’re willing to risk it — perhaps you’d spend the evening 
with me.” 
“For what purpose?” The girl 
was suddenly demure. “Slavery?” 
“No. Just — the usual. What 
ever you’d like to do.” 
“This is very abrupt. After all, 
I haven’t even seen you face to 
face.” 
“Yes, you’re right,” said Gersen, abashed. “I’m not very gallant.” 
“And still, what could be the 
harm? I’m impulsive myself, or 
so I’ve been told.” 
“I suppose it depends on circumstances.’ 
“You’re just in from Beyond,” 
the girl said magnanimously. “So 
I guess you can be excused.” 
“Then you’ll do it?” 
She pretended to consider. 
“Very well. I’ll take a chance. 
Where will I meet you?” 
“I’ll be out at three o’clock to 
see Mr. Warweave. We can make 
arrangements then.” 
“I’m off duty at four. You’re 
sure you’re not a slaver?” 
“I’m not even a pirate.” 
“Rather an unenterprising sort, 
I’d say. But I’m just as pleased. 
until I know you a little better." 
A wide sandy beach extended a hundred miles south 
of Avente, around the entire 
concavity of Ard Hook. As far 
as Remo, and a few miles beyond, villas built of glaring 
white coquina lined the crest of 
the sandy bluffs which overlooked the ocean. 
Gersen hired a small surfaceslider and skidded south over the 
broad white turnpike, the inevitable dust puffing up behind 
him. For a space the road followed the shore. Sand dazzled 
under the brilliant Rigel-light; 
blue water under a collar of 
white foam sparkled and rolled 
calmly up and down the sand, 
creating a sound invariable on 
every other world in every other 
galaxy where surf meets shore. 
The road presently climbed the 
bluffs. To the left spread sanddunes overgrown with black and 
purple iron-bush, punctuated by 
tall white balloon-flower, the inflated pod floating at the end 
of a long stem. Other white villas 
looked forth from groves of cool 
green deodars, native feathertree, hybrid palm. 
Ahead the ground rose, the 
sandy bluffs became a range of 
low hills, presenting a steep face 
to the ocean. Remo occupied the 
flat land at the foot of one of 
these hills. A pair of piers termi
THE STAR KING 
nating in high-domed casinos 
reached forth to create a harbor 
filled with small boats. The university occupied the crest of the 
hill, a series of low flat-roofed 
structures connected by arcades. 
Gersen arrived at the campus 
parking-area, lowered the slidecar and alighted. A slideway 
took him through a commemorative arch into a wide mall, where 
he inquired directions from a 
student. 
“The College of Galactic Morphology? Into the next quad, 
sir; at the far corner.” 
Ruefully pondering the respectful “sir” from a man no 
more than seven years his junior, 
Gersen walked to the end of the 
mall, threading a many-voiced, 
many-costumed multitude of students. He crossed the quadrangle 
and approached the building at 
the far corner. At the portal he 
paused, aware of an emotion 
strangely like diffidence, or shyness, which had gradually been 
asserting itself during the entire 
trip out to the university. He 
jeered at himself. Was he a 
schoolboy, that the prospect of 
an evening with a strange girl 
should give him tremors? And 
more remarkable, the emotion 
seemed to take precedence over 
the basic goal of his existence! 
He shrugged, irritated and 
amused together, then entered 
the foyer. 
A t a desk a girl looked up, 
with an uncertainty Gersen identified as equivalent to 
his own. She was smaller and 
more slender than he had 
thought her to be, but by no 
means less appealing. “Mr. Gersen?” 
Gersen put on what he hoped 
was a reassuring mile. “It occurs to me that I don’t know 
your name.” 
She relaxed a trifle. “Pallis 
Atwrode.” 
“That takes care of the formalities,” said Gersen. “I hope that 
our arrangement is still working?” 
She nodded. “Unless you’ve 
changed your mind.” 
“No.” 
“I act far bolder than I actually am,” said Pallis Atwrode. 
She gave an embarrassed laugh. 
“I’ve simply decided to ignore 
my upbringing. My mother is a 
blue-stocking. Perhaps it’s time 
I began to overcompensate.” 
“You begin to alarm me,” said 
Gersen. “I’m not very bold either, and if I have to cope with 
overcompensation — ” 
“Not really formidable overcompensation. I won’t become 
intoxicated, or pick a fight, or — ” 
She stopped. 
“Or?” 
“Oh — just ‘or’.” 
Gersen looked at his watch. 
“I’d better see Mr. Warweave.” 
“His offices are down that 
corridor. And Mr. Gersen — ” 
Gersen looked down into the 
upturned face. “Yes?” 
“Today I told you something 
which it seems I shouldn’t have. 
About the code. It’s supposed to 
be secret. Would you please not 
mention it to Mr. Warweave? 
I’d get in trouble.” 
“I’ll say nothing about it.” 
“Thank you.” 
He went off down the corridor 
she had indicated. The floor was 
resilient black and gray tesserae; 
the walls and ceiling were plastered white, devoid of decoration or relief except for the 
various doors and identificators 
— these in various muted tones 
of maroon, mauve, dark green, 
indigo. 
Three doors along the corridor Gersen came upon a freefloating identificator of luminous blue letters, which read: 
GYLE WARWEAVE, and below: PROVOST. 
He paused, struck by the incongruity of Grendel the Monster in such surroundings. Was 
there a break in his chain of 
reasoning? The monitor was 
coded, registered to the university. Hildemar Dasce, Grendel’s 
lieutenant, had sought possession 
of the filament, which was useless without the decoder. Gyle 
Warweave, Detteras and Kelle 
were the three men who had ac
cess to the decoder; one of the 
three must be Grendel. So then: 
which? Warweave, Detteras or 
Kelle? 
Conjecture without facts was 
useless; he must deal with events 
as they occurred. He stepped forward. The door slipped aside, 
quick as a camera shutter; the 
identificator broke into individual letters which scattered like 
frightened fish, to regroup after 
he had passed. 
I n the outer office a tall 
thin, middle-aged woman 
with keen, unsympathic gray 
eyes stood listening to an obviously unhappy young man, 
shaking her head slowly as he 
spoke. 
“I’m sorry,” she said finally, 
in a clear brittle voice. “These 
arrangements are all made on a 
formal basis of student achievement. I can’t allow you to bother 
the provost with your complaints.” 
“What is he there for, then?” 
shouted the young man. “He has 
open office hours, why can’t he 
listen to my side of the story?” 
The woman shook her head. 
“I’m sorry.” She turned away. 
“Are you Mr. Gersen?” she 
asked. 
Gersen came forward. 
“Mr. Warweave is expecting 
you; please go through that 
door.” 
THE STAR KING 
Gersen went as directed. Gyle 
Warweave, sitting at a desk rose 
to his feet as Gersen entered: a 
tall handsome man, strong and fit 
looking, of an age not immediately obvious — perhaps ten or 
fifteen years older than Gersen. 
His hair was a cushion of black 
curls shaped close to his skull, 
his skin-dye a conservative pale 
umber. His face was emphatically marked; the eyes narrow, 
deep-set, black and brooding; 
the nose and chin harsh. He saluted Gersen with a measured 
courtesy. 
“Mr. Gersen, sit down, if you 
will. I’m glad to make your acquaintance.” 
“Thank you.” Gersen looked 
about him. The room was larger 
than the usual office. The desk 
occupied an unconventional position by the left of the door, with 
the greater part of room beyond. 
Tall windows at the right overlooked the quadrangle. The opposite wall was papered with 
hundreds of Mercator-projection 
maps of many worlds. The center of the room was empty, giving it the semblance of a conference chamber from which the 
table had been removed. 
At the far end, on a pedestal 
of polished wood, stood a construction of stone and metal 
spires, the provenance of which 
Gersen was ignorant. He seated 
himself and returned his atten
76 
tion to the man behind the desk. 
Gyle Warweave hardly conformed to Gersen’s picture of the 
typical university administrator. 
This of course would well be 
true, thought Gersen, if Warweave were Grendel. Contradicting the evidence of his conservative skin-dye, Warweave wore a 
rich bright blue suit with a 
white sash, white leather greaves, 
pale blue sandals; garments 
which might be affected by a 
young buck of Sailmaker Beach 
district, north of Avente. Gersen groped at an elusive familiarity, a tantalizing wisp of recollection, which fled completely from view. 
Warweave inspected Gersen 
with a similar frank curiosity, 
in which there was a trace of 
condescension. 
Gersen definitely was no dandy. He wore the neutral garments 
of a person either uninterested 
in current modes or unaware of 
them. His skin was undyed 
(walking along the streets of 
Avente Gersen had felt almost 
undressed); his thick dark hail 
was cropped' into an undistinguished ruff. 
TT^arweave waited with at’ ’ tentive politeness. Gersen 
said, “I’m here, Mr. Warweave, 
in connection with a rather complex matter. My motives are beside the point, so I’ll ask you to 
i 
listen without troubling about 
them.” 
Warweave nodded. “Rather 
difficult, but I’ll try.” 
“First of all, are you acquainted with Mr. Lugo Teehalt?” 
“No, I am not.” The answer 
was immediate and decisive. 
“May I ask who has the responsibility for the university’s 
space exploration program?” 
Warweave considered. “Do 
you refer to major expeditions, 
shotgun surveys, or what?” 
“Whatever program makes use 
of locators in leased boats.” 
“Hm,” said Warweave. He 
turned a quizzical look toward 
Gersen. “By any chance, are you 
a locator in search of a post? 
If so—” 
Gersen smiled politely. “No, 
I’m not after a job.” 
Warweave smiled in his turn, 
a quick humorless grimace. “No, 
of course not. I’m inept in my 
judgments. For instance, your 
voice tells me very little. You’re 
not a native of the Concourse. 
If you were of a different physiognomy I’d place you from Mizar’s Third.” 
“During most of my youth I 
lived on Earth.” 
“Indeed?” Warweave raised 
his eyebrows in manufactured 
astonishment. “Out here, you 
know, we think of Earthmen in 
terms of stereotypes ; cultists, 
mystics, hyper-civilized epi
THE STAR KING 
cenes, sinister old men in Institute black, decadent aristocrats . .” 
“I claim no particular niche,” 
said Gersen. “Incidentally, you 
puzzle me no less than I puzzle 
you.” 
Warweave put on an expression of rueful whimsy. “Very 
well, Mr. Gersen. You were asking about our policy in connection with locaters. First of all, 
we cooperate with a number of 
other institutions in the Master 
Space Exploration Program. 
Secondly, there is a small fund 
which may be drawn upon to 
expedite some special project.” 
“That is Beneficial Grant 
291?” 
Warweave inclined his head in 
curt assent. 
“Very odd,” said Gersen. 
“ ‘Odd’? How so?” 
“Lugo Teehalt was a locater. 
The monitor in his boat was 
chartered to Sea Province University, under Grant 291.” 
Warweave pursed his lips. 
“It’s quite possible that Mr. Teehalt might be working for one 
of the department heads on some 
special project.” 
“The monitor was coded. That 
should narrow the possibilities.” 
Warweave pierced Gersen 
with a hard glance of black eyes. 
“If I knew what you wanted to 
learn, I could answer more to 
the point.” 
T here was nothing to lose by 
telling at least part of the 
truth, thought Gersen. If Gyle 
Warweave were Grendel, he 
would know what had happened. If he were not, no harm 
could be done. “The name Grendel is familiar to you?” 
“Grendel the Monster? One of 
the so-called Demon Princes.” 
“Lugo Teehalt located a world 
of apparently idyllic conditions 
— a world literally beyond value, 
more Earthlike than Earth. 
Grendel learned of the discovery, how I don’t know. In any 
event, at least four of Grendel’s 
men hunted Teehalt to Smade’s 
Tavern. 
“Teehalt arrived just after I 
did. He landed in a hidden valley 
and walked to the tavern. During the evening Grendel’s men 
arrived. Teehalt tried to escape, 
but they caught him in the dark, 
killed him. Then they took off 
in my ship, apparently assuming that it was Teehalt’s. Both 
were the same, old Model 9B.” 
Gersen laughed. “When they 
checked my monitor they had a 
sorry surprise. 
“The next day I left in Teehalt’s boat. Naturally I took possession of his monitor. I plan to 
sell the filament for as much as 
the market will bear.” 
Warweave nodded briskly, 
moved a sheet of paper on his 
desk an inch to the right. Gersen 
watched him, studsdng the immaculate hands, the glossy fingernails. Looking up he caught 
the stare of Warweave’s gaze, 
less affable than his tone of 
voice. “And from whom do you 
propose to collect?” 
Gersen shrugged. I’ll give 
Teehalt’s sponsor the first opportunity. As I mentioned, the 
filament is coded, and is valueless without the decoding strip.” 
Warweave leaned back in his 
chair. “Offhand, I don’t know 
who might have contracted with 
this man Teehalt. Whoever it is 
naturally would not buy a pig 
in a poke.” 
“Naturally not.” Gersen placed 
a photograph on the desk. Warweave glanced at it, dropped it 
into a projection slot. A screen 
on the far wall burst into color. 
Teehalt had taken the picture 
from a rise of ground to one side 
of a valley. On either hand hills 
rolled back, over, away and beyond. The rounded tips could be 
seen receding into the distance. 
Groves of tall dark trees stood 
to the side of the valley; a river 
wandered through the meadows, 
the banks lined with rushes. At 
the far side of the meadow, almost in the shade of the forest, 
stood what appeared to be a bank 
of flowering shrubs. The sunlight was golden-white, warm, 
languid, and the time was evidently noon. 
Warweave studied the picture 
at length, then made a gruff, 
noncommittal sound. Gersen 
provided another photograph. 
The screen shifted to display the 
view down the valley: the river 
meandering and twisting, finally 
disappearing into the far distance. Trees standing tall at either side formed a sort of aisle, 
diminishing until all faded into 
haze. 
■f T^arweave heaved a sigh. 
^ ^ “Beyond question a beautiful world. A hospitable 
world. What of atmosphere and 
biogens?” 
“Completely compatible, according to Teehalt.” 
“If it is as you say — undiscovered, uninhabited — an independent locater could name 
his own price. Still, not being 
born yesterday, I wonder, could 
not this photograph have been 
made elsewhere? Even on Earth, 
where the vegetation is similar 
to this?” 
For answer Gersen brought 
forth a third photograph. Warweave dropped it into the slot. 
The screen depicted, as if from 
a distance of twenty feet, one of 
the objects which in the first 
photograph had appeared as a 
flowering shrub. It was revealed 
as a perambulatory being, semihumanoid, graceful . Slender 
gray legs supported a gray, silver, 
blue, green torso. Purple-green 
eyes looked forth from a perfect 
ovoid head, which was otherwise 
featureless. From the shoulders, 
arm-like members reached three 
feet into the air, branching and 
webbing, to support the peacock’s tail fan of fronds. 
“The creature, whatever it 
is — ” 
“Teehalt called it a dryad.” 
“ — certainly it is unique. I’ve 
never seen its like before. If the 
picture is not faked — and I do 
not believe that it is — then the 
planet is what you claim it to 
be.” 
“I claim nothing. Teehalt 
made the claims. It is a world — ■ 
so he told me — so beautiful that 
he could neither bear to stay not 
bear to leave.” • 
“And you have Teehalt’s filament in your possession.” 
“Yes. I want to sell it. The 
market is presumably limited to 
those persons who have access 
to the decoding strip. Of these, 
the man who sponsored Lugo 
Teehalt’s operation should have 
the first option.” 
Warweave gave Gersen a long 
steady inspection. “A quixotic 
attitude, which puzzles me. You 
do not seem a quixotic man.” 
“Why not judge from deeds 
rather than impressions?” 
Warweave merely raised his 
eyebrows in something like disdain. Then he said, “Conceivably 
THE STAR KING 
I could make you an offer for 
the filament: say two thousand 
SVU now, another ten thousand 
after inspection of the world. 
Possibly a trifle more.” 
“Naturally I will take the best 
price I can get,” said Gersen. 
“But I would like to interview 
Mr. Kelle and Mr. Detteras first. 
One of them must be Teehalt’s 
sponsor. If neither is interested 
in the filament, then — ” 
Warweave interrupted sharplly. “Why do you specify these 
two men?” 
“Other than yourself, they are 
the only persons who have access to the decoding strips.” 
“May I ask how you are aware 
of this?” 
Remembering Pallis Atwrode’s 
request, Gersen felt a pang of 
guilt. “I asked a young man in 
the quadrangle. Apparently it’s 
common knowledge.” 
“Altogether too much loose 
talk,” said Warweave, his mouth 
in a hard angry line. 
G ersen wanted to inquire 
how Warweave had spent 
the previous month, but the occasion was clearly inopportune. 
It could not be a wise question, 
if posed directly: if Warweave 
were Grendel, his suspicion 
would instantly be reinforced. 
Warweave now tapped fingers 
on his desk, rose to his feet. “If 
you will give half an hour I will 
ask Mr. Detteras and Mr. Kelle 
to step into my office, and you 
can make your inquiry. Will 
that be satisfactory?” 
“No.” 
“ ‘No’?” barked Warweave. 
“Why not?” 
Gersen also rose to his feet. 
“Since the matter does not concern you, I would prefer to interview Mr. Kelle and Mr. Detteras 
alone, on my own terms.” 
“This is at your option,” said 
Warweave coldly. He considered a moment. “What you are after, I can’t guess. I put little 
faith in your candor. But I will 
make a bargain with you.” 
Gersen waited. 
“Kelle and Detteras are busy 
men,” said Warweave. “They are 
not as accessible as I am. I will 
arrange that you see them at 
once — today, if you like. Possibly one or the other will admit 
to an arrangement with Lugo 
Teehalt. In any case, after your 
interview with Kelle and Detteras, you will report to me what 
offers, if any, they have made, 
and so give me the opportunity 
of meeting or exceeding the offer.” 
known, my money has gone to 
endow Grant 291.” 
“That’s reasonable enough.” 
“You agree to my bargain, 
then?” 
“Yes. So long as you understand that the first refusal goes 
to Teehalt’s sp>onsor.” 
Warweave’s eyelids drooped. 
“I wonder why you insist on 
this.” 
“Perhaps I am a quixotic man 
after all, Mr. Warweave.” 
Warweave swung about, spoke 
into the desk-screen, listened, 
turned back to Gersen. “Very 
well. Mr. Kelle will see you first, 
then Mr. Detteras. After which, 
you will report back to me.” 
“I agree.” 
“Good. You will find Kelle’s 
office at the opposite end of the 
building.” 
Gersen went out into the corridor past Warweave’s glint-eyed 
secretary, returned to the foyer. 
Pallis Atwrode looked up with 
an eager expectancy Gersen 
found very appealing. “Did you 
learn what you wanted to?” 
“No. He’s sending me to see 
Kelle and Detteras.” 
“Today?” 
“Right now.” 
She looked at him with new 
interest. “You’d be surprised at 
the people both Mr. Kelle and 
Mr. Detteras have refused to see 
today.” 
Gersen grinned. “I don’t know 
how long I’ll be. If you’re off 
duty at four — ” 
“I’ll wait,” said Pallis Atwrode, and then she laughed. “I 
mean, you won’t be very much 
longer than four, and I’d have 
to walk home, and explain where 
I live — and it’s just easier waiting.” 
“I’ll be as fast as I can,” said 
Gersen. He left to prepare for 
his encounter with the Star King, 
feeling an unwonted sense of 
pleasure but he did not keep it 
long. Two thoughts obtruded in 
his mind and destroyed it for 
him. 
Did he dare involve this girl 
in his struggle with a cruel and 
inhuman enemy? 
Did he dare risk any distraction of his own purpose, in the 
face of this resourceful and devastating foe? 
“In other words,” said Gersen, 
“you’d keep this world for your 
private use?” 
“Why not? The filament is no 
longer the property of the university. You have taken possession of it. And, if the truth be 
]i 
THE STAR KING 
TO BE CONCLUDED 
★ ★ ★ ★ ★ 
1 
THE BIG PAT BOOM 
by DAMON KNIGHT 
ILLUSTRATED BY VAN DONGEN 
This couldn't happen, of course. 
People don't act this way. All 
of recorded history proves this 
point . one way or the other! 
'^he long, shiny car pulled up 
* with a whirr of turbines and 
a puff of dust. The sign over the 
roadside stand read: BAS
KETS. CURIOS.” Farther down, 
another sign over a glass-fronted 
rustic building announced : 
SQUIRE CRAWFORD’S COFFEE MILL. TRY OUR 
DOUGHNUTS.” Beyond that 
was a pasture, with a bam and 
silo set back from the road. 
The two aliens sat quietly and 
looked at the signs. They both 
had hard purplish skins and lit
tle yellow eyes. They were wearing gray tweed suits. Their bodies 
looked approximately human, 
but you coul'd not see their chins, 
which were covered by orange 
scarves. 
Martha Crawford came hustling out of the house and into 
the basket stand, drying her 
hands on her apron. After her 
came Llewellyn Crawford, her 
husband, still chewing his cornflakes. 
“Yes, sir — ma’am?” Martha 
asked nervously. She glanced at 
THE BIG PAT BOOM 
Llewellyn for support, and he 
patted her shoulder. Neither of 
them had ever seen an alien real 
close to. 
One of the aliens, seeing the 
Crawfords behind their counter, 
leisurely got out of the car. He, 
or it, was puffing a cigar stuck 
through a hole in the orange 
scarf. 
“Good morning,” Mrs. Crawford said nervously. “Baskets? 
Curios?” 
The alien blinked its yellow 
eyes solemnly. The rest of its 
face did not change. The scarf 
hid its chin and mouth, if any. 
Some said that the aliens had no 
chins, others that they had something instead of chins that was 
so squirmy and awful that no human could bear to look at it. 
People called them “Hurks” because they came from a place 
called Zeta Herculis. 
The Hurk glanced at the baskets and gimcracks hung over 
the counter, and puffed its cigar. 
Then it said, in a blurred but 
comprehensible voice, “What is 
that?” It pointed downward with 
one horny, three-fingered hand. 
“The little Indian papoose?” 
Martha Crawford said, in a voice 
that rose to a squeak. “Or the 
birchbark calendar?” 
“No, that,” said the Hurk, 
pointing down again. This time, 
craning over the counter, the 
Crawfords were able to see that 
it was looking at a large, disshaped gray something that lay 
on the ground. 
“That?” Llewellyn asked 
doubtfully. 
“That.” 
Llewellyn Crawford blushed. 
.“Why — that’s just a cowpat. 
One of them cows from the dairy 
got loose from the herd yesterday, and she must have dropped 
that there without me noticing.” 
“How much?” 
The Crawfords stared at him, 
or it, without comprehension. 
“How much what?” Llewellyn 
asked finally. 
“How much,” the alien 
growled around its cigar, “for 
the cowpat?” 
The Crawfords exchanged 
glances. “I never heard — ” said 
Martha in an undertone, but her 
husband shushed her. He cleared 
his throat. “How about ten ce — 
well, I don’t want to cheat you 
— how about a quarter?” 
The alien produced a large 
change purse, laid a quarter on 
the counter and grunted something to its companion in the car. 
The other alien got out, bringing a square porcelain box and 
a gold-handled shovel. With the 
shovel, she — or it — carefully 
picked up the cowpat and deposited it in the box. 
Both aliens then got into the 
car and drove away, in a whine 
of turbines and a cloud of dust. 
The Crawfords watched them 
go, then looked at the shiny 
quarter lying on the counter. 
Llewellyn picked it up and 
bounced it in his palm. “Well, 
say!” He began to smile. 
\ 11 that week the roads were 
full of aliens in their long 
shiny cars. They went everywhere, saw everything, paid their 
way with bright new-minted 
coins and crisp paper bills. 
There was some talk against 
the government for letting them 
in, but they were good for business and made no trouble. Some 
claimed to be tourists, others 
said they were sociology students 
on a field trip. 
Llewellyn Crawford went into 
the adjoining pasture and picked 
out four cowpats to deposit near 
his basket stand. When the next 
Hurk came by, Llewellyn asked, 
and got, a dollar apiece. 
“But why do they want them?” 
Martha wailed. 
“What difference does that 
make?” her husband asked. 
“They want ’em — we got ’em! 
If Ed Lacey calls again about 
that mortgage payment, tell him 
not to worry!” He cleared off 
the counter and arranged the 
new merchandise on it. He 
jacked his price up to two dollars, then to five. 
Next day he ordered a new 
sign: COWPATS. 
/^ne fall afternoon two years 
later, Llewellyn Crawford 
threw his hat in a corner, and 
sat down hard. He glared over 
his glasses at the large circular 
object, tastefully tinted in concentric rings of blue, orange and 
yellow, which was mounted over 
the mantelpiece. To the casual 
eye, this might have been a genuine “Trophy” class pat, a museum piece, painted on the Hurk 
planet; but in fact, like so many 
artistic ladies nowadays, Mrs. 
Crawford had painted and 
mounted it herself. 
“What’s the matter. Lew?” she 
asked apprehensively. She had 
a new hairdo and was wearing 
a New York dress, but looked 
peaked and anxious. 
“Matter!” Llewellyn grunted. 
“Old man Thomas is a damn 
fool, that’s all. Four hundred 
dollars a head! Can’t buy a cow 
at a decent price any more.” 
“Well, Lew, we do have seven 
herds already, don’t we, and — ” 
“Got to have more to meet the 
demand, Martha!” said Llewellyn, sitting up. “My heaven, I’d 
think you could see that. With, 
queen pats bringing up to fifteen dollars, and not enough to 
go ’round — And fifteen hundred for an emperor pat, if 
you’re lucky enough — ” 
“Funny we never thought ther 
was so many kinds of pats,” Martha said dreamily. “The emperor 
THE BIG PAT BOOM 
— that’s the one with the double 
whorl?” 
Llewellyn grunted, picking up 
a magazine. 
“Seems like a person could 
kind of — ” 
A kindly gleam came into 
Llewellyn’s eyes. “Change one 
around?” he said. “Nope — been 
tried. I was reading about it in 
here just yesterday.” He held up 
the current issue of The American Pat Dealer, then began to 
turn the glossy pages. “Pat-OGrams,” he read aloud. “Preserving Your Pats. Dairying — a 
Profitable Sideline. Nope. Oh, 
here it is. Fake Pats a Flop. See, 
it says here some fellow down in 
Amarillo got hold of an emperor 
and made a plaster mold. Then 
he used the mold on a couple 
of big cull pats — says here they 
was so perfect you couldn’t tell 
the difference. But the Hurks 
wouldn’t buy. They knew.” 
He threw the magazine down, 
then turned to stare out the back 
window toward the sheds. 
“There’s that fool boy just sitting in the yard again. Why 
ain’t he working?” Llewellyn 
rose, cranked down the louver, 
shouted through the opening, 
“You, Delbert! Delbert!” He 
waited. “Deaf, too,” he muttered. 
“I’ll go tell him you want — ” 
Martha began, struggling out of 
her apron. 
“No, never mind — go myself. 
Have to keep after ’em every 
damn minute.” Llewellyn 
marched out the kitchen door 
and across the yard to where a 
gangling youth sat on a trolley, 
slowly eating an apple. 
“Delbert!” said Llewellyn, exasperated. 
“Oh — hello, Mr. Crawford,” 
said the youth, with a gaptoothed grin. He took a last bite 
from the apple, then dropped 
the core. Llewellyn’s gaze followed it. Owing to his missing 
front teeth, Delbert’s apple cores 
were like nothing in this world. 
“Why ain’t you trucking pats 
to the stand?” Llewellyn demanded. “I don’t pay you to 
set on no empty trolley, Delbert.” 
“Took some out this morning,” the boy said. “Frank, he 
told me to take ’em back.” 
“He what?” 
Delbert nodded. “Said he 
hadn’t sold but two. You ask 
him if I’m lying.” 
“Do that,” Llewellyn grunted. 
He turned on his heel and strode 
back across the yard. 
/^ut at the roadside, a long 
car was parked beside a 
battered pickup at the pat stand. 
It pulled out as Llewellyn started 
toward it, and another one drove 
up. As he approached the stand, 
the alien was just getting back 
in. The car drove off. 
Only one customer was left at 
the stand, a whiskered farmer in 
a checked shirt. Frank, the attendant, was leaning comfortably on the counter. The display 
shelves -behind him were well 
filled with pats. 
“Morning, Roger,” Llewellyn 
said with well-feigned pleasure. 
“How’s the family? Sell you a 
nice pat this morning?” 
“Well, I don’t know,” said the 
whiskered man, rubbing his 
chin. “My wife’s had her eye on 
that one there — ” he pointed to 
a large, symmetrical pat on the 
middle shelf — “but at them 
prices — ” 
“You can’t do better, believe 
me, Roger. It’s an investment,” 
said Llewellyn earnestly. 
“Frank, what did that last Hurk 
buy?” 
“Nothing,” said Frank. A persistent buzz of music came from 
the radio in his breast pocket. 
“Just took a picture of the stand 
and drove off.” 
“Well, what did the one before — ” 
With a whirr of turbines, a 
long shiny car pulled up behind 
him. Llewellyn turned. The 
three aliens in the car were 
wearing red felt hats with comic 
buttons sewed all over them, and 
carried Yale pennants. Confetti 
was strewn on their gray tweed 
suits. 
One of the Hurks got out and 
approached the stand, puffing a 
cigar through the hole in his — 
or its — orange scarf. 
“Yes, sir?” said Llewellyn at 
once, hands clasped, bending 
forward slightly. “A nice pat 
this morning?” 
The alien looked at the gray 
objects behind the counter. He, 
or it, blinked its yellow eyes and 
made a curious gurgling noise. 
After a moment Llewellyn decided that it was laughing. 
“What’s funny?” he demanded, his smile fading. 
“Not funny,” said tlie alien. 
“I laugh because I am happy. I 
go home tomorrow — our field 
trip is over. Okay to take a picture?” He raised a small lensed 
machine in one purple claw. 
“Well, I suppose — ” Llewellyn 
said uncertainly, “Well, you say 
you’re going home? You mean 
all of you? When will you be 
coming back?” 
“We are not coming back,” 
the alien said. He, or it, pressed 
the camera, extracted the photograph and looked at it, then 
grunted and put it away. “We 
are grateful for an entertaining 
experience. Good-by.” He turned 
and got into the car. The car 
drove off in a cloud of dust. 
“Like that tlie whole morning,” Frank said. “They don’t 
buy nothing — just take pictures.” 
Llewellyn felt himself begin
87 
THE BIG PAT BOOM 
ning to shake. “Think he means 
it — they’re all going away?” 
“Radio said so,” Frank replied. “And Ed Coon was 
through here this morning from 
Hortonville. Said he ain’t sold 
a pat since day ’fore yesterday.” 
“Well, I don’t understand it.” 
Llewellyn said. “They can’t just 
all quit.” His hands were trembling badly, and he put them in 
his pockets. “Say, Roger,” he 
said to the whiskered man, “now 
just how much would you want 
to pay for that pat?” 
“Well—” 
“It’s a ten dollar pat, you 
know,” Llewellyn said, moving 
closer. His voice had turned 
solemn. “Prime pat, Roger.” 
“I know that, but — ” 
“What would you say to seven 
fifty?” 
“Well, I don’t know. Might 
give — say, five.” 
“Sold,” said Llewellyn. “Wrap 
that one up, Frank.” 
He watched the whiskered 
man carry his trophy off to the 
pickup. “Mark ’em all down, 
Frank,” he said faintly. “Get 
whatever you can.” 
'^he long day’s debacle was 
-*■ almost over. Arms around 
each other, Llewellyn and Martha Crawford watched the last 
of the crowd leaving the pat 
stand. Frank was cleaning up. 
Delbert, leaning against the side 
of the stand, was eating an apple. 
“It’s the end of the world, 
Martha,” Llewellyn said huskily. Tears stood in his eyes. 
“Prime pats, going two for a 
nickel!” 
Headlights blinding in the 
dusk, a long, low car came nosing up to the pat stand. In it 
were two green creatures in 
raincoats, with feathery antennae that stood up through holes 
in their blue pork-pie hats. One 
of them got out and approached 
the pat stand with a curious 
scuttling motion. Delbert gaped, 
dropping his apple core. 
“Serps!” Frank hissed, leaning 
over the stand toward Llewellyn. “Heard about ’em on the 
radio. From Gamma Serpentis, 
radio said.” 
The green creature was inspecting the half-bare shelves. 
Homy lids flickered across its 
little bright eyes. 
“Pat, sir — ma’am?” Llewellyn asked nervously. “Not many 
left right now, but — ” 
“What is that?" the Serp 
asked in a rustling voice, pointing downward with one claw. 
The Llewellyns looked. The 
Serp was pointing to a misshapen, knobby something that lay 
beside Delbert’s boot. 
“That there?” Delbert asked, 
coming partially to life “That’s 
an apple core.” He glanced 
across to Llewellyn, and a gleam 
of intelligence seemed to come 
into his eyes. “Mr. Crawford, I 
quit,” he said clearly. Then he 
turned to the alien. “That’s a 
Delbert Smith apple core,” he 
said. 
Frozen, Llewellyn watched 
the Serp pull out a billfold and 
scuttle forward. Money changed 
hands. Delbert produced another apple and began enthusiastically reducing it to a core. 
“Say, Delbert,” said Llewellyn, stepping away from Martha. His voice squeaked, and he 
cleared his throat. “Looks like 
we got a good little thing going 
here. Now, if you was smart, 
you’d rent this pat stand — ” 
“Nope, Mr. Crawford,” said 
Delbert indistinctly, with hii 
mouth full of apple. “Figure I’ll 
go over to my uncle’s place. He’s 
got an orchard.” 
The Serp was hovering nearby, watching the apple core and 
uttering little squeals of appreciation. 
“Got to be close to your source 
of supply, you know,” said Delbert, wagging his head wisely. 
Speechless, Llewellyn felt a 
tug at his sleeve. He looked 
down : it was Ed Lacey, the 
banker. 
“Say, Lew, I tried to get you 
all afternoon, but your phone 
didn’t answer. About your collateral on those loans. .” 
—DAMON KNIGHT 
New! in the big December Worlds of Tomorrowl 
THE CREATURE INSIDE 
Seqnel to Arcturas Times Three, Big Baby, etc. 
by Jack Sharkey 
FAR AVANAL 
An exciting novelette 
by J. T. McIntosh 
The great concinsion of 
ALL WE MARSMEN 
by Philip K. Dick 
—and many others! December Worlds of Tomorrow on sa!e nowl 
THE BIG PAT BOOM 
for 
your 
information 
BY WILLY LEY 
THE NAMES 
OF THE 
CONSTELLATIONS 
I n my column “Names in the 
Sky” which was published 
in the June, 1962, issue of Galaxy 
lack of space compelled me to 
neglect the names of the constellations. Ever since I have 
been receiving letters and postcards asking me to devote some 
space to these names. By now I 
feel it is time to give in. 
As I mentioned in my earlier 
column, the Astronomical Congress of 1928 decided to recognize eighty-eight different constellations for the purpose of 
having easy labels for referring 
to areas in the sky. The list designating the precise borders for 
each of these constellations was 
published by E. Delporte of 
Brussels in his Atlas Celeste 
(Cambridge, 1930) so that there 
can be no longer any disagreement whether a faint star at the 
edge of one constellation belongs 
to the particular constellation 
or to its neighbor. As regards 
the names which are now recognized they are all of long standing and many of them are classical, going back to F*tolemy’s 
Almagest. 
Ptolemy listed a total of fortyeight constellations, twelve of 
them being the Zodiac — the 
belt of constellations along 
which the sun moves in the 
course of a year. Of the others, 
twenty-one were to the north of 
the Zodiac and fifteen to the 
south of the Zodiac. In fact, it 
was Ptolemy who is responsible 
for twelve constellations in the 
Zodiac. 
Most of the names of the signs 
of the Zodiac do not need any 
explanation. They are, in their 
customary order and in the La
tin version, the following; 
Aries (the Ram), Taurus (the 
Bull) and Gemini (the Twins, 
named “Castor and Pollux” in 
the Greek version and “Man and 
Wife” in sixteenth-century Europe), followed by Cancer (the 
Crab, or the Crayfish in western 
Europe), Leo (the Lion) and 
Virgo, (the Virgin, originally 
just “the Woman”). The next 
constellation, Libra (the Scales) 
is the one Ptolemy made a separate constellation. Before him the 
Greeks had considered the constellation Libra to be a part, 
namely the pincers, of the following constellation Scorpio 
while the Romans considered it 
the scales held by Themis, which 
was the same as the preceding 
constellation Virgo. Though 
Ptolemy gave it the rank of a 
separate constellation he still 
called it chelai, “the pincers”. 
The constellations following 
Libra, are, of course, Scorpius 
(the Scorpion), Sagittarius (the 
Archer), Capn'cornus (the Goat, 
originally the , Fish-Goat) 
Aquarius (the Water Carrier) 
and Pisces (the Fishes). 
Ptolemy’s twenty-one constellations to the north of the Zodiac, 
numbered consecutively, were: 
No. 1. Ursa minor and 
No. 2. Ursa major (literally the 
Little Bear and the 
Great Bear ... in the 
past called the Small 
FOR YOUR INFOR/MTION 
Wain and the Great 
Wain . now called 
the Little and Big 
Dipper.) 
No. 3. Draco (the Dragon) 
No. 4. Cepheus (this is a personal name, presumed 
to be the Latin version of the name of 
an Ethiopian king.) 
No. 5. Bootes (the Driver of the 
Oxen, or the Custodian of the Bears.) 
No. 6. Corona borealis (the 
Northern Crown) 
No. 7. Hercules (in Ptolemy’s 
Almagest, “the Kneeling Man’’.) 
No. 8. Lyra (originally a turtle, 
the shell of which 
then became the lyre, 
a rather poetic development.) 
No. 9. Cygnus (the Swan; in 
Ptolemy “the Bird”.) 
No. 10. Cassiopeia (wife of Cepheus; on some old 
charts this constellations is called the 
Throne or the Queen’s 
Throne.) 
No. 11 . Perseus (the rescuer of 
of Andromeda.) 
No. 12. Auriga (the Drajmian) 
No. 13. Ophiuchus (the Carrier 
of the Serpent) 
No. 14. Serpens (the serpent carried by Ophiuchus) 
No. 15. Sagitta (the Arrow) 
No. 16. Aquila (the Eagle) 
No. 17. Delphinus (the Dolphin) 
No. 18. Equuleus (the Filly; in 
Ptolemy the “Front 
Part of the Horse”.) 
No. 19. Pegasus (the Horse; not 
a winged horse in 
Ptolemy.) 
No. 20. Andromeda (the daughter of Cepheus and 
Cassiopeia.) 
No. 21. Triangulum (the Triangle; originally the 
Nile Delta.) 
The constellations to the south 
of the Zodiac were: 
No. 34. Cetus (the Whale) 
No. 35. Orion (the Himter) 
No. 36. Eridanus (the River; in 
Ptolemy this constellation is called potamos which is the 
Greek word for River, 
meaning the Nile. The 
Romans changed this 
to Eridanus, the Amber River, which was 
their name for the Elb 
river in Germany; later they called the 
same river Albis — 
which caused a lot of 
confusion.) 
No. 37. Lepus (the Hare) 
No. 38. Canis major (the Big 
Dog; in Ptolemy just 
kynos, the dog.) 
No. 39. Canis minor (the Little 
Dog; in Ptolemy this 
constellation was 
called prokyon, which 
is now the name of its 
principal star.) 
No. 40. Argo navis (the Ship; 
since it also served as 
the symbol of the year 
it was pictured with 
either 12 or 52 oars, 
symbolizing months or 
weeks.) 
No. 41. Hydra (the Sea Serpent) 
No. 42. Crater (the Cup) 
No. 43. Corvus (the Raven) 
No. 44. Centaurus (the Centaur) 
No. 45Lupus (the Wolf. In Ptolemy this constellation 
is just therion, which 
means “wild beast”; 
the Arabs were the 
ones who substituted a 
specific wild beast.) 
No. 46. Ara (the Altar) 
No. 47. Corona australis (the 
Southern Crown; the 
Arabs called it the 
Ostrich Nest.) 
No. 48. Piscis austrinus (the 
Southern Fish). 
The constellation now known 
as Coma Berenices (the Hair of 
Berenice) was suggested before 
Ptolemy by the Greek astronomer Hipparchos, but for unknown reasons was not accepted 
by Ptolemy. 
■pouring the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries three 
more constellations were added: 
Monoceros (the Unicom), Ca
melopardalis (the Giraffe) and 
Columba (the Dove). The latter 
is credited in countless books to 
Dr. Edmond Halley but it was 
actually suggested by the Dutch 
geographer Pieter Plancius. The 
gradual mapping of the southern 
sky which followed in the wake 
of geographical exploration added literally dozens of new constellations, most of which were 
dropped later. It may be mentioned at this point that the 
early explorers expected the 
southern sky to be a replica (or 
else a mirror image) of the 
northern sky and they were puzzled that this did not turn out to 
be the case. They were especially 
disappointed that there was no 
South Pole Star. 
Of the many new constellations suggested during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries 
a number are still accepted. They 
are; Chamaeleon, Phoenix, Grus 
(the Crane), Pavo (the Peacock), Lacerta (the Lizard), Leo 
minor (the Little Lion), Hydrua 
(the Water Snake, Canes venatici (the Hunting Dogs), Dorado 
(the Swordfish, or Goldfish), 
and Crux (the Southern Cross). 
Two of the newer constellations, Lynx and Apus, require 
some explanation. The name 
Lynx applies to an area lacking 
in bright stars; it was created 
by the part-time astronomer, otherwise brewmaster and city ald
FOR YOUR INFORAAATION 
erman, Johannes Hewelcke (better known as Hevelius) of Danzig. A constellation was needed 
in that area to fill the space. 
Hevelius named it Lynx because 
he said that lynx eyes were 
needed to see anything at all. 
As for Apus the name is translated with annoying regularity 
as The Bee in manuals for amateurs. But the Latin word for 
“bee” is apis. Actually the name 
comes from Apus (seu avis') intaken notion that the bird of 
India” and is based on the mistaken notion that the Bird of 
Paradise was footless, which is 
what apus really means. Hence 
the constellation Apus should be 
rendered in English as “Bird of 
Paradise”. 
For the modern list of eightyeight constellations, one of Ptolemy’s constellations. No. 40, Argo 
was divided into three: Carina, 
Vela and Puppis (Keel, Sails and 
Poop) but the Greek letters for 
the stars form one sequence 
through all three. 
The other constellations of the 
modem star atlas which have not 
been mentioned so far are, in 
alphabitical order: 
Antlia (originally Antlia pneumatica, the Air Pump) 
Caelum (originally Caelum 
sculptoris, the Sculptor’s 
Tool) 
Circinus (the Compasses, originally Circinus et norma, 
Compasses and Ruler) I 
Fornax (the Furnace) I 
Horologium (the Pendulum I 
Clock) I 
Indus (the Indian) 
Mensa (the Table, originally 
Mons mensae, the Table 
Mountain, meaning Table 
Mountain near Cape Town 
in South Africa, from which 
Nicolas Louis de Lacaille, 
who introduced this constellation, observed the 
southern sky.) 
Microscopium (the Microscope) 
Musca (the Fly) 
Norma (the Ruler, but in the 
sense of “straightedge”.) 
Pictor (originally Equus pictoris, the Painter’s Easel) 
Pyxis (the Mariner’s Compass. 
The literal meaning of the 
word is “small (wooden) 
box”; it came to mean Mariner’s Compass via the Italian form, hussola della calamita, which was a wooden 
bowl, filled with water, in 
which a reed (calamita), 
supporting the magnetic 
needle was floating.) 
Reticulum (the Net; actually [ 
Lacaille’s reticule romboide, 
the instrument he used for 
measuring angular distances 
between the stars.) 
Sculptor (no translation needed) 
Scutum (the Shield, or Buckler; 
originally Scutum Sobiesii, 
GALAXY . 
Sobieski’s Shield.) 
Sextans (the Sextant) 
Telescopium (the Telescope) 
Triangulum australis (the 
Southern Triangle) 
Tucana (the Toucan) 
Volans (originally Piscis volans, 
the Flying Fish) 
You have repeatedly pointed 
out scientific facts behind myths 
or allusions in classical literature. How about these lines from 
Shakespeare’s As You Like It: 
Sweet are the uses of adversity; 
Which, like the toad, ugly 
and venomous, 
Wears yet a precious jewel 
in its head. 
What does the reference to the 
precious jewel mean? And while 
I am at it, are toads venomous? 
Deborah Crawford 
New York City. 
Let me take your last question 
first, it’s easier that way. Toads 
are amphibians, and no amphibian is venomous in the sense that 
they have poison fangs like some 
snakes. But all amphibians have 
skin glands; and the liquid exuded by the skin glands of one 
South American tree frog actually is toxic enough to be used 
FOR YOUR INFORAAATION 
Vulpecula (usually called “the 
Fox” in English, though the 
word means Little Fox. The 
original name by Hevelius 
was Vulpecula cum ansere, 
the Little Fox and the 
Goose.) 
as an arrow poison. Whether the 
excretions of the skin glands of 
the common garden toad can be 
called venomous is the subject 
of a debate which by now has 
lasted for at least five centuries. 
In England you still find the 
belief in some quarters that 
touching a toad will cause warts, 
while German peasants are convinced that touching a toad in 
the light of a full moon will 
cure warts. (People just can’t get 
together on some things!) I 
think it would be correct to say 
that the excretion is not venomous, though there are a few 
cases known where the handling 
of live toads caused a skin irritation. 
Now for the “precious jewel”, 
also known as the toadstone. It 
was supposed to be a yello'vish 
stone which either had the shape 
of a toad or else had the image 
of a toad on it. And, while the 
toad itself does not produce such 
(Questions ? 
a stone, contemporary artisans 
had no trouble furnishing them 
for people with money. 
Shakespeare’s contemporary, 
the writer Edward Topsell, who 
published a Historie of Fourefooted Beasts in 1607, has provided us with a summary of the 
beliefs then current: “There be 
many late Writers, which doe 
affirme that there is a precious 
stone in the head of a Toade 
There be many that weare these 
stones in Ringes, beeing verily 
perswaded that they keep them 
from all manner of grypings and 
paines of the belly, and the 
small guttes. But the Art (as they 
term it) is in taking of it out, 
for they say it must be taken out 
of the head alive, before the 
Toade be dead, with a peece of 
cloth of the colour of redde 
Skarlet, wherewithal! they are 
much delighted, so that while 
they stretch out themselves as it 
were in sport upon that cloth, 
they cast out the stone of their 
head, but instantly they sup it 
up againe, unlesse it be taken 
from them through some secrete 
hole in the said cloth, whereby 
it falleth into a cesterne or vessell of water, into which the 
Toade dare not enter, by reason 
of the coldness of the water.” 
Topsell was not Shakespeare’s 
source, because As You Like It 
is usually dated as having been 
written in 1599 or 1600. Shake
speare must have read about it 
in one of the unnamed writers 
quoted by Topsell who also said 
that the toad stone was good 
against the “falling sickness” 
and that it changed color in the 
presence of poison. Topsell’s own 
own conclusion is : 
“Now for my part I dare not 
conclude either with it, or 
against it, for many are directlie 
for this stone ingendered in the 
braine or head of the Toade: 
on the other side, some confesse 
such a stone by name and nature, but they make doubt of the 
generation of it, as others have 
delivered; and therefore, they 
beeing in sundry opinions, the 
found the Reader, I will referre 
him for his satisfaction unto a 
Toade, which he may easily 
every day kill: For although 
when the Toade is dead, the 
vertue thereof be lost, which consisted in the eye, or blew spot in 
the middle, yet the substance remaineth, and, if the stone be 
found there in substance, then is 
the question at an end; but, if it 
be not, then must the generation 
of it be sought for in some other 
place.” 
As a resident of Hollywood, 
California, I am well acquainted 
with the tar pools of Hancock 
Park and I have paid a number 
of visits to our Museum where 
the skeletons of animals found in 
the tar pits have been re-assembled. My question is: how old are 
these bones? I have heard statements ranging from 10,000 to 
100.000 years. Hasn’t the radiocarbon dating method been tried 
out on these bones? 
Magnus Hellmann 
Hollywood, Calif. 
The reason why you have 
heard such different age estimates is that during the last few 
decades there has been a general 
re-dating of recent geological 
events. It had always been assumed that the animals of the 
tar fKJols, the so-called La Brea 
Fauna, existed at about the time 
of the last glaciation in the 
North. And it had also been assumed that the last retreat of 
the glaciers of the Ice Age took 
place about 30,000 years ago, a 
few geologists thinking that it 
might have been as recently as 
20.000 years ago. 
Under these assumptions the 
age of the La Brea Fauna had 
to be not less than 30,000 years, 
probably nearer 50,000 years. 
But then the radio-carbon method permitted the dating of a spot 
in Wisconsin where a forest had 
been felled by the advance of 
the glaciers. It then turned out 
that the last glaciation was still 
going on 11,000 to 12,000 years 
ago. Nobody believed this result 
at first; obviously something had 
gone wrong. To check what it 
might be, samples of European 
material known to have been 
formed late during the last glaciation were sent to the United 
States for dating. The dates of 
this European material agreed 
with the Wisconsin dates within 
about a thousand years. 
Since the last glaciation had 
been more recent than had been 
assumed, the La Brea Fauna also 
had to be more recent. And another very strong hint was obtained elsewhere. 
One of the animals from the 
tar pits is a large ground sloth. 
Radio -carbon dating of the remains of identical ground sloths 
from Gsrpsum Cave in Nevada 
showed that they were between 
10,000 and 11,000 years old. All 
this made it unlikely that the 
remains from the tar pits would 
be much older. The logical next 
step was to date something from 
the tar pits. 
When Pit No. 3 was excavated 
during the period from July, 
1913, to August, 1914, a tree 
trunk, eight feet tall, was found 
rooted in the hard clay beneath 
the asphalt. 
Wood from this tree was sent 
to two different laboratories for 
dating. Since the wood was tarsoaked, part of the sample was 
washed in xylol to remove the 
tar and then dated. The other 
part was dated without removing 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
the tar. The two cleaned samples 
gave the ages of 15,390 plus or 
minus 230 years and 13,890 plus 
or minus 280 years; the two 
samples which were not cleaned 
of tar gave the ages of 14,500 
plus or minus 210 years and 14,110 plus or minus 420 years. 
While the first laboratory had 
tested pieces of the tree trunk, 
the second laboratory was supplied with a piece of one of the 
roots of the same tree. This laboratory extracted the tar from 
the whole sample and tested the 
cleaned root and the tar extracted from it separately. The tar 
proved to be “dead”, which 
means that it was too old to be 
dated by this method, or older 
than 28,000 years. The root gave 
an age of 14,400 plus or minus 
300 years. 
These tests show that the more 
recent age estimates of the La 
Brea Fauna were confirmed by 
direct dating. Instead of saying 
“30,000 to 50,000 years old,” one 
should say “Between 10,000 and 
20,000 years.” 
If both the Soviet Union and 
our own country stopped putting 
satellites into orbit, how many 
of those now in orbit would still 
circle the earth a hundred years 
from now? (I discount the space 
probes that are in orbit around 
the sun.) Isaac Braunstein 
Brooklyn, N. Y. 
The answer is “about twenty”, 
but there is an uncertainty involved due to the fact that the 
U. S. Air Force has launched a 
number of secret satellites with 
undisclosed orbits. Some of them 
may have a lifetime of more 
than a century. And since the 
released information about the 
Russian series of “Cosmos” satellites is quite meager, it would 
be useless to guess about their 
lifetimes. 
Of the known satellites, the 
ones with a very long life expectancy are: Vanguard I (fired 
March 17, 1958), Tiros I (fired 
April 1, 1960), Transit IIA 
(fired June 22, 1960), Echo I 
(fired August 12, 1960), Courier 
I (fired October 4, 1960), Tiros 
II (fired Nov. 23, 1960), Explorer 
IX (fired February 11, 1961), 
Tiros III (fired July 12, 1961), 
Midas III (fired same day as 
Tiros II), Midas IV (fired Oct. 
21, 1961), Transit IVB (fired 
Nov. 15, 1961), Tiros IV (fired 
November 15, 1961), OSO-1 
(fired March 7, 1962), 1962Kappa-1 (fired April 9, 1962), 
Tiros V (fired June 19, 1962), 
Telstar (fired July 10, 1962), 
Tiros VI (fired September 18, 
1962), Alouette (fired September 27, 1962) and Tiros VII 
(fired June 19, 1963). 
I am in the eighth grade and 
interested in the sciences. Last 
Degree 
length of one degree of longitude at 
of Place under that 
different latitudes. 
latitude 
Latitude 
Kilometers 
Quito, Ekniador (Equator) 
111.32 
Cayenne, Guiana 
U0.90 
San Jose, Costa Rica 
109.64 
Manilla, Philippines (approx.) 
107.55 
Guantanamo, Cuba ) 
Mexico, City ) (approx.) 
Hilo, Hawaii ) 
104.65 
Talhoku, Formosa 
100.95 
New Orleans, La., Cairo, Egypt 
96.49 
Albuquerque, N. Mex. 
91.29 
Philadelphia, Pa., Boulder Colo. 
Minneapolis, - St. Paul, Minn. 
85.40 
78.85 
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada 
71.70 
Newcastle on Tyne, England 
64.00 
Oslo, Norway 
55.80 
Fairbanks, Alaska 
47.18 
Tromso, Norway (approx.) 
33.19 
Devon Island, north of North America 28.90 
Axel Heiberg Island 
19.40 
Arctic Ice north of Greenland 
9.73 
the Poles 
0.00 
week our science teacher pointed out that the usual map, the 
Mercator map, is all wrong because on this map the degrees 
of longitude form parallel lines 
while, in reality, they should all 
come together at the poles. 
He also said that for this reason a degree of longitude is of 
different lengths, depending on 
latitude. It is longest at the 
equator and has no length at all 
at the poles. Now I have two 
questions. If the Mercator map 
is so wrong, why is it still used? 
And is there a simple formula 
for calculating how long a degree is in various places? 
Michael Stromberg 
Indianapolis, I nd. 
The Mercator map just emphasizes a problem which is 
common to all maps. The earth 
is very nearly a sphere; hence 
FOR YOUR INFORAAATION 
Miles 
69.17 
68.91 
68.13 
66.83 
65.02 
62.73 
59.96 
56.73 
53.06 
48.99 
44.5b 
39. rr 
34.67 
29.31 
23.73 
17.96 
12.05 
6.05 
0.00 
any part of that sphere, say the 
continent of Africa, is a curved 
surface. If you flatten it out on 
paper for the purpose of making 
a map you have to introduce a 
distortion of some kind. Only a 
globe can be accurate. But if 
you deal with a sufficiently small 
area, like that of a county, the 
distortion of the Mercator map 
makes no difference. For maps 
showing whole continents or 
oceans the Mercator map has the 
advantage that you can tell at a 
glance which place is due North 
(or due South) of another. Its 
directions are true, even if the 
dimensions are not. 
There is no simple formula 
for computing the length of a 
degree; in fact it is a fairly complicated calculation. But I can 
give you a table, showing the 
values for every five degrees 
(above). —WILLY LEY 
IF THERE 
WERE NO 
BENNY CEMOLI 
by PHILIP K. DICK 
ILLUSTRATED BY LUTJENS 
They brought the peace of the 
stars to ruined Earth . *juf 
Earth had never asked for itl 
S campering across the unplowed field the three boys 
shouted as they saw the ship; it 
had landed, all right, just where 
they expected, and they were the 
first to reach it. 
“Hey, that’s the biggest I ever 
saw!” Panting, the first boy 
halted. “That’s not from Mars; 
that’s from farther. It’s from all 
the way out, I know it is.” He 
became silent and afraid as he 
saw the size of it. And then looking up into the sky he realized 
that an armada had arrived, exactly as everyone had expected. 
“We better go tell,” he said to 
his companions. 
Back on the ridge, John LeConte stood by his steam-powered chauffeur-driven limousine, 
impatiently waiting for the boiler to warm. Kids got there first, 
he said to himself with anger. 
Whereas I’m supposed to. And 
the children were ragged; they 
were merely farm boys. 
“Is the phone working today?" 
LeConte asked his secretary. 
Glancing at his clipboard, Mr. 
Fall said, “Yes, sir. Shall I put 
through a message to Oklahoma 
City?” He was the skinniest 
employee ever assigned to LeConte’s office. The man evidently took nothing for himself, was 
positively uninterested in food. 
And he was efficient. 
LeConte murmured, “The immigration people ought to hear 
about this outrage.” 
He sighed. It had all gone 
wrong. The armada from Proxima Centauri had after ten years 
arrived and none of the earlywarning devices had detected it 
in advance of its landing. Now 
Oklahoma City would have to 
deal with the outsiders here on 
home ground — a psychological 
disadvantage which LeConte felt 
keenly. 
Look at the equipment they’ve 
got, he thought as he watched 
the commercial ships of the flotilla begin to lower their cargos. 
Why, hell, they make us look 
like provincials. He wished that 
his official car did not need 
twenty minutes to warm up; he 
wished — 
A ctually, he wished that CURB 
did not exist. 
Centaurus Urban Renewal Bureau, a do-gooding body unfortunately vested with enormoqs 
inter-system authority. It had 
been informed of the Misadventure back in 2170 and had started into space like a phototropic 
organism, sensitive to the mere 
physical light created by the hydrogen-bomb explosions. But LeConte knew better than that. Actually the governing organiza
tions in the Centaurian system 
knew many details of the tragedy because they had been in 
radio contact with other planets 
of the Sol system. Little of the 
native forms on earth had survived. He himself was from 
Mars; he had headed a relief 
mission seven years ago, had decided to stay because there were 
so many opportunities here on 
Earth, conditions being what 
they were. 
This is all very difficult, he 
said to himself as he stood waiting for his steam-powered car to 
warm. We got here first, but 
CURB does outrank us; we must 
face that awkward fact. In my 
opinion, we’ve done a good job 
of rebuilding. Of course, it isn’t 
like it was before . but ten 
years is not long. Give us another twenty and we’ll have the 
trains running again. And our 
recent road-building bonds sold 
quite successfully, in fact were 
oversubscribed. 
“Call for you, sir, from Oklahoma City,” Mr. Fall said, holding out the receiver of the portable field-phone. 
“Ultimate Representative in 
the Field John LeConte, here,” 
LeConte said into it loudly. “Go 
ahead; I say go ahead.” 
“This is Party Headquarters,” 
the dry official voice at the other end came faintly, mixed with 
static, in his ear. “We’ve received
reports from dozens of alert citizens in Western Oklahoma and 
Texas of an immense — ” 
“It’s here,” LeConte said. “I 
can see it. I’m just about ready 
to go out and confer with its 
ranking members, and I’ll file a 
full report at the usual time. So 
it wasn’t necessary for you to 
check up on me.” He felt irritable. 
“Is the armada heavily 
armed?” 
“Naw,” LeConte said. “It appears to comprise bureaucrats 
and trade officials and commercial carriers. In other words, 
vultures.” 
The Party desk-man said, 
“Well, go and make certain they 
understand that their presence 
here is resented by the native 
population as well as the Relief 
of War-torn Areas Administrating Coucil. Tell them that the 
legislature will be called to pass 
a special bill expressing indignation at this intrusion into 
domestic matters by an intersystem body.” 
“I know, I know,” LeConte 
said. “It’s been all decided; I 
know.” 
His chauffeur called to him, 
“Sir, your car is ready now.” 
The Party desk-man concluded, “Make certain they understand that you can’t negotiate 
with them; you have no power 
to admit them to Earth. Only 
the Council can do that and of 
course it’s adamantly against 
that.” 
LeConte hung up the phone 
and hurried to his car. 
D espite the opposition of the 
local authorities, Peter 
Hood of CURB decided to locate his headquarters in the 
ruins of the old Terran capital. 
New York City. This would lend 
prestige to the CURBmen as 
they gradually widened the circle of the organization’s influence. At last, of course, the circle would embrace the planet. 
But that would take decades. 
As he walked through the 
ruins of what had once been a 
major train yard, Peter Hood 
thought to himself that when the 
task was done he himself would 
have long been retired. Not 
much remained of the pre- tragedy culture here. The local authorities — the political nonentities who had flocked in from 
Mars and Venus, as the neighboring planets were called — 
had done little. And yet he admired their efforts. 
To the members of his staff 
walking directly behind him he 
said, “You know, they have done 
the hard part for us. We ought 
to be grateful. It is not easy to 
come into a totally destroyed 
area, as they’ve done.” 
His man Fletcher observed, 
IF THERE WERE NO BENNY CEMOLl 
“They got back a good return.” 
Hood said, “Motive is not important. They have achieved results.” He was thinking of the 
official who had met them in 
his steam car; it had been solemn and formal, carrying complicated trappings. When these 
locals had first arrived on the 
scene years ago they had not 
been greeted, except perhaps by 
radiation-seared, blackened survivors who had stumbled out of 
cellars and gaped sightlessly. He 
shivered. 
Coming up to him, a CURBman of minor rank saluted and 
said, “I think we’ve managed to 
locate an undamaged structure 
in which your staff could be 
housed for the time being. It’s 
underground.” He looked embarrassed. “Not what we had 
hoped for. We’d have to displace 
the locals to get anything attractive.” 
“I don’t object,” Hood said. 
“A basement will do.” 
“The structure,” the minor 
CURBman said, “was once a 
great homeostatic newspaper, the 
New York Times. It printed 
itself directly below us. At least, 
according to the maps. We 
haven’t located the newspaper 
yet; it was customary for the 
homeopapes to be buried a mile 
or so down. As yet we don’t 
know how much of this one survived.” 
“But it would be valuable,” 
Hood agreed. 
“Yes,” the CURBman said. 
“Its outlets are scattered all over 
the planet; it must have had a 
thousand different editions 
which it put out daily. How 
many outlets function — ” He 
broke off. “It’s hard to believe 
that the local politicos made no 
efforts to repair any of the ten 
or eleven world-wide homopapes, but that seems to be the 
case.” 
“Odd,” Hood said. Surely it 
would have eased their task. The 
post-tragedy job of reuniting 
people into a common culture 
depended on newspapers, ionization in the atmosphere making 
radio and TV reception difficult 
if not impossible. “This makes 
me instantly suspicious,” he said, 
turning to his staff. “Are they 
perhaps not trying to rebuild 
after all? Is their work merely 
a pretense?” 
It was his own wife Joan who 
spoke up. “They may simply 
have lacked the ability to place 
the homeopapes on an operational basis.” 
Give them the benefit of the 
doubt. Hood thought. You’re 
right. 
“So the last edition of the 
Times,” Fletcher said, “was put / 
on the lines the day the Misad-^ 
venture occurred. And the entire network of newspaper com-; 
munication and news-creation 
has been idle since. I can’t respect these politicos; it shows 
they’re ignorant of the basics of 
a culture. By reviving the homeopapes we can do more to reestablish the pre-tragedy culture 
than they’ve done in ten thousand pitiful projects.” His tone 
was scornful. 
Hood said, “You may misunderstand, but let it go. Let’s hope 
that the cephalon of the pape 
is imdamaged. We couldn’t possibly replace it.” Ahead he saw 
the yawning entrance which the 
CURBmen crews had cleared. 
This was to be his first move, 
here on the ruined planet, restoring this immense self-contained entity to its former authority. Once it had resumed its 
activity he would be freed for 
other tasks; the homeopape 
would take some of the burden 
from him. 
A workman, still clearing debris away, muttered, “Jeez, I 
never saw so many layers of 
junk. You’d think they deliberately bottled it up down here.” 
In his hands, the suction furnace 
which he operated glowed and 
praunded as it absorbed material, 
converting it to energy, leaving 
an increasingly enlarged open
“I’d like a report as soon as 
possible as to its condition,” 
Hood said to the team of engi
IF THERE WERE NO BENNY CEMOLI 
neers who stood waiting to descend into the opening. “How 
long it will take to revive it, 
how much — ” He broke off. 
Two men in black uniforms 
had arrived. Police, from the 
Security ship. One, he saw, was 
Otto Dietrich, the ranking investigator accompanying the armada from Centaurus, and he felt 
tense automatically; it was a reflex for all of them — he saw 
the engineers and the workmen 
cease momentarily and then, 
more slowly, resume their work. 
“Yes,” he said to Dietrich. 
“Glad to see you. Let’s go off 
to this side room and talk there.” 
He knew beyond a doubt what 
the investigator wanted; he had 
been expecting him. 
Dietrich said, “I won’t take up 
too much of your time. Hood. I 
know you’re quite busy. What is 
this, here?” He glanced about 
curiously, his scrubbed, round, 
alert face eager. 
I n a small side room, converted to a temporary office, 
Hood faced the two policemen. 
“I am opposed to prosecution,” 
he said quietly. “It’s been too 
long. Let them go.” 
Dietrich tugging thoughtfully 
at his ear, said, “But war crimes 
are war crimes, even foul decades later. Anyhow, what argument can there be? We’re required by law to prosecute. 
J 
Somebody started the war. They 
may well hold positions of responsibility now, but that hardly matters.” 
“How many police troops have 
you landed?” Hood asked. 
“Two hundred.” 
“Then you’re ready to go to 
work.” 
“We’re ready to make inquiries. Sequester pertinent documents and initiate litigation in 
the local courts. We’re prepared 
to enforce cooperation, if that’s 
what you mean. Various experienced personnel have been distributed to key points.” Dietrich 
eyed him. “All this is necessary; 
I don’t see the problem. Did you 
intend to protect the guilty 
parties — make use of their socalled abilities on your staff?” 
“No,” Hood said evenly. 
Dietrich said, “Nearly eighty 
million people died in the Misfortune. Can you forget that? Or 
is it that since they were merely 
local people, not known to us 
personally — ” 
“It’s not that,” Hood said. He 
knew it was hopeless; he could 
not communicate with the police 
mentality. “I’ve already stated 
my objections. I feel it serves no 
purpose at this late date to have 
trials and hangings. Don’t request use of my staff in this; 
111 refuse on the grounds that I 
can spare no one, not even a janitor. Do I make myself clear?” 
“You idealists,” Dietrich sighed. “This is strictly a noble task 
confronting us ... to rebuild, 
correct? What you don’t or 
won’t see is that these people 
will start it all over again, one 
day, unless we take steps now. 
We owe it to future generations. 
To be harsh now is the most 
humane method, in the long run. 
Tell me. Hood. What is this site? 
What are you resurrecting here 
with such vigor?” 
“The New York Times,” Hood 
said. 
“It has, I assume, a morgue? 
We can consult its backlog of 
information? That would prove 
valuable in building up our 
cases.” 
Hoood said, “I can’t deny you 
access to material we uncover.” 
Smiling, Dietrich said, “A day 
by day account of the political 
events leading up to the war 
would prove quite interesting. 
Who, for instance, held supreme 
power in the United States at the 
time of the Misfortune? No one 
we’ve talked to so far seems to 
remember.” His smile increased. 
^ arly the next morning the 
report from the corps of 
engineers reached Hood in his 
temporary office. The power 
supply of the newspaper had 
been totally destroyed. But the 
cephalon, the governing brainstructure which guided and ori
ented the homeostatic system, 
appeared to be intact. If a ship 
were brought close by, perhaps 
its power supply could be integrated into the newspaper’s 
lines. Thereupon much more 
would be known. 
“In other words,” Fletcher 
said to Hood, as they sat with 
Joan eating breakfast, “it may 
come on and it may not. Very 
pragmatic. You hook it up and 
if it works you’ve done your job. 
What if it doesn’t? Do the engineers intend to give up at that 
point?” 
Examining his cup. Hood said, 
“This tastes like authentic coffee.” He pondered. “Tell them 
to bring a ship in and start the 
homeopape up. And if it begins 
to print, bring me the edition at 
once.” He sipped his coffee. 
An hour later a ship of the 
line had landed in the vicinity 
and its power source had been 
tapped for insertion into the 
homeopape. The conduits were 
placed, the circuits cautiously 
closed. 
Seated in his office, Peter 
Hood heard far underground a 
low rumble, a halting, uncertain 
stirring. They had been successful. The newspaper was returning to life. 
The edition, when it was laid 
on his desk by a bustling CURBman, surprised him by its accuracy. Even in its dormant 
state, the newspaper had somehow managed not to fall behind 
events. Its receptors had kept 
going. 
~ CURB LANDS, TRIP DECADE 
LONG, PLANS CENTRAL 
ADMINISTRATION 
Ten years after the Misfortune of 
a nuclear holocaust, the inter-system rehabilitation agency, CURB, 
has made its historic appearance 
on Earth’s surface, landing from 
a veritable armada of craft — a 
sight which witnesses described as 
“overpowering both in scope and in 
significance.” CURBman Peter 
Hood, named top co-ordinator by 
Centaurian authorities, immediately set up headquarters in the 
ruins of New York City and conferred with aides, declaring that 
he had come “not to punish the 
guilty but to re-estalish the planet-wide culture by every means 
available, and to restore — 
It was uncanny. Hood thought 
as he read the lead article. The 
varied news-gathering services 
of the homeopape had reached 
into his own life, had digested 
and then inserted into the lead 
article even the discussion between himself and Otto Dietrich. 
The newspaper was — had been 
— doing its job. Nothing of 
news-interest escaped it, even a 
discreet conversation carried on 
with no outsiders as witnesses. 
He would have to be careful. 
Sure enough, another item, 
ominous in tone, dealt with the 
IF THERE WERE NO BENNY CEMOLI 
anival of the black jacks, the 
police. 
SECURITY AGENCY VOWS 
“WAR CRIMINALS” TARGET 
Captain Otto Dietrich, supreme 
police investigator arriving with 
the CURB armada from Proxima 
Centauri, said today that those responsible for the Misfortune of a 
decade ago “would have to pay 
for i.heir crimes” before the bar 
of Centaurian justice. Two hundred black-uniformed police, it 
was learned by the Times, have already begun exploratory activities designed to — 
The newspaper was warning 
Earth about Dietrich, and Hood 
could not help feeling grim relish. The Times had not been set 
up to serve merely the occupying hierarchy. It served everyone, including those Dietrich 
intended to try. Each step of the 
police activity would no doubt 
be reported in full detail. Dietrich, who liked to work in anonymity, would not enjoy this. But 
the authority to maintain the 
newspaper belonged to Hood. 
And he did not intend to shut 
it off. 
One item on the first page of 
the paper attracted his further 
notice; he read it, frowning and 
a little uneasy. 
CEMOLI BACKERS RIOT 
IN UPSTATE NEW YORK 
Supporters of Benny Cemoli, gathered in the familiar tent cities as
sociated with the colorful political 
figure, clashed with local citizens 
armed with hammers, shovels, and 
boards, both sides claiming victory 
in the two-hour melee which left 
twenty injured and a dozen hospitalized in hastily-erected first 
aid stations. Cemoli, garbed as always in his toga-style red robes, 
visited the injured, evidently in 
good spirits, joking and telling his 
supporters that “it won’t be long 
now ” an evident reference to the 
organization's boast that it would 
march on New York City in the 
near future to establish what 
Cemoli deems “social justice and 
true equality for the first time in 
world history.” It should be recalled that prior to his imprisonment at San Quentin — 
Flipping a switch on his intercom system. Hood said, 
“Fletcher, check into activities 
up in the north of the county. 
Find out about some sort of a 
political mob gathering there.” 
Fletcher’s voice came back, “I 
have a copy of the Times, too, 
sir. I see the item about this 
Cemoli agitator. There’s a ship on 
the way up there right now; 
should have a report within ten 
minutes.” Fletcher paused. “Do 
you think — it’ll be necessary to 
bring in any of Dietrich’s people?” 
“Let’s hope not,” Hood said 
shortly. 
Half an hour later the CURB 
ship, through Fletcher, made its 
report. Puzzled, Hood asked 
that it be repeated. But there 
was no mistake. The CURB field 
team had investigated throughly. They had found no sign 
whatsoever of any tent city or 
any group gathering. And citizens in the area whom they had 
interrogated had never heard of 
anyone named “Cemoli.” And 
there was no sign of any scuffle 
having taken place, no first aid 
stations, no injured persons. 
Only the peaceful, semi-rural 
countryside. 
Baffled, Hood read the item 
in the Times once more. There 
it was, in black and white, on 
the front page, along with the 
news about the landing of the 
CURB armada. What did it 
mean? 
He did not like it at all. 
Had it been a mistake to revive the great, old, damaged 
homestatic newspaper? 
T^rom a sound sleep that 
-*■ night Hood was awakened 
by a clanging from far beneath 
the ground, an urgent racket 
that grew louder and louder as 
he sat up in bed, blinking and 
confused. Machinery roared. He 
heard the heavy rumbling movement as automatic circuits fitted 
into place, responding to instructions emanating from within the closed system itself. 
“Sir,” Fletcher was saying 
from the darkness. A light came 
on as Fletcher located the temporary overhead fixture. “I 
thought I should come in and 
wake you. Sorry, Mrs. Hood.” 
“I’m awake,” Hood muttered, 
rising from the bed and putting 
on his robe and slippers. “What’s 
it doing?” 
Fletcher said, “It’s printing an 
extra.” 
Sitting up, smoothing her tousled blond hair back, Joan said, 
“Good lord. What about?” 
Wide-eyed, she looked from her 
husband to Fletcher. 
“We’ll have to bring in the 
local authorities,” Hood said. 
“Confer with them.” He had an 
intuition as to the nature of the 
extra roaring through the presses 
at this moment. “Get that LeCone, that politico who met us 
on our arrival. Wake him up 
and fly him here immediately. 
We need him.” 
It took almost an hour to obtain the presence of the haughty, 
ceremonious local potentate and 
his staff member. The two of 
them in their elaborate uniforms at last put in an appearance at Hood’s office, both of 
them indignant. They faced 
Hood silently, waiting to hear 
what he wanted. 
In his bathrobe and slippers 
Hood sat at his desk, a copy of 
the Times’ extra before him; he 
was reading it once more as LeConte and his man entered. 
IF THERE WERE NO BENNY CEMOLI 
NEW YORK POLICE REPORT 
CEMOLI LEGIONS ON MOVE 
TOWARD CITY, 
BARRICADES ERECTED, 
NATIONAL GUARD ALERTED 
He turned the paper, showing 
the headlines to the two Earthmen. “Who is this man?” he 
said. 
After a moment LeConte said, 
“I — don’t know.” 
Hood said, “Come on, Mr. LeConte.” 
“Let me read the article,” LeConte said nervously. He 
scanned it in haste; his hands 
trembled as he held the newspaper. “Interesting,” he said at 
last. “But I can’t tell you a thing. 
It’s news to me. You must imderstand that our communications have been sparse, since 
the Misfortune, and it’s entirely 
possible that a political movement could spring up without 
our — ” 
“Please,” Hood said. “Don’t 
make yourself absurd.” 
Flushing, LeConte stammered, 
“I’m doing the best I can, summoned out of my bed in the 
middle of the night.” 
There was a stir, and through 
the office doorway came the rapidly-moving figure of Otto Dietrich, looking grim. “Hood,” he 
said without preamble, “there’s 
a Times kiosk near my headquarters. It just posted this.” He 
no 
held up a copy of the extra. “The 
damn thing is running this off 
and distributing it throughout 
the world, isn’t it? However, we 
have crack teams up in that area 
and they report absolutely nothing, no road blocks, no militiastyle troops on the move, no activity of any sort.” 
“I know,” Hood said. He felt 
weary. And still, from beneath 
them, the deep rumble continued, the newspaper printing its 
extra, informing the world of 
the march by Benny Cemoli’s 
supporters on New York City — 
a fantasy march, evidently, a 
product manufactured entirely 
within the cephalon of the newspaper itself. 
“Shut it off,” Dietrich said. 
Hood shook his head. “No. I 
want to know more.” 
“That’s no reason,” Dietrich 
said. “Obviously, it’s defective. 
Very seriously damaged, not 
working properly. Youll have to 
search elsewhere for your worldwide propaganda network.” He 
tossed the newspaper down on 
Hood’s desk. 
To LeConte, Hood said, “Was 
Benny Cemoli active before the 
war?” 
There was silence. Both LeConte and his assistant Mr. Fall 
were pale and tense; they faced 
him tight-lipped, glancing at 
each other. 
“I am not much for police 
' GALAXY 
matters,” Hood said to Dietrich, 
“but I think you could reasonably step in here.” 
Dietrich, understanding, said, 
“I agree. You two men are under 
arrest. Unless you feel inclined 
to talk a little more freely about 
this agitator in the red toga.” 
He nodded to two of his police, 
who stood by the office doorway; they stepped obediently 
forward. 
As the two policemen came 
up to him, LeConte said, “Come 
to think of it, there was such a 
person. But — he was very obsecure.” 
“Before the war?” Hood 
asked. 
“Yes.” LeConte nodded slowly. “He was a joke. As I recall, 
and it’s difficult ... a fat, ignorant clown from some backwoods area. He had a little radio 
station or something over which 
he broadcast. He peddled some 
sort of anti-radiation box which 
you installed in your house, and 
it made you safe from bomb-test 
fallout.” 
Now his staff member Mr. 
Fall said, “I remember. He even 
ran for the UN senate. But he 
was defeated, naturally.” 
“And that was the last of 
him?” Hood asked. 
“Oh yes,” LeConte said. “He 
died of Asian flu soon after. 
He’s been dead for fifteen 
years.” 
I n a helicopter. Hood flew 
slowly above the terrain depicted in the Times articles, seeing for himself that there was no 
sign of political activity. He did 
not feel really assured until he 
had seen with his own eyes that 
the newspaper had lost contact 
with actual events. The reality 
of the situation did not coincide 
with the Times’ articles in any 
way; that was obvious. And yet 
— the homeostatic system continued on. 
Joan, seated beside him, said, 
“I have the third article here, 
if you want to read it.” She had 
been looking the latest edition 
over. 
“No,” Hood said. 
“It says they’re in the outskirts of the city,” she said. 
“They broke through the police 
barricades and the governor has 
appealed for UN assistance.” 
Thoughtfiolly, Fletcher said, 
“Here’s an idea. One of us, preferably you. Hood, should write 
a letter to the Times.” 
Hood glanced at him. 
“I think I can tell you exactly how it should be worded,” 
Fletcher said. “Make it a simple 
inquiry. You’ve followed the accounts in the paper about Cemoli’s movement. Tell the editor — ” Fletcher paused. “That 
you feel sympathetic and you’d 
like to join the movement. Ask 
the paper how.” 
IF THERE WERE NO BENNY CEMOLI 
To himself. Hood thought. 
In other words ask the newspaper to put me in touch with Cemoli. He had to admire Fletcher’s idea. It was brilliant, in a 
crazy sort of way. It was as if 
Fletcher had been able to match 
the derangement of the newspaper by a deliberate shift from 
common sense on his own part. 
He would participate in the 
newspaper’s delusion. Assuming 
there was a Cemoli and a march 
on New York, he was asking a 
reasonable question. 
Joan said, “I don’t want to 
sound stupid, but how does one 
go about mailing a letter to a 
homeopape?” 
“I’ve looked into that,” Fletcher said. “At each kiosk set Up 
by the paper there’s a letterslot, next to the coin-slot where 
you pay for your paper. It was 
the law, when the homeopapes 
were set up originally, decades 
ago. All we need is your husband’s signature.” Reaching into his jacket, he brought out an 
envelope. “The letter’s written.” 
Hood took the letter, examined it. So we desire to be 
part of the mythical fat clown’s 
throng, he said to himself. 
“Won’t there be a headline reading CURB CHIEF JOINS 
MARCH ON EARTH CAPITAL?” he asked Fletcher, feeling a trace of wry amusement. 
“Wouldn’t a good, enterprising 
homeopape make front page use 
of a letter such as this?” 
Obviously Fletcher had not 
thought of that; he looked chagrined. “I suppose we had better 
get someone else to sign it,” he 
admitted. “Some minor person 
attached to your staff.” He added, “I could sign it myself.” 
Handing him the letter back. 
Hood said, “Do so. It’ll be interesting to see what response, 
if any, there is.” Letters to the 
editor, he thought. Letters to a 
vast, complex, electronic organism buried deep in the ground, 
responsible to no one, guided 
solely by its own ruling circuits. 
How would it react to this external ratification of its delusion? Would the newspaper be 
snapped back to reality? 
It was, he thought, as if the 
newspaper, during these years of 
its enforced silence, had been 
dreaming, and now, reawakened, 
it had allowed portions of its 
former dreams to materialize in 
its pages along with its accurate, 
perceptive accounts of the actual 
situation. A blend of figments 
and sheer, stark reporting. 
Which ultimately would triumph? Soon, evidently, the unfolding story of Benny Cemoli 
would have the toga-wearing 
spellbinder in New York; it appeared that the march would 
succeed. And what then? How 
could this be squared with the 
arrival of CURB, with all its 
enormous inter-system authority 
and power? Surely the homeopape, before long, would have 
to face the incongruity. 
One of the two accounts would 
have to cease . but Hood had 
an uneasy intuition that a homeopape which had dreamed for a 
decade would not readily give 
up its fantasies. 
Perhaps, he thought, the news 
of us, of CURB and its task of 
rebuilding Earth, will fade from 
the pages of the Times, will be 
given a steadily decreasing coverage each day, farther back in 
the paper. And at last only the 
exploits of Benny Cemoli will 
remain. 
It was not a pleasant anticipation. It disturbed him deeply. As 
if, he thought, we are only real 
so long as the T imes writes about 
us; as if we were dependent for 
our existence on it. 
'^wenty-four hours later, in 
its regular edition, the 
Times printed Fletcher’s letter. 
In print it struck Hood as flimsy 
and contrived — surely the 
homeopape could not be taken 
in by it, and yet here it was. It 
had managed to pass each of the 
steps in the pape’s processing. 
Dear Editor; 
Your coverage of the heroic 
inarch on the decadent plutocrat
ic stronghold of New York City 
has fired my enthusiasm. How 
does an ordinary citizen become a 
part of this history in the making? Please inform me at once, 
as I am eager to join Cemoli and 
endure the rigors and triumphs 
with the others. 
Cordially, 
Rudolf Fletcher 
Beneath the letter, the homeopape had given an answer; 
Hood read it rapidly. 
Cemoli’s stalwarts maintain a recruiting office in downtown New 
York; address, 460 Bleekman St., 
New York 32. You might apply 
there, if the >oliee haven’t cracked 
down on these quasi-legal activities, in view of the current crisis. 
Touching a button on his desk. 
Hood opened the direct line to 
police headquarters. When he 
had the chief investigator, he 
said, “Dietrich, I’d like a team 
of your men; we have a trip to 
make and there may be difficulties.” 
After a pause Dietrich said 
drily, “So it’s not all noble reclamation after all. Well, we’ve 
already dispatched a man to 
keep an eye on the Bleekman Street address. I admire 
your letter scheme. It may have 
done the trick.” He chuckled. 
Shortly, Hood and four blackuniformed Centaurian policemen flew by ’copter above the 
ruins of New York City, search
IF THERE WERE NO BENNY CEMOLI 
ing for the remains of what had 
once been Bleekman Street. By 
the use of a map they managed 
after half an hour to locate themselves. 
“There,” the police captain in 
charge of the team said, pointing. “That would be it, that 
building used as a grocery store.” 
The ’copter began to lower. 
It was a grocery store, all 
right. Hood saw no signs of political activity, no persons loitering, no flags or banners. And 
yet — something ominous seemed to lie behind the commonplace scene below, the bins of 
vegetables parked out on the 
sidewalk, the shabby women in 
long cloth coats who stood picking over the winter potatoes, the 
elderly proprietor with his 
white cloth apron sweeping with 
his broom. It was too natural, 
too easy. It was too ordinary. 
“Shall we land?” the police 
captain asked him. 
“Yes,” Hood said. “And be 
ready.” 
The proprietor, seeing them 
land in the street before his 
grocery store, laid his broom 
carefully to one side and walked 
toward them. He was. Hood saw, 
a Greek. He had a heavy mustache and slightly wavy gray 
hair, and he gazed at them with 
innate caution, knowing at once 
that they did not intend him 
any good. Yet he had decided 
to greet them with civility: he 
was not afraid of them. 
“Gentlemen,” the Greek grocery store owner said, bowing 
slightly. “What can I do for 
you?” His eyes roved speculatively over the black Centaurian 
police uniforms, but he showed 
no expression, no reaction. 
Hood said, “We’ve come to 
arrest a political agitator. You 
have nothing to be alarmed 
about.” He started toward the 
grocery store; the team of police 
followed, their side arms drawn. 
“Political agitation here?” 
the Greek said. “Come on. It is 
impossible.” He hurried after 
tliem, panting, alarmed now. 
“What have I done? Nothing at 
all; you can look around. Go 
ahead.” He held open the door 
of the store, ushering them inside. “See right away for yourself.” 
“That’s what we intend to 
do,” Hood said. He moved with 
agility, wasting no time on the 
conspicuous portions of the 
store; he strode directly on 
through. 
^T'he back room lay ahead, 
the warehouse with its cartons of cans, cardboard boxes 
stacked up on every side. A 
young boy was busy making a 
stock inventory; he glanced up, 
startled, as they entered. Nothing here. Hood thought. The 
owner’s son at work, that’s all. 
Lifting the lid of a carton Hood 
peered inside. Cans of peaches. 
And beside that a crate of lettuce. He tore off a leaf, feeling 
futile and — disappointed. 
The police captain said to him 
in a low voice, “Nothing, sir.” 
“I see that,” Hood said, irritably. 
A door to the right, led to a 
closet. Opening it, he saw 
brooms and a mop, a galvanized 
pail, boxes of detergents. And — 
There were drops of paint on 
the floor. 
The closet, some time recently 
had been repainted when he 
bent down and scratched with 
his nail he found the paint still 
tacky. 
Look at this,” he said, beckoning the police captain over. 
The Greek, nervously, said, 
'What’s the matter, gentlemen? 
You find something dirty and 
report to the board of health, is 
that it? Customers have complained — tell me the truth, 
please. Yes, it is fresh paint. We 
keep everything spick and span. 
Isn t that in the public interest?” 
Running his hands across the 
wall of the broom closet, the 
police captain said quietly, “Mr. 
Hood, there was a doorway here. 
Sealed up now, very recently.” 
He looked expectantly toward 
Hood, awaiting instructions. 
Hood said, “Let’s go in.” 
Turning to his subordinates, 
the police captain gave a series 
of orders. From the ship, equipment was dragged, through the 
store, to the closet; a controlled 
whine arose as the police began 
the task of cutting into the wood 
and plaster. 
Pale, the Greek said, “This is 
outrageous. I will sue.” 
“Right,” Hood agreed. “Take 
us to court.” Already a portion 
of the wall had given way. It 
fell inward with a crash, and 
bits of rubble spilled down onto the floor. A white cloud of 
dust rose, then settled. 
It was not a large room which 
Hood saw in the glare of the 
police flashlights. Dusty, without windows, smelling stale and 
ancient . the room had not 
been inhabited for a long, long 
time, he realized as he warily 
entered. It was empty. Just an 
abandoned storeroom of some 
kind, its wooden walls scaling 
and dingy. Perhaps before the 
Misfortune the grocery store had 
possessed a larger inventory. 
More stocks had been available 
then, but now this room was not 
needed. Hood moved about, 
flashing his beam of light up to 
the ceiling and then down to the 
floor. Dead flies, entombed here 
. and, he saw, a few live ones 
which crept haltingly in the 
dust. 
“Remember,” the police cap
115 
IF THERE WERE NO BENNY CEMOLI 
tain said, “it was boarded up 
just now, within the last three 
days. Or at least the painting was 
just now done, to be absolutely 
accurate about it.” 
“These flies. Hood said. 
“They’re not even dead yet.” So 
it had not even been three days. 
Probably the boarding-up had 
been done yesterday. 
What had this room been used 
{or? He turned to the Greek, 
who had come after them, still 
tense and pale, his dark eyes 
flickering rapidly with concern. 
This is a smart man. Hood realized. We will get little out of 
him. 
At the far end of the storeroom the police flashlights 
picked out a cabinet, empty 
shelves of bare, rough wood. 
Hood walked toward it. 
“Okay,” the Greek said thickly, swallowing. “I admit it. We 
have kept bootleg gin stored 
here. We became scared. You 
Centaurians — ” He looked 
around at them all with fear. 
“You’re not like our local 
bosses; we know them, they understand us. You! You can’t be 
reached. But we have to make 
a living.” He spread his hands, 
appealing to them. 
From behind the cabinet the 
edge of something protruded. 
Barely visible, it might never 
have been noticed. A paper 
which had fallen there, almost 
out of sight; it had slipped 
down farther and farther. Now 
Hood took hold of it and carefully drew it out. Back up the 
way it had come. 
The Greek shuddered. 
It was. Hood saw, a picture. 
A heavy, middle-aged man with 
loose jowls stained black by the 
grained beginnings of a beard, 
frowning, his lips set in defiance. 
A big man, wearing some kind 
of uniform. Once this picture 
had hung on the wall and people 
had come here and looked at it, 
paid respect to it. He knew who 
it was. This was Benny Cemoli, 
at the height of his political career, the leader glaring bitterly 
at the followers who had gathered here. So this was the man. 
No wonder the Times showed 
such alarm. 
To the Greek grocery store 
owner, Hood said, holding up 
the picture, “Tell me. Is this 
familiar to you?” 
“No, no,” the Greek said. He 
wiped perspiration from his face 
with a large red handkerchief. 
“Certainly not.” But obviously, 
it was. 
Hood said, “You’re a follower 
of Cemoli, aren’t you?” 
There was silence. 
“Take him along,” Hood said 
to the police captain. “And let’s 
start back.” He walked from the 
room, carrying the picture with 
him. 
A s he spread the picture out 
on his desk. Hood thought. 
It isn’t merely a fantasy of the 
Times. We know the truth now. 
The man is real and twenty-four 
hours ago this portrait of him 
hung on a wall, in plain sight. 
It would still be there this moment, if CURB had not put in 
its appearance. We frightened 
them. The Earth people have a 
lot to hide from us, and they 
know it. They are taking steps, 
rapidly and effectively, and we 
will be lucky if we can — 
Interrupting his thoughts, 
Joan said, “Then the Bleekman 
Street address really was a meeting place for them. The pape 
was correct.” 
“Yes,” Hood said. 
“Where is he now?” 
I wish we knew. Hood thought. 
“Has Dietrich seen the picture yet?” 
“Not yet,” Hood said. 
Joan said, “He was responsible for the war and Dietrich is 
going to find it out.” 
“No one man,” Hood said, 
“could solely be responsible.” 
“But he figured largely,” Joan 
said. “That’s why theyr’ve gone 
to so much effort to eradicate 
all traces of his existence.” 
Hood nodded. 
“Without the Times,” she said, 
‘Svould we ever have guessed 
that such a political figure as 
Benny Cemoli existed? We owe 
a lot to the pape. They overlooked it or weren’t able to get 
to it. Probably they were working in such haste; they couldn’t 
think of everything, even in ten 
years. It must be hard to obiterate every surviving detail of a 
planet-wide political movement, 
especially when its leader managed to seize absolute power in 
the final phase.” 
“Impossible to obliterate,” 
Hood said. A closed-off storeroom in the back of a Greek 
grocery store . that was 
enough to tell us what we needed 
to know. Now Dietrich’s men 
can do the rest. If Cemoli is 
alive they will eventually find 
him, and if he’s dead — they’ll 
be hard to convince, knowing 
Dietrich. They’ll never stop 
looking now. 
“One good thing about this,” 
Joan said, “is that now a lot of 
innocent people will be off the 
hook. Dietrich won’t go around 
prosecuting them. He’ll be busy 
tracking down Cemoli.” 
True, Hood thought. And that 
was important. The Centaurian 
police would be thoroughly occupied for a long time to come, 
and that was just as well for 
everyone, including CURB and 
its ambitious program of reconstruction. 
If there had never been a 
Benny Cemoli, he thought suddenly, it would almost have been 
IF THERE WERE NO BENNY CEMOLI 
necessary to invent him. An odd 
thought ... he wondered how it 
had happened to come to him. 
Again he examined the picture, 
trying to infer as much as possible about the man from this 
flat likeness. How had Cemoli 
sounded? Had he gained power 
through the spoken word, like 
so many demagogues before 
him. And his writing . Maybe some of it would turn up. Or 
even tap recordings of speeches 
he had made, the actual sound 
of the man. And perhaps video 
tapes as well. Eventually it 
would all come to light; it was 
only a question of time. And 
then we will be able to experience for ourselves how it was 
to live under the shadow of such 
a man, he realized. 
The line from Dietrich’s office buzzed. He picked up the 
phone. 
“We have the Greek here,” 
Dietrich said. “Under drugguidance he’s made a number of 
admissions; you may be interested.” 
“Yes,” Hood said. 
D ietrich said, “He tells us 
he’s been a follower for 
seventeen years, a real old-timer 
in the Movement. They met 
twice a week in the back of his 
grocery store, in the early days 
when the Movement was small 
and relatively powerless. That 
picture you have — I haven’t 
seen it, of course, but Stavros, 
our Greek gentleman, told me 
about it — that portrait is actually obsolete in the sense that 
several more recent ones have 
been in vogue among the faithful for some time now. Stavros 
hung onto it for sentimental reasons. It reminded him of the old 
days. Later on when the Movement grew in strength, Cemoli 
stopped showing up at the grocery store, and the Greek lost 
out in any personal contact with 
him. He continued to be a loyal 
dues-paying member, but it became abstract for him.” 
“What about the war?” Hood 
asked. 
“Shortly before the war Cemoli seized power in a coup 
here in North America, through 
a march on New York City, during a severe economic depression. Millions were unemployed 
and he drew a good deal of support from them. He tried to 
solve the economic problems 
through an aggressive foreign 
policy — attacked several Latin 
American republics which were 
in the sphere of influence of the 
Chinese. That seems to be it, but 
Stavros is a bit hazy about the 
big picture . we’ll have to fill 
in more from other enthusiasts 
as we go along. From some of 
the younger ones. After all, this 
one is over seventy years old.” 
Hood said, “You’re not going 
to prosecute him, I hope.” 
“Oh, no. He’s simply a source 
of information. When he’s told 
us all he has on his mind we’ll 
let him go back to his onions 
and canned apple sauce. He’s 
harmless.” 
“Did Cemoli survive the war?” 
“Yes,” Dietrich said. “But 
that was ten years ago. Stavros 
doesn’t know if the man' is still 
alive now. Personally I think he 
is, and we’ll go on that assumption until it’s proved false. We 
have to.” 
Hood thanked him and hung 
up. 
As he turned from the phone 
he heard, beneath him, the low, 
dull rumbling. The homeopape 
had once more started into life. 
“It’s not a regular edition,” 
Joan said, quickly consulting her 
wristwatch. “So it must be another extra. This is exciting, 
having it happen like this; I 
can’t wait to read the front 
page.” 
What has Benny Cemoli done 
now? Hood wondered. According to the Times, in its misphased chronicling of the man’s 
epic . what stage, actually taking place years ago, has now 
been reached? Something climatic, deserving of an extra. It 
will be interesting, no doubt of 
that. The Times knows what is 
fit to print. 
He, too, could hardly wait. 
Tn downtown Oklahoma City, 
John LeConte put a coin infhe slot of the kiosk which 
the Times had long ago established there. The copy of the 
Times, latest extra slid out, and 
he picked it up and read the 
headline briefly, spending only 
a moment on it to verify the essentials. Then he crossed the 
sidewalk and stepped once more 
into the rear seat of his chauffeur-driven steam car. 
Mr. F all said circumspectly. 
Sir, here is the primary material, if you wish to make a 
word-by-word comparison.” The 
secretary held out the folder, 
and LeConte accepted it. 
The car started up. W^ithout 
being told, the chauffeur drove 
in the direction of Party headquarters. LeConte leaned back, 
lit a cigar and made himself 
comfortable. 
On his lap, the newspaper 
blazed up its enormous headlines. 
CEMOLI ENTERS COALITION 
UN GOVERNMENT; 
TEMPORARY CESSATION OP 
hostilities 
To his secretary, LeConte said, 
“My phone, please.” 
“Yes sir.” Mr. Fall handed 
him the portable field-phone. 
“But we’re almost there. And it’s 
always possible, if you don’t 
mind my pointing it out, that 
they may have tapped us somewhere along the line.” 
“They’re busy in New York,” 
LeConte said. “Among the 
ruins.” In an area that hasn’t 
mattered as long as I can remember, he said to himself. 
However, possibly Mr. Fall’s 
advice was good; he decided to 
skip the phone call. “What do 
you think of this last item?” he 
asked his secretary, holding up 
the newspaper. 
“Very success-deserving,” Mr. 
Fall said, nodding. 
Opening his briefcase, LeConte brought out a tattered, 
coverless textbook. It had been 
manufactured only an hour ago, 
and it was the next artifact to 
be planted for the invaders from 
Proxima Centaurus to discover. 
This was his own contribution, 
and he was personally quite 
proud of it. The book outlined 
in massive detail Cemoli’s program of social change; the revolution depicted in language 
comprehensible to school children. 
“May I ask,” Mr. Fall said, 
“if the Party hierarchy intends 
for them to discover a corpse?” 
“Eventually,” LeConte said. 
“But that will be several months 
from now.” Taking a pencil 
from his coat pocket he wrote 
in the tattered textbook, crudely, as if a pupil had done it; 
DOWN WITH CEMOLI 
Or was that going too far? No, 
he decided. There would be resistance. Certainly of the spontaneous, school boy variety. He 
added : 
WHERE ARE THE ORANGES? 
Peering over his shoulder, 
Mr. Fall said, “What does that 
a bombastic, threatening quality 
... I must admit I enjoyed it.” 
And meanwhile, LeConte 
thought, there are no war-crimes 
trials. We who were leaders during the war, on Earth and on 
Mars, we who held responsible 
posts — we are safe, at least for 
a while. And perhaps it will be 
forever. If our strategy continues to work. And if our tunnel 
to the cephalon of the homeopape, which took us five years 
to complete, isn’t discovered. Or 
doesn’t collapse. 
The steam car parked in the 
reserved space before Party 
headquarters; the chauffeur 
came around to open the door, 
and LeConte got leisurely out, 
stepping forth into the light of 
day, with no feeling of anxiety. 
He tossed his cigar into the gutter and then sauntered across 
the sidewalk, into the familiar 
building. — PHILIP K. DICK 
mean?” 
“Cemoli promises oranges to 
the youth,” LeConte explained. 
“Another empty boast which the 
revolution never fulfills. That 
was Stavros’ idea ... he being a 
grocer. A nice touch.” Giving it, 
he thought, just that much more 
semblance of verisimilitude. It’s 
the little touches that have done 
it. 
“Yesterday,” Mr . Fall said, 
“when I was at Party headquarters, I heard an audio tape that 
had been made. Cemoli addressing the UN. It was uncanny; if 
you didn’t know — ” 
“Who did they get to do it?” 
LeConte asked, wondering why 
he hadn’t been in on it. 
“Some nightclub entertainer 
here in Oklahoma City. Rather 
obscure, of course. I believe he 
specializes in all sorts of characterizations. The fellow gave it 
GALAXy 
LULLABY: 1990 
Sleep now, little one, fortunate child. 
(Summer follow spring and winter follow fall.) 
When you were born the kind gods smiled. 
Sleep, perfect little one, superior to all. 
Some have three eyes and some have one. 
(Dawn follow dark and dark follow day.) 
Some have many legs and others have none; 
some live a little while and then waste away. 
Some are hair covered, head to toe. 
(War follow hate and the bomb follow after.) 
Some are giants and some never grow. 
Sleep, perfect little one, to your mother’s laughter. 
Some eat flesh and some eat grasses. 
(Men still love and still get married.) 
Tentacled lads and two headed lasses 
lie in the alley-ways, yet unburied. 
Sleep now, little one, fortunate child. 
(Summer follow spring and winter follow fall.) 
When you were born the kind gods smiled. 
Sleep, little one, who will never wake at all. 
Sheri S. Eberhart 
THE INFINITE MOSKOWIH 
^T^he man named Sam the 
Mosk, this milennium’s 
Stentor, who gossips like an auctioneer, whose impact (if not influence) on fandom (if not science fiction) is without comparison (“He stamped about the 
Convention,” wrote a fan, “dropping his own name,”) has produced a book which is an ingroup landmark, and in many a 
sequence can be accused not 
only with indefatigability but 
with downright scholarship. 
On the theory that it is pointless to apply unguents until we 
have a patient, leave us first lay 
about us. Sam Moskowitz begins 
the book with the world’s knobbiest definition of science fiction (“. a branch of fantasy 
identifiable by the fact that it 
eases the ‘willing suspension of 
disbelief’ on the part of its readers by utilizing an atmosphere 
of scientific credibility for its 
imaginative speculations in physical science, space, time, social 
GALAXY j 
science, and philosophy”) and 
ends with a more-in-sorrow-thanin-anger implication that sf has 
lost direction and ceased to 
evolve: “Suave writing (has) 
diluted most of the “sense of 
wonder” in science fiction. The 
‘documentary,’ too close to the 
present to allow for any imagination, (has) rinsed out most of 
what remained.” In between is 
prose with the delicacy of a 
Caterpillar D-8 — no insult, really, for we have much respect for 
Mr. Caterpillars’ products. 
The above quotes and citations 
are legitimate examples of a 
man’s legitimate opinions. What 
makes one carp a little is the 
air of positiveness with which 
they are presented. One would 
be happier if, say, the words In 
my opinion . were run as a 
sort of subtitle on the dedication 
page — a good position for it, at 
that, for there’s no question that 
the man is dedicated to just that. 
And it is unfair to pick at a work 
of scholarship as if scholarship 
should have conferred grace, just 
as it is unfair to pick at a graceful work for its lack of scholarship. If the criterion is : did 
the author achieve his aims? 
then on the one hand Shakespeare did, for all his lack of 
science, and so did Moskowitz, 
for all his lack of poetry. And 
here end the kicks. 
The kudos is heartfelt and 
multifarious. One could not 
want a more detailed and fascinating accoimt of the birth and 
growth of what is certainly one 
of the most interesting forms of 
expression ever to strike this or 
any other planet. From the scientific dreams of Cyrano to the 
beauty of Dejah Thoris, from 
the influence of the legendary 
Golem on robot stories to the 
battle of the behemoths, wherein Otis Adelbert Kline took on 
Edgar Rice Burroughs, with 
epics as weapons: from the very 
well-written exposition of M. P. 
Shiel’s truly vicious anti-Semitism to the extraordinary career 
of the almost-unknown Lu Senarens, author of most of the Frank 
Reade, Jr. series — there is 
hardly a page of this remarkable 
book which will not yield you 
an astonishment, a revelation or 
at the very least as well, whaddaye know!” Some of the astonishments involve names that you 
may never have associated with 
science fiction before — FitzJames O’Brien, for one, and Edward Everett Hale. And some of 
the examinations — for example, 
that of Philip Wylie, and of 
Olaf Stapledon — have a style 
and depth quite transcending 
all criticism of ham-handedness. 
In view of our remarks above 
concerning a man’s right to his 
own choices and conclusions, 
what follows is not a complaint. 
FIVE STAR SHELF 
We must, however, record our 
disappointment in seeing no 
mention of certain writers who 
have been, personally, profoimdly influential — so much so that 
it would be hard for us (again, 
personally) to imagine science 
fiction without them. They are 
Budrys, Shute, Tenn, Vonnegut, 
Vercors and Tom Godwin, each 
of whom has inspired and instructed your correspondent. 
But certainly every writer in the 
field could compose a similar 
list, and it would be no discredit 
to Mr. Moskowitz, for each of 
us has a different opinion (sometimes differing a little, sometimes drastically) of what science fiction is. In sum, no one 
has surveyed the roots of sf as 
well as Mr, M. ; probably no one 
ever will; prossibly, no one else 
can. 
The book is published by 
World, costs $6 (and is worth it) 
has 353 pages and includes a 
pretty good index. Ask for Explorers oi the Infinite, Shapers 
of Science Fiction, by Sam Moskowitz. 
— THEODORE STURGEON 
OTHER NEW BOOKS 
I n The World of Flying Saucers 
(Doubleday), Donald H. 
IVenzel and Lyle G. Boyd have 
gone to great lengths to track 
down all the surviving evidence 
surrounding every recorded UFO 
“sighting” of the period of the 
Great Saucer Craze. There is no 
doubt that at this time a number 
of people saw things they 
couldn’t account for and, in all 
good faith, attempted to explain 
them in terms of extra-terrestrial 
visitors. There is even less doubt 
that in the wake of these early 
sightings there sprang up a rank 
growth of lunatics and publicityhounds, buck-hustlers and frauds 
who by their clamor and obvious 
unreliability discredited not only 
their own claims but those of all 
the others. Dr. Menzel and Mrs. 
Boyd have patiently gone over 
every single case, preposterous 
or not, and they, present their 
findings here, without passion 
but with candor and touches of 
wit. What it all comes down to 
is that the case for flying saucers rests mostly on the words of 
observers describing what they 
saw — or thought they saw, or 
claimed to see — buttressed to 
some degree by a few smudged 
photographs and a scattering of 
physical objects described by 
their discoverers as of off-Earth 
origin. Many exhibits in each 
category are demonstrably fakes. 
The best that can be said of the 
remaining photographs and specimens is that they are ambiguous. 
As to the eyewitness reports, 
there are many by persons whose 
statements deserve careful attention; but in essentially every 
such case the authors have been 
able to show the existence, either 
as a matter of record or as at 
least a reasonable probability, 
of some other conspicuous phenomenon — star, planet, cloud, 
plane, weather ballon or optical 
effect — which might easily have 
been mistaken for a UFO. True, 
the fact that an observer might 
have been mistaken is a long way 
from proof that he was mistaken. 
The authors point out, however, 
that if these other phenomena are 
not what the sighters saw, it is 
at least interesting that they 
didn’t mention these things when 
they were in the very part of the 
sky where the sighters reported 
“unidentified” objects. The authors .conclude, rather regretfully, 
that while there are grounds for 
believing that intelligent life 
may exist off-Earth and may at 
any moment come calling on us, 
“No evidence yet found indicates 
such visits have begun.” And so 
we end an age . 
In Spectrum II (Harcourt, 
Brace & World), Kingsley Amis 
and Robert Conquest put together an anthology of familiar 
but first-rate stories by Wyman 
Guin, James Blish, Philip K. 
Dick, Isaac Asimov and others, 
and present them with a thoughtful introduction berating those 
critics who reflexively damn all 
science fiction. What they say 
about these critics is well said, 
but they say it twice; the first 
time is as a two-line rubric on the 
dedication page of the volume: 
“S/’s no good,” they bellow 
till we’re deaf. 
“But this looks good.” “Well, 
then, it’s not sf.” 
When we published Jack 
Vance’s The Dragon Masters 
here a year or so ago, it was received with considerable delight, 
not only for its own considerable 
merits but because of the fine 
Gaughan illustrations that 
adorned it. Now in book form 
(Ace), the publishers have kept 
Gaughan on to do its cover, which 
is again a handsome job. The 
story remains what it was: one 
of the best sf stories to appear 
an 3 Twhere in the past half-dozen 
years. This is a double volume: 
the other half is an earlier, but 
well worthwhile, Vance sciencefiction adventure story called 
The Five Gold Bands . Readers of our companion magazine. 
If, will be pleased by another 
new Ace book, or at least by half 
of it: six of Keith Laumer’s 
Retief stories, collected under 
the title of Envoy to New Worlds. 
The other half of the book is 
Flight from Yesterday, by Robert Moore Williams, which brings 
some Atlanteans to the 20th century for assorted adventures, with 
mixed effect. — FP 
FIVE STAR SHELF 
AND AIL THE EARTH 
There's nothing wrong with 
dying — it just hasn't ever 
had the proper saies pitch! 
Tt all began when the new 
bookkeeping machine of a 
large Midwestern coffin manufacturer slipped a cog, or blew 
a transistor, or something. It was 
fantastic that the error — one of 
two decimal places — should enjoy a straight run of okays, human and mechanical, clear down 
the line; but when the figures 
clacked out at the last clackingout station, there it was. The figures were now sacred; immutable; and it is doubtful whether 
the President of the concern or 
the Chairman of the Board 
would have dared question them 
— even if either of those two 
gentlemen had been in town. 
As for the Advertising Manager, the last thing he wanted 
to do was question them. He 
carried them (they were the 
budget for the coming fiscal 
year) into his office, staggering 
a little on the way, and dropped 
dazedly into his chair. They 
showed the budget for his own 
department as exactly one hundred times what he’d been expecting. That is to say, fifty 
times what he’d put in for. 
When the initial shock began 
to wear off, his face assumed an 
expression of intense thought. In 
about five minutes he leaped 
from his chair, dashed out of the 
office with a shouted syllable or 
two for his secretary, and got 
his car out of the parking lot. At 
home, he tossed clothes into a 
travelling bag and barged toward the door, giving his wife 
a quick kiss and an equally quick 
explanation. He didn’t bother to 
call the airport. He meant to be 
on the next plane east, and no 
nonsense about it. 
TXrith one thing and another, 
^ ^ the economy hadn’t been 
exactly in overdrive that year, 
and predictions for the Christmas season were gloomy. Early 
A GRAVE 
by C. C. MacAPP 
ILLUSTRATED 
BY GAUGHAN 
retail figures bore them out. Gift 
buying dribbled along feebly imtil Thanksgiving, despite brave 
speeches by the Administration. 
The holiday passed more in selfpity than in thankfulness among 
owners of gift-oriented businesses. 
Then, on Friday following 
Thanksgiving, the coffin ads 
struck. 
Struck may be too mild a 
word. People on the streets saw 
feverishly-working crews (at 
holiday rates!)- slapping up posters on billboards. The first poster was a dilly. A toothy and 
toothsome young woman leaned 
over a coffin she’d been unwrapping. She smiled as if she’d just 
received overtures of matrimony 
from an eighty-year-old billionaire. There was a Christmas tree 
in the background, and the coffin was appropriately wrapped. 
So was she. She looked as if 
had just gotten out of bed, or 
AND ALL THE EARTH A GRAVE 
were ready to get into it. For 
amorous young men, and some 
not so young, the message was 
plain. The motto, “The Gift That 
Will Last More Than a Lifetime”. seemed hardly to the 
point. 
Those at home were assailed 
on TV with a variety of bright 
and clever skits of the same import. Some of them hinted that, 
if the young lady’s gratitude 
were really precipitous, and the 
bedroom too far away, the coffin might be comfy. 
Of course the more settled elements of the population were not 
neglected. For the older married 
man, there was a blow directly 
between the eyes: “Do You 
Want Your Widow to Be HalfSafe?” And, for the spinster 
without immediate hopes, “/ 
Dreamt I Was Caught Dead 
Without My Virginform Casket!”. 
Newspapers, magazines and 
every other medium added to 
the assault, never letting it cool. 
It was the most horrendous campaign, for sheer concentration, 
that had ever battered at the 
public mind. The public reeled, 
blinked, shook its head to clear 
it, gawked, and rushed out to 
buy. 
C 'ihristmas was not going to 
^ be a failure after all. Department store managers who 
had, grudgingly and under 
strong sales pressure, made space 
for a single coffin somewhere at 
the rear of the store, now rushed 
to the telephones like touts with 
a direct pronouncement from a 
horse. Everyone who possibly 
could got into the act. Grocery 
supermarkets put in casket departments. The Association of 
Pharmaceutical Retailers, who 
felt they had some claim to priority, tried to get court injunctions to keep caskets out of service stations, but were unsuccessful because the judges were all 
out buying caskets. Beauty parlors showed real ingenuity in 
merchandising. Roads and 
streets clogged with delivery 
trucks, rented trailers, and whatever else could haul a coffin. 
The Stock Market went completely mad. Strikes were declared and settled within hours. 
Congress was called into session 
early. The President got authority to ration lumber and other 
materials suddenly in starvationshort supply. State laws were 
passed against cremation, under 
heavy lobby pressure. A new 
racket, called boxjacking, blossomed overnight. 
The Advertising Manager who 
had put the thing over had been 
fighting with all the formidable 
weapons o( his breed to make 
his plant managers build up a 
stockpile. They had, but it went 
like a toupee in a wind tunnel. 
Competitive coffin manufacturers were caught napping, but by 
Wednesday after Thanksgiving 
they, along with the original 
one, were on a twenty-four hour, 
seven-day basis. Still only a fraction of the demand could be met. 
Jet passenger planes were 
stripped of their seats, supplied 
with Yankee gold, and sent to 
plunder the world of its coffins. 
It might be supposed that 
Christmas goods other than caskets would take a bad dumping. 
That was not so. Such was the 
upsurge of prosperity, and such 
was the shortage of coffins, that 
nearly everything — with a few 
exceptions — enjoyed the biggest 
season on record. 
On Christmas Eve the frenzy 
slumped to a crawl, though on 
Christmas morning there were 
still optimists out prowling the 
empty stores. The nation sat 
down to breathe. Mostly it sat 
on coffins, because there wasn’t 
space in the living rooms for 
any other furniture. 
There was hardly an individual in the United States who 
didn’t have, in case of sudden 
sharp pains in the chest, several 
boxes to choose from. As for the 
rest of the world, it had better 
not die just now or it would be 
literally a case of dust to dust. 
O f course everyone expected 
a doozy of a slump after 
Christmas. But our Advertising 
Manager, who by now was of 
course Sales Manager and First 
Vice President also, wasn’t settling for any boom-and-bust. 
He’d been a frustrated victim of 
his choice of industries for so 
many years that now, with his 
teeth in something, he was going 
to give it the old bite. He gave 
people a short breathing spell to 
arrange their coffin payments 
and move the presents out of the 
front rooms. Then, late in January, his new campaign came 
down like a hundred-megatonner. 
Within a week, everyone saw 
quite clearly that his Christmas 
models were now obsolete. The 
coffin became the new status 
symbol. 
The auto industry was of 
course demolished. Even people 
who had enough money to buy 
a new car weren’t going to trade 
in the old one and let the new 
one stand out in the rain. The 
garages were full of coffins. Petroleum went along with Autos. 
(Though there were those who 
whispered knowingly that the 
same people merely moved over 
into the new industry. It was 
noticeable that the center of it 
became Detroit.) A few trucks 
and buses were still being built, 
but that was all. 
Some of the new caskets were 
true works of art. Others — well, 
there was variety. Compact models appeared, in which the occupant’s feet were .to be doubled 
up alongside his ears. One manufacturer pushed a circular model, claiming that by all the laws 
of nature the foetal position was 
the only right one. At the other 
extreme were virtual houses, ornate and lavishly equipped. Possibly the largest of all was the 
“Togetherness” model, triangular, with graduated recesses for 
Father, Mother, eight children 
(plus two playmates), and, in 
the far corner beyond the baby, 
the cat. 
The slump was over. Still, 
economists swore that the new 
boom couldn’t last either. They 
reckoned without the Advertising Manager, whose eyes gleamed brighter all the time. People 
already had coffins, which they 
polished and kept on display, 
sometimes in the new “Coffinports” being added to houses. 
The Advertising Manager’s reasoning was direct and to the 
point. He must get people to use 
the coffins; and now he had all 
the money to work with that 
he could use. 
The new note was woven in so 
gradually that it is not easy to 
put a finger on any one ad and 
say, “It began here.” One of the 
first was surely the widely-printed one showing a tattooed, smiling young man with his chin 
thrust out manfully, lying in a 
coffin. He was rugged-looking 
and likable (not too rugged for 
the spindly-limbed to identify 
with) and he oozed, even though 
obviously dead, virility at every 
pore. He was probably the finestlooking corpse since Richard 
the Lion-Hearted. 
Neither must one overlook the 
singing commercials. Possibly 
the catchiest of these, a really 
cute little thing, was achieved by 
jazzing up the Funeral March. 
It started gradually, and it was 
all so un-violent that few saw it 
as suicide. Teen-agers began having “Popping-off parties”. Some 
of their elders protested a little, 
but adults were taking it up too. 
The tired, the unappreciated, 
the ill and the heavy-laden lay 
down in growing numbers and 
expired. A black market in poisons operated for a little while, 
but soon pinched out. Such was 
the pressure of persuasion that 
few needed artificial aids. The 
boxes were very comfortable. 
People just closed their eyes and 
exited smiling. 
The Beatniks, who had their 
own models of coffin — mouldy, 
scroungy, and without lids, since 
the Beatniks insisted on being 
seen — placed their boxes on the 
Grant Avenue in San Francisco. 
They died with highly intellectual expressions, and eventually 
were washed by the gentle rain. 
Of course there were voices 
shouting calamity. When aren’t 
there? But in the long run, and 
not a very long one at that, they 
availed naught. 
T t isn’t hard to imagine the 
reactions of the rest of the 
world. So let us imagine a few. 
The Communist Block immedately gave its Stamp of Disapproval, denouncing the movement as a filthy Capitalist Imperialist Pig plot. Red China, 
which had been squabbling with 
Russia for some time about a 
matter of method, screamed for 
immediate war. Russia exposed 
this as patent stupidity, saying 
that if the Capitalists wanted to 
die, warring upon them would 
only help them. China surreptitiously tried out the thing as an 
answer to excess population, and 
found it good. It also appealed 
to the well-known melancholy 
facet of Russian nature. Besides, 
after pondering for several days, 
the Red Bloc decided it could 
not affort to fall behind in anything, so it started its own program, explaining with much logic how it differed. 
An elderly British philosopher endorsed the movement, on 
the grounds that a temporary set
AND ALL THE EARTH A GRAVE 
back in Evolution was preferable 
to facing up to anything. 
The Free Bloc, the Red Bloc, 
the Neutral Bloc and such scraps 
as had been too obtuse to find 
themselves a Bloc were drawn 
into the whirlpool in an amazingly short time, if in a variety 
of ways. In less than two years 
the world was rid of most of 
what had been bedeviling it. 
Oddly enough, the country 
where the movement began was 
the last to succumb completely. 
Or perhaps it is not so odd. Coffin-maker to the world, the 
American casket industry had 
by now almost completely automated box-making and gravedigging, with some interesting assembly lines and packaging arrangements; there still remained 
the jobs of management and 
distribution. The President of 
General Mortuary, an ebullient 
fellow affectionately called Sarcophagus Sam, put it well. “As 
long as I have a single prospective customer, and a single Stockholder,” he said, mangling a 
stogie and beetling his brows at 
the one reporter who’d showed 
up for the press conference, “111 
try to put him in a coffin so I 
can pay him a dividend.” 
T?inally, though, a man who 
thought he must be the last 
living human, wandered contentedly about the city of Denver 
looking for the coffin he liked 
best. He settled at last upon a 
rich mahogany number with 
platinum trimmings, an Automatic Self-Adjusting Cadaver-contour Innerspring Wearever-Plastic-Covered Mattress with a built 
in bar. He climbed in, drew himself a generous slug of fine 
Scotch, giggled as the mattress 
prodded him exploringly, closed 
his eyes and sighed in solid comfort. Soft music played as the 
lid closed itself. 
From a building nearby a turkey-buzzard swooped down, cawing in raucous anger because it 
had let its attention wander for 
a moment. It was too late. It 
clawed screaming at the solid 
cover, hissed in frustration and 
finally gave up. It flapped into 
the air begin, still grumbling 
It was tired of living on dead 
small rodents and coyotes. It 
thought it would take a swing 
over to Los Angeles, where the 
pickings yere pretty good. 
As it moved westward over 
parched hills, it espied two black 
dots a few miles to its left. It 
circled over for a closer look, 
then grunted and went on its 
way. It had seen them before. 
The old prospector and his burro 
had been in the mountains for 
so long the buzzard had concluded they didn’t know how to 
die. 
The prospector, whose name 
GALAXY 
was Adams, trudged behind his 
burro toward the buildings that 
shimmered in the heat, humming to himself now and then 
or addressing some remark to 
the beast. When he reached the 
outskirts of Denver he realized 
something was amisS. He stood 
and gazed at the quiet scene. 
Nothing moved except some 
skinny packrats and a few sparrows foraging for grain among 
the unburied coffins. 
“Tarnation!” he said to the 
burro. “Martians?” 
A half-buried piece of newspaper fluttered in the breeze. 
He walked forward slowly and 
picked it up. It told him enough 
so that he understood. 
“They’re gone, Evie,” he said 
to the burro, “all gone.” He put 
his arm affectionately around 
her neck. “I reckon it’s up to 
me and you agin. We got to start 
all over.” He stood back and 
gazed at her with mild reproach. 
“I shore hope they don’t favor 
your side of the house so much 
this time.” — C. C. MacAPP 
★ ★ ★ ★ ★ 
FORECAST 
Next issue, naturally, contains the conclusion of Jack Vance's The 
Star King, about which it is only necessary to say that all the thrill and 
color of the first half, herein, is amply sustained and brought to an exciting climax in the second. 
There's a certain temptation to rest on that, because if you won't be 
around to see how The Star King comes out, what can we tell you to 
change your mind? But, of course, there's more. Lots more — and, we think, 
a great deal that you'll find just as rewarding as Vance. There is, for 
example, the lead novelette. Grandmother Earth, by that Old Reliable, 
J. T. McIntosh. There's a novelette by Philip K. Dick called Oh! to be a 
Blobel which has to deal with certain unanticipated problems of the aftermath of future interplanetary wars. (Talk about disabled veterans! In 
Dick's view, the quadrapelgics and other victims of minor-league events like 
World War II have nothing to worry about . ) 
And, of course, there'll be Willy Ley's usual contribution, short stories, 
features and all . 
AND ALL THE EARTH A GRAVE 
IN THE CONTROL 
1 
■pxewforth had almost most 
lost the habit of looking 
from windows. The train which 
took him to the city every morning passed through a country in 
the terminal stages of a long war 
of self-destruction. Whatever 
had been burned, botched, poi
soned or exhausted in that struggle Lad been filled along the 
right-of-way, among drifts of 
soot and ground-mists of sulphurous smoke and chemical 
flatulence, to form a long tedious mural — a parody of cloudborne Asiatic hills, precipitous 
and always so close to the tracks 
that their tops could not be seen. 
haunted the dying alleys. 
Madness stalked the wide streets. 
And what lay at the city's heart? 
TOWER 
This was almost merciful, considering what had been done to 
the sky. When the train did not 
sneak between hills of slag, cinders, rubbish, garbage, dross and 
the bloody brown carrion of 
broken machinery, it shot like 
a bolt in the groove of an arbolest between unbroken barriers of advertising or through 
by WILL MOHLER 
Illustrated by GIUNTA 
deep concrete troughs and roaring tunnels full of grimy light 
and grubby air. 
There was one inconsistancy 
in this scheme of things : Just as 
the train emerged from a deep 
valley of slag-hills and swung into a long curve, passengers on 
the left side had a panoramic 
view of the city — a frozen scene 
of battle between geometrical 
monsters, made remote and obscure by the dust of a thousand 
thousand merely human struggles, too small to be visible from 
the crusty windows of the train 
by the merely human eye. They 
had about one second in which 
to absorb this vision of corporate 
purpose. Then they were plunging into a final stretch of tunnel 
to the center of the city itself, 
where no surface was ever more 
than fifteen paces away and 
where there were no horizons at 
all. 
Dewforth was excited by this 
view even though it reached him 
in a fragmentary and subliminal 
way. Day after day he told himself that he would have all his 
faculties at the ready before the 
train swung into the curve. But 
morning after morning he was 
still emerging from the stale 
fumes of the preceding night’s 
beer, or he allowed himself to 
be hypnotized by the sound of 
the wheels or fascinated by the 
jiggling of another passenger’s 
earlobe at that critical moment. 
The train had always entered the 
clangorous colon of the city before this resolve could crystallize 
in his mind, and he was left with 
an impression which lay somewhere in the scale of reality between the after-image of a light 
bulb and the morning memory 
of a fever-dream. He could never 
have described the scene except 
in loose generalities about buildings of contrasting height and 
unemphatic color. 
rr^he single memorable feature of the panorama, looming above the rest, was not even 
a building. It eluded all familiar 
categories. It was, like the other 
components of the picture, rectangular; but it was a displaced 
rectangle. A shining thread of 
morning sky could be seen beneath it. It was only logical to 
suppose that it stood on legs of 
some kind — a complicated process of girders. The upper part 
appeared to be made of corrugated metal, but, as with the 
matter of the legs, it was impossible to separate what was actually seen and what was merely 
inferred. The only other structures Dewforth had seen which 
resembled it at all were water 
towers and shipyard cranes, but 
these had been mere toys compared with the thing that hovered over the center of the city. 
Its purpose could not be guessed, but what disturbed Dewforth 
more was the fact that he could 
not be sure that it existed. He 
was a precision draftsman, more 
or less resigned to deteriorating 
eyesight, and his usual abstracted 
state of mind during that segment of his day had also to be 
considered. He hoped that someone else would mention the 
structure. Once — only once — 
a man sitting on the opposite 
seat had made a comment which 
could have applied to it. “It 
turned,” he said, just as the tunnel swallowed the train. 
Dewforth would have liked to 
ask the other passenger what he 
had meant. Had he seen the same 
thing? Had he seen anything at 
all? And what had he meant by 
“turned”? 
But he had not asked. The 
other had been not merely forbidding, not merely repugnant, 
but alternately forbidding and 
repugnant — in daylight, an impeccable burgher sitting tall and 
righteous under a tall hat; in 
tunnels, a hunchbacked gargoyle 
picking its nose in the fickle 
darkness. 
If Dewforth had been the only 
passenger on the train, or indeed 
the last man in the world, he 
could not have been more alone 
with his wonder. You did not 
ask whimsical questions of strangers nowadays. You did not ask 
IN THE CONTROL TOWER 
many questions of friends. All 
uncertainties incubated in private darkness; they lived and 
grew and even put forth new 
appendages. 
Not a building. Not a water 
tank. Not a crane. Perhaps it was 
only an illusion. 
Illusion or not, it wanted a 
name so that it might be at least 
catalogued in his own mind. 
Therefore, on a morning since 
forgotten and for reasons never 
closely examined, he decided to 
call it The Control Tower. 
II 
'"T^here was an unholy Friday 
restlessness upon Dewforth. 
To make matters worse, it was 
the last Friday in March. Logically, perhaps, this should not 
have made any difference because Dewforth worked in one 
of a number of identical windowless rooms in a building 
from which all natural rhythms 
had been rigorously excluded. 
From skylights high in the ceilings of the drafting rooms came 
a light which had been pasteurized and was timeless. It could 
have been artificial. 
His work provided no refuge 
for his thought. It was demanding, but only mechanically so. 
Strictly speaking, he did not 
know what he was doing. No one 
did, apparently. He did not have 
the satisfaction of knowing that 
what he did was real. He filled 
large sheets of plastic with tracings of intricate, interconnected 
schematic hieroglyphs. But he 
knew that in another place a 
template would be laid over his 
work. An irregular portion like 
a piece of a jigsaw puzzle would 
be cut out of it and the rest, perhaps more than half of his work, 
would be destroyed. 
It was even possible that all 
of it was destroyed. 
Dewforth worked for a firm 
which made components. Of 
what, no one said, no one asked. 
Components, Inc., the firm was 
called. He knew that the finished 
products were small, heavy and 
very complicated. Their names 
were mute combinations of letters and numbers, joined by hyphens or separated by virgules. 
Some said that these components 
performed no functions. Others 
said that they worked, but their 
operations corresponded to no 
known human need. It was 
known that some of the finished 
products themselves were destroyed. Some maintained that 
they were dissolved in vats of 
hydrofluoric acid. Others argued 
that they were encased in cement, then taken out to sea in 
speedboats on moonless nights 
and jettisoned. The favorite rumor was that the entire firm was 
a decoy to bewilder agents of 
foreign powers and pre-empt 
their espionage efforts. There 
was neither proof of this nor 
evidence to the contrary. 
The penalty for circulating this 
last rumor was immediate dismissal with prejudice. 
In another place, another 
time, Dewforth might have 
spread the burden of his mood 
by confiding in other workers, 
but not under the circumstances 
so painstakingly arranged by 
Components, Inc. in the interest 
of what was called The Interloathing Index, or 1. 1. It was an 
axiom of modern industry that 
a high 1. 1, meant high productivity and also tighter security. 
The latter was as much the measure of the importance of an industry as what it made or how 
much. That there was design in 
the egg-box compartmentation 
of workspaces, for example, was 
obvious enough. Less overt were 
the lengths to which Personnel 
had gone to discourage the exchange of information, or confidences, among employees. 
Under the guise of aptitude 
testing, the psychologists had 
been able to select and organize 
teams consisting entirely of mutually incompatible individuals. 
So well had they succeeded that 
most workers could barely stand 
the sight of one another, and so 
were driven back upon themselves and their work. Only by 
practicing an almost egg-like 
self-containment could a draftsman or other worker hope to get 
through the day without open 
conflict and disaster. 
Latent antipathies among 
workers were further intensified 
by means of the Annual Proficiency Competitions. At the conclusion of these tests all employees save two were given Proficiency Stars. Of the remaining 
two, one was invariably a person who had shown signs of becoming too popular among his 
fellows. He was given a Leadership Star, and because an affable 
man was usually less rather than 
more efficient that the rest, this 
made of him a lonely little airbubble in a sea of resentment. 
The second of the two workers 
was always discharged. Thus a 
dash of anxiety was added to the 
proceedings. 
''T^he visible manifestations of 
high 1. 1, were hectic color, 
a characteristic ferocity of eye 
and throbbing jaw-hinges. Often 
the jaw-hinges of an entire team 
would be pulsating at once, 
sometimes even in unison. This 
spectacle emanated an overwhelming feeling of earnestness 
and purpose. Executives were 
fond of pointing out this phenomenon to visiting dignitaries. 
“Observe their jaw-hinges,” they 
would say. 
Another factor which isolated 
employees from one another was 
the peculiarly virulent form of 
halitosis which afflicted all workers without exception. The company cafeteria was the source of 
this malady. 
Thus, if Dewforth had been 
the only employee in that vast 
complex of buildings, or in the 
world, he could not have been 
restlessness. Add to this the fact 
that it had been his misfortime 
to win the Leadership Star in 
the Proficiency Competitions 
only three days earlier. He did 
not have to trace the bitter 
stream of his mood any farther 
back than that to find the bilesource. 
The object of the contest had 
been to draw a single line 28 5/8 
inches long and 1/15,000 of an 
inch thick, a feat which is starkly simple in conception but only 
theoretically feasible. The draftsmen had spent hours preparing 
the surfaces of paper, straining 
ink through filters, honing drawing pens with emery and polishing them with rouge, drawing 
practice lines and scrutinizing 
them with powerful bench microscopes. They did Balinese finger exercises, Chinese body coordination exercises, Hindu 
breathing exercises and Tibetan 
spiritual calisthenics to dispel 
their incipient shakes. When the 
great moment came, a solemn 
IN THE CONTROL TOWER 
little group of executives entered the drafting room and stood 
about in attitudes of grave ceremonial courtesy. 
The draftsmen then drew their 
lines. 
When it was over, the judges 
examined and graded the lines 
and the scores were announced 
by Mr. Shrank, the foreman. The 
better scores prompted little flutters of restrained applause from 
the executives. This moist and 
muted sound had reminded Dewforth of a hippopotamus venting 
its wind under water, and in a 
moment of thoughtless exhilaration he had even thought of 
sharing this bizarre notion with 
his wife. He never did so, as it 
happened. 
■\X/'hy had he ever told his 
’ ^ wife about that wretched 
Leadership Star? Her laughter 
persisted through his dreams, or 
through his dream. He only had 
one. In this dream she was always a massive machine which 
ingested songbirds between steel 
rollers and stamped them into 
pipe-flange gaskets at a rate of 
one hundred and twenty per 
minute. 
And the prize-winning line he 
had drawn — it revealed its true 
nature in the perspective of 
days. There was no mistaking 
what it was. It was The Abyss. 
It could widen and it could en
gulf. How much light would a 
Leadership Star cast in that bottomless inkiness? 
Acute restless had the effect 
of sending Dewforth frequently 
to the lavatory, not so much for 
physiological reasons as because 
there was no other place to go 
and he had to go somewhere 
when the white walls of the 
drafting room threatened to 
crush him. He went as often as 
he thought he could without attracting the attention of Mr. 
Shrank or eliciting ponderous 
jocosities from the other workers. After several visits, however, 
he did begin to question himself. What drew him to that 
bleak refuge again and again? 
He was not aware of bladder irritation. He had no infantile obsession about such facilities. Was 
he driven by an aggregation of 
petty forces, each too small to 
make sense by itself? Or was 
there one reason hiding behind 
a cloud of small rationalizations? There was a difference in 
the air in the lavatory, and in 
the sound — the undifferentiated 
background sound which came 
from nowhere. Nowhere? 
It came through a window. 
He had been staring at a window — probably the only one in 
the building — and it had failed 
to register on his mind at the 
time because he had not expected it to be there. It was not part 
of the habitual pattern. He had 
seen a window. He had, moreover, looked through a window. 
What had he seen? He thought 
about this, and at the same time 
he thought about being sick — 
administratively sick. He succeeded in working up a palpable 
fever and a windy yawning beneath the diaphragm. Before 
taking any action he would have 
to confirm what he had seen 
through the window of the lavatory. 
On his last trip to the lavatory 
he climbed up onto the slippery 
washbasin and looked through 
the high window. His position 
there would be impossible to explain, of course, if anyone should 
come in. He was past caring 
about that. The unpasteurized air 
made him a little drunk and the 
sound — the immense distant 
sighing groan like a giant’s whispper — filled his brain. It made 
him want to expand to meet it 
somehow. 
Only one immense skeleton 
foot was visible, but there was 
no question about exactly what 
it was. 
No conventional structure 
would curve upward in that way. 
There was no point of reference 
by which to determine how far 
away it was, and the air was 
blue with haze, giving everything 
an appearance of remoteness and 
of unreality. He had never seen 
the city from that angle before, 
but if what he saw was what he 
thought it was, how could it have 
been so close without his knowing about it before this time? 
It was a thing which belonged 
to vast distances — spatial distances and other kinds of disance as well. Now it was close, 
or he was closer to it than he 
had ever imagined he would be 
in his life. 
It was accessible. 
Dewforth left at half past 
three when the somnolence of 
afternoon was heaviest on the 
heads of the other draftsmen. He 
did not speak to Mr. Shrank 
about it. He did not clear with 
Miss Plock in the dispensary, nor 
with Mr. Fert in Personnel, nor 
with Miss Yurt in Wage Readjustment, nor with Miss Bort in 
Sick Leave Subdivision, nor with 
Miss Vibe in Special Problems, 
nor with Mr. Pfister in Sick 
Claims, nor with Miss Grope in 
Employee Grievances, nor with 
Miss Rupnick in Company 
Grievances, nor with Miss Guggward in Allowance Reductions, 
nor with Mr. Droon in Privilege 
Curtailment, nor with Miss 
Tremulo in Psychological Counseling, nor with Dr. Schreck in 
Spiritual Aid Subdiv. 
He did not even trouble to see 
Miss Nosemilker who kept the 
time book. 
He just left. 
IN THE CONTROL TOWER 
Ill 
(CXTobody goes up there,” said 
' the hulking oyster-eyed 
man in the burlap overcoat. 
The bum’s eyes cleared long 
enough for him to peer into 
Dewforth’s eyes in order to see 
if his madness was worth sharing, then they filmed over again 
as he decided that it was not. 
Dewforth crowded past him 
and walked on. He was making 
real progress. He had at last 
found someone who acknowledged that there was something 
up there above eye-level. The 
others — old lost children, fig
ures of scab and grime — had 
been unaware of anything but 
inner cavities of craving and fear 
above the sidewalk firmament of 
trodden gum disks, sputum stars 
and the ends of twice-smoked 
cigarettes. 
He could not have lost sight 
of the Control Tower. He had 
never realized what streets were. 
Before that time he had known 
a single well policed block between the station and his place 
of work. He still thought of 
streets as more or less open strips 
along which people moved, north 
or south, east or west, purposefully from Point A to Point B 
with perhaps one right-angle 
turn, two at the most, pausing 
only to tip hats or look into shop 
windows. Now it developed that 
streets were sewers, battlegrounds, lairs, abattoirs, cesspools, lazarettes, midways of deformity and brawling markets 
where nightmares and spirochetes were sold. 
The city had not less than 
three dimensions. He had not 
been fully prepared for the implications of this, either. Existence in three dimensions does 
not necessarily mean three-dimensional vision. The sky was 
not visible through the maze of 
girders, stairways and catwalks 
overhead. Dewforth tried to orient himself by the direction of 
shadows, but this was misleading. It was the heart of the shadow district, and the play of shadows was the order of things. The 
rules were the rules of phantoms. 
Flesh lived there in subjection. 
Long miscegenation with shadow had made phantoms of them 
all and endowed all shadows 
with the menace of the real. Everything was equivocal as hell. 
Dewforth wandered in a cavern without walls. He saw bulky 
overcoats with defeated hats or 
defeated heads; long-legged 
dwarfs in black leather jackets; 
willowy chorus-boys with platinum ringlets, waiting in their 
niches for the gift of violence; 
scuttling trolls with horse-blanket jackets and alpine hats; deposed patriarchs under the 
small shelter of black derbies, 
hiding from persecution behind 
the Spanish moss of consolidated 
beards; headless things and 
thingless heads, importuning, 
threatening, watching or just 
standing there, those that were 
able. 
In his search for a way out 
of the darkness, he was obliged 
to turn back time and again. If 
gangs of shadows fought with 
knives at the end of a street 
which had at first looked promising, what business had shadows cursing or screaming or 
bleeding? If the madman who 
enjoined the mob to fight in the 
service of nothingness was only 
a mouse dancing on a summit of 
garbage, why did they cheer? At 
the end of still another street, 
a mass rape may not have been 
in progress; the participants 
I many not have waited sullenly 
j in a long line; a macrocephalic 
gnome in a plaid suit may not 
! actually have moved up and 
down the line selling tickets at 
i a reduced rate and explaining 
that the outrage had been in pro! gress since the preceding Christmas Eve; but why was the un' reality so consistant? 
And if no one was in fact being 
, ravaged, why did everyone look 
I as though they had been? 
A ' 11 these spectacle tested Dewforth’s courage, but they 
dimmed his resolve not at all. 
At last he found a deserted street. 
He followed it and he was rewarded with encouraging signs. 
There was more birdlime underfoot, and the inhuman yammering of the streets was replaced 
with echoing silence, and that 
silence was invaded by the sound 
— the voice of the colossus, remote and terrible. 
Dewforth asked directions 
again, this time of a pear-shaped 
figure which may or may not 
have had legs and which sat in 
the mouth of an iron cave and 
smoked what appeared to be a 
twist of hemp. “Where . .” Dewforth began. 
“Nobody goes up there,” the 
hemp -smoker answered without 
looking up at him. 
“Where do they come down, 
then,” asked Dewforth, trying a 
new approach but with little 
hope. There was a long pause. 
The pear-shaped man didn’t have 
arms either, Dewforth noticed. 
Hands, but no arms. 
“Well now, some got it, some 
ain’t,” he said. 
“How’s that?” asked Dewforth. 
The pear blew out a cloud of 
smoke, sulphurous, with viscous 
strings through it. “I knowed a 
guy caught it from a drinking 
glass once.” 
This dialogue might have gone 
on much longer if Dewforth had 
not just then noticed that his 
noninformer was sitting on the 
IN THE CONTROL TOWER 
bottom step of a long, dark stairway which led up and up into a 
jungle of lacy girders and shadows above them. 
He did not bother kicking the 
pear-shaped man. He stepped 
over him and ran up the stairs 
two at a time. His footsteps rang 
on the iron stairs and carried 
through the structure. It sounded 
like the bells of a sunken cathedral ringing in the tide. 
On the second level there was 
more light and more air. It was 
colder. There were loiterers on 
the second level too, but these 
were far from menacing. They 
clung to things and pressed themselves against things, and they 
stared with unfocused eyes at 
something which had been there 
before but was not there now. 
These men seemed to be wearing greasy fezzes and dark, baggy 
long underwear with buttons and 
vestigial lapels. As he approached them, Dewforth saw that the 
fezzes were actually felt hats 
with the brims atrophied or 
rotted away, and the funereal 
long-johns were the weatherbeaten remains of those suits 
which are designed for Young 
Men On The Way Up. As though 
by tacit agreement of long standing, these men did not look directly at Dewforth as he passed, 
nor he at them. 
There was no difficulty about 
finding a stairway to the next 
level, but there was a rusty chain 
across the entrance. 
Dewforth’s foot caught in this 
chain as he stepped over it, and 
it shattered like a chain of stale 
pretzels. There were no more 
people beyond the second level 
— none that could be seen. 
He soon lost count of levels. 
Stairs became narrower and 
more heavily encrusted with 
birdlime and rust as he ascended. In some places there were 
long sweeping ramps which led 
to blind sacs or reached out unsupported into space, and he was 
forced to retrace his steps. At no 
time did he look down, even 
when it was possible. There were 
usually high barriers along the 
platforms and ramps. These were 
covered with layers of old advertising posters which peeled 
and were tom by the wind, revealing still more ancient posters 
underneath. They seemed to 
have grown there by themselves 
like lichen. It seemed entirely 
reasonable to Dewforth that the 
writing on the older posters underneath was runic or demotic 
and the faces were ochre-stained 
skulls, but his impulse was to 
hurry past and not study them 
too closely. 
\ t last he found a long steep 
-^ladder running up the outside of one of the legs of the 
Control Tower. Only huge slow
ly circling birds and low-flying 
douds came between him and 
the underside of the control 
house at the top of the structure. 
Before beginning the climb he 
admonished himself not to look 
down and not to ponder what 
he was doing. In order to keep 
climbing, however, he had to 
keep admonishing himself, 
thereby only reminding himself 
to look down and to ponder, to 
the detriment of his equilibrium 
and confidence. Was it vertigo, 
or did the ladder or the Tower 
itself sway in the singing wind? 
Who was to say that the earth 
itself did not heave like fermenting mash? Was any object inherently more solid than any 
other object? What was “stability”? 
When he looked down at the 
city he could not pick out the 
building in which he had worked. There was nothing in any 
feature of the landscape. Nothing. If his position, clinging to a 
girder high above the city, made 
no sense, it did not make less 
sense than the position of a man, 
or a Dewforth, sitting in a blind 
cell among thousands of other 
blind cells down there, drawing 
tiny lines. Nothing bound him 
to the drafting room nor even 
to the Dewforth of the drafting 
room — not so much as a spider 
web or a shaft of light. The light 
pointed to itself. The wind got 
under his shirt and chilled hia 
navel, a poignant reminder of 
disconnectedness. 
An eagle glided close and 
screamed at him. It was like the 
laughter of his wife. He resumed 
his climb, looking down no 
more. 
The last few yards of the 
climb were the worst. Some bolts 
holding the ladder in place were 
shapeless little masses of rust. 
The eleventh rung from the top 
broke under his weight, and for 
the last ten steps he had to lighten his body by means of a technique of autosuggestion and willprojection which he invented on 
the spot, demonstrating what 
could be done under pressure of 
extreme necessity. He could see 
above his head a tiny balcony 
not more than a yard square, at 
which the ladder terminated. 
The floor of this balcony appeared to be made of long, 
weatherbeaten cigars which reason told him were badly corroded iron bars. Reason also told 
him that there would be a door 
there. 
He could not see a door 
through the skeleton floor of tha 
balcony, but the idea that there 
would not be a door there was, 
under the circumstances, insupportable. There would be a door, 
he told himself as he made his 
way upwards by means of levitation and the most tentative of 
IN THE CONTROL TOWER 
•teps. It would probably have an 
inhospitable sign on it — NO 
TRESPASSING, AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL ONLY, 
DANGER or perhaps HIGH 
VOLTAGE. It might prove to 
be locked. If so, he would pound 
on it until some one opened it, 
he decided. 
There was even an outside possibility that no one would be inside. He had never considered 
that possibility before that time. 
He decided that it was not time 
to consider it now. 
When Dewforth heaved himself up onto the small projecting platform he felt the ladder 
give under his feet. It was not 
just another rung. He saw the 
entire ladder go curling away into the emptiness like a huge 
broken spring. Then he lay on 
the platform face down with his 
eyes closed, fingers clutching the 
sill of the door, for a long time. 
New sounds invaded his personal darkness as he lay there. 
He heard bells, buzzers, klaxons, 
whistles and slamming relays. 
There were voices from loudspeakers — imperious and hopeless, angry and feeble, impassioned and monotonous, arrogant and anguished — in a synthetic language made up of odd 
phonemes long since discarded 
from a thousand other languages. 
When he looked up he saw no 
door but only a rectangle of 
darkness with erratic flashes of 
colored light. 
Having no choice, he entered 
on his hands and knees. 
IV 
T^ewforth wandered in a lab^ yrinth of control panels 
which reached almost to the ceiling, but did not entirely shut out 
the light. This light was like 
skimmed milk diffused in shadow. He reasoned that it came 
from windows, but when he tried 
to remember whether the control 
cab had windows he could not 
be sure. He had no visual image 
of windows seen from the outside, but he had supposed that 
such an edifice would hardly be 
blind. Somewhere beyond this 
maze of control panels, he also 
reasoned, there must be an area 
like the bridge of an enormous 
ship where the clamor of the 
bells, buzzers, klaxons and whistles and the silent warnings and 
importunings of dials, gauges, 
colored lights, ticker-tapes which 
spewed from metal mouths, the 
palsied styles which scribbled 
on creeping scrolls, were somehow collated and made meaningful, where the yammering loudspeakers could be answered, and 
where the operators could look 
out and down and see what they 
were doing. 
Where were the operators? 
The noise was deafening. Unlike the noise of machinery in a 
factory it was not homogenous. 
Each sound was intended to attract attention and to evoke a 
certain response, but what response and from whom? Long 
levers projecting from the steel 
deck wagged back and forth 
spastically like the legs of monstrous insects struggling on their 
backs. Several times Dewforth 
was temporarily blinded by an 
explosion of blue light as a fuse 
blew or something short-circuited among the rows of knifeswitches and rheostats on the 
panels. One would never really 
get used to the sporadic sound 
or to the lights. There was no 
knowable pattern about them — 
about what they did or said. 
When he closed his eyes and 
tried to compose himself the 
words Out of Control flashed red 
against the back of his eyelids, 
but he told himself that this was 
foolish. How was one to adjudge 
a situation to be Out of Control 
when one did not know what 
constituted control, over what, or 
by whom? Furthermore, he rebuked himself, if the panels — 
never mind how many or how 
forbidding — with their lights, 
bells, buzzers, switches, relays, 
dials, gauges, styles, tapes, pointers, rheostats and buttons had 
any meaning, and in fact if the 
Tower itself had any meaning at 
IN THE CONTROL TOWER 
all, that meaning was Control. 
How arrogant it had been of him 
to imagine, even briefly, that because he — a green intruder in 
that high place — had not immediately comprehended what it 
was all about, the situation must 
be out of control. Absurd! 
' I ^here were hundreds — per
-*■ haps thousands — of little 
labels attached to the control 
panels, presumably indicating 
the functions of the buttons, 
switches and other controls. Dewforth leaned close and studied 
these, but found only mute combinations of letters and numbers, 
joined by hyphens or separated 
by virgules. They made him 
feel somewhat more fragile, 
more round-shouldered and colder, but he resisted despair. It 
was getting a little darker, 
though. The skimmed-milk light 
above him was taking on a bluish 
tint. He had no way of knowing 
how long he had wandered 
among the control panels. His 
time-sense had always been dependent upon clocks and bells 
— and upon the arrivals and departures of trains. 
It was a sound which finally 
led Dewforth out of the maze of 
control panels. 
It was not a louder sound, not 
more emphatic, imperative or 
clear than the others; it was 
formless, feeble and ineffably 
pathetic. It was its utter incongruity which reached Dewforth 
through the robotic clamor, and 
which touched him. a mewing, 
as of a kitten trapped in a closet. 
It came, as he discovered, from 
The Operator. 
He was quite alone among his 
levers, wheels, switches, buttons, 
cranks, gauges, lights, bells, buzzers, horns, ticker-tapes, creeping scrolls, barking loudspeakers 
and cryptic dials. Dewforth saw 
him sharply silhouetted against 
a long window through which 
bluish-gray light poured but 
through which nothing could be 
clearly seen from where he stood. 
The Operator sat on a high, onelegged stool. His head was drawn 
into his shoulders, which were 
crumpled things of birdlike 
bones. His head was bald on top 
but the fringe was long and wild. 
He had big simian ears set at 
right angles to his head and the 
light shone through them, not 
pink but yellowish. There was 
an aureole of fine hairs about 
them which gave them the appearance of angel’s wings. V/ith 
enlarged hands at the ends of 
almost fleshless arms he clutched at the knobs of rheostats and 
the cranks of transformers, hesitantly, spasmodically, and without ever quite reaching anything. Each time he withdrew 
his hands quickly as though he 
had been on the point of touch
ing something very hot. His 
arms might have been elongated 
by a lifetime of such aborted 
movement. 
Just as Dewforth began to wonder how his sudden appearance 
there would affect the old man, 
feeble and distraught as he already was, the Operator whirled 
on his stool and stared at Dewforth with eyes so round, so huge 
and so terrified that the rest of 
his face was not noticeable at 
all. 
He shouted something that 
sounded like "HuzzahP’ but almost certainly was not, then 
stiffened, then fell to the steel 
deck with no more fuss than a 
bag of corn-husks would have 
made, and died, 
O ne would think that a windowed control cab or 
wheelhouse atop the loftiest 
structure in a city, or in an entire landscape, would afford a 
man an Olympian view of the 
world below, and of its people 
and their activities. 
Dewforth must have believed 
this at one time, but he found 
that it was not so. The entire 
lower portion of the windows was 
covered with thin pages of typescript, mostly yellowed, dusty 
and curled at the edges — orders, 
instructions, directives, memoranda, all Urgent, For Immediate Action, Important, Priority, 
On No Account, or At All Costs. 
The texts of these orders, instructions, directives or memoranda consisted of mute combinations of letters and numbers, 
joined by hyphens or separated 
by virgules. 
Through the upper portion of 
the windows Dewforth could just 
make out the horizon and a narrow strip of darkening sky, 
which were silent and which demanded nothing of him. Amid 
the continuing clamor of all the 
signal devices, he tried to recapture the last utterance of the 
Operator — the former Operator. 
“Huzzah!” was out of the question. ‘Who’s there?” or “Who’s 
that?” were more likely, but, as 
he thought of it, weren’t “I^hose 
what?”, “What’s where?”, 
“Where’s what” or even “Who’s 
where?” just as likely? 
Of these possible last words, 
“M^ho’s where?” echoed most 
persistently in his memory. 
Dewforth might have tom 
away the pages of meaningless 
orders and looked down upon 
lights as darkness fell, but he 
did not. 
Opaque as they were in form 
and content alike, there was 
something reassuringly familiar 
in the lines of inane symbols. 
And they were all that stood between him and the approaching 
tidal wave of night, and beyond 
the night, the winter with its 
storms. 
— WILL MOHLER 
In the Current issue of IF — 
A thrilling new Retief story 
THE GOVERNOR OF GLAVE 
by Keith Loumer 
The dramatic conclusion of 
THE REEFS OF SPACE 
by Jack Williamson & Frederik Pohl 
Damon Knight - John Brunner - Theodore Sturgeon 
All in the November IF — on sale at your newsstand nowl 
IN THE CONTROL TOWER 
GALAXr 
NO 
GREAT MAGIC 
The troupers of the Big Time 
lack no art to sway a crowd 
— or to change all history! 
I 
To bring the dead to life 
Is no great magic. 
Few are wholly dead; 
Blow on a dead man’s embers 
And a live flame will start 
— Graves 
I dipped through the filmy 
curtain into the boys’ half 
of the dressing room and there 
was Sid sitting at the star’s 
dressing table in his threadbare 
yellowed undershirt, the lucky 
one, not making up yet but staring sternly at himself in the 
bulb-framed mirror and experi
mentally working his features a 
little, as actors will, and kneading the stubble on his fat chin. 
I said to him quietly, “Siddy, 
what are we putting on tonight? 
Maxwell Anderson’s Elizabeth 
the Queen or Shakespeare’s 
Macbeth? It says Macbeth on 
the callboard, but Miss Nefer’s 
getting ready for Elizabeth. She 
just had me go and fetch the red 
wig.” 
He tried out a few eyebrow 
rears — right, left, both together — then turned to me, sucking 
in his big gut a little, as he always does when a gal heaves into hailing distance, and said, 
“Your pardon, sweetling, what 
sayest thou?” 
Sid always uses that kook antique patter backstage, until I 
sometimes wonder whether I’m 
in Central Park, New York City, 
nineteen hundred and three 
quarters, or somewhere in Southwark, Merry England, fifteen 
hundred and same. The truth is 
that although he loves every last 
fat part in Shakespeare and will 
play the skinniest one with loyal 
and inspired affection, he thinks 
Willy S. penned Falstaff with 
nobody else in mind but Sidney 
J. Lessingham. (And no accent 
on the ham, please.) 
I closed my eyes and counted 
to eight, then repeated my question. 
He replied, “Why, the Bard’s 
tragical history of the bloody 
Scot, certes.” He waved his hand 
toward the portrait of Shakespeare that always sits beside his 
mirror on top of his reserve 
makeup box. At first that particular picture of the Bard looked 
too nancy to me — a sort of 
peeping-tom schoolteacher 
but I’ve grown used to it over 
the months and even palsy-feeling. 
He didn’t ask me why I hadn’t 
asked Miss Nefer my question. 
Everybody in the company 
knows she spends the hour before curtain-time getting into 
character, never parting her lips 
except for that purpose — or to 
bite your head off if you try to 
make the most necessary conversation. 
“Aye, ’tiz Macbeth tonight,” 
Sid confirmed, returning to his 
frowning-practice: left eyebrow 
up, right down, reverse, repeat, 
rest. “And I must play the illstarred Thane of Glamis.” 
I said, “That’s fine, Siddy, 
but where does it leave us with 
Miss Nefer? She’s already 
thinned her eyebrows and beaked out the top of her nose for 
Queen Liz, though that’s as far 
as she’s got. A beautiful job, the 
nose. Anybody else would think 
it was plastic surgery instead of 
putty. But it’s going to look kind 
of funny on the Thaness of 
Glamis.” 
Oid hesitated a half second 
longer than he usually 
would — I thought, his timing’s 
otf tonight — and then he harrumphed and said, “Why, Iris 
Nefer, decked out as Good Queen 
Bess, will speak a prologue to 
the play — a prologue which I 
have myself but last week writ.” 
He owled his eyes. “ ‘Tis an experiment in the new theater.” 
I said, “Siddy, prologues were 
nothing new to Shakespeare. He 
had them on half his other 
plays. Besides, it doesn’t make 
sense to use Queen Elizabeth. 
She was dead by the time he 
whipped up Macbeth, which is 
all about witchcraft and directed at King James.” 
He growled a little at me and 
demanded, “Prithee, how comes 
it your peewit-brain bears such 
a ballast of fusty book-knowledge, chit?” 
I said softly, “Siddy, you don’t 
camp in a Shakespearean dressing room for a year, tete-a-teting 
with some of the wisest actors 
ever, without learning a little 
Sure I’m a mental case, a poor 
little A 8s A existing on your 
sweet charity, and don’t think I 
don’t appreciate it, but — ” 
“A-and-A, thou sayest?” he 
frowned. “Methinks the gladsome new forswearers of sack 
and ale call themselves AA.” 
“Agoraphobe and Amnesiac,” 
I told him. “But look, Siddy, I 
NO GREAT MAGIC 
was going to sayest that I do 
know the plays. Having Queen 
Elizabeth speak a prologue to 
Macbeth is as much an anachronism as if you put her on the 
gantry of the British moonship, 
busting a bottle of champagne 
over its schnozzle.” 
“Ha!” he cried as if he’d 
caught me out. “And saying 
there’s a new Elizabeth, wouldn’t 
that be the bravest advertisement ever for the Empire? — 
perchance rechristening the pilot, copilot and astrogator 
Drake, Hawkins and Raleigh? 
And the ship The Golden Hind? 
Tilly fally, lady!” 
He went on, “My prologue an 
anachronism, quotha ! The 
groundlings will never mark it. 
Think’st thou wisdom came to 
mankind with the stenchful 
rocket and the sundered atomy? 
More, the Bard himself was topfull of anachronism. He put 
spectacles on King Lear, had 
clocks tolling the hour in Caesar’s Rome, buried that Roman 
‘stead o’ burning him and gave 
Czechoslovakia a seacoast. Go 
to, doll.” 
“Czechoslovakia, Siddy?” 
“Bohemia, then, what skills 
it? Leave me now, sweet poppet. 
Go thy ways. I have matters of 
import to ponder. There’s more 
to running a repertory company 
than reading the footnotes to 
Furness.” 
M artin had just slouched by 
calling the Half Hour and 
looking in his solemnity, sneakers, levis and dirty T-shirt more 
like an underage refugee from 
Skid Row than Sid’s newest recruit, assistant stage manager 
and hardest-worked juvenile — 
though for once he’d remembered to shave. I was about to ask 
Sid who was going to play Lady 
Mack if Miss Nefer wasn’t, or, 
if she were going to double the 
roles, shouldn’t I help her with 
the change? She’s a slow dresser 
and the Elizabeth costumes are 
pretty realistically stayed. And 
she would have trouble getting 
off that nose, I was sure. But 
then I saw that Siddy was already slapping on the alboline 
to keep the grease paint from 
getting into his pores. 
Greta, you ask too many questions, I told myself. You get 
everybody riled up and you rack 
your own poor ricketty little 
mind; and I hied myself off to 
the costumery to settle my 
nerves. 
The costumery, which occupies the back end of the dressing room, is exactly the right 
place to settle the nerves and 
warm the fancies of any child, 
including an unraveled adult 
who’s saving what’s left of her 
sanity by pretending to be one. 
To begin with there are the regular costumes for Shakespeare’s 
plays, all jeweled and spangled 
and brocaded, stage armor, great 
Roman togas with weights in 
the borders to make them drape 
right, velvets of every color to 
rest your cheek against and 
dream, and the fantastic costumes for the other plays we 
favor; Ibsen’s Peer Gynt, Shaw’s 
Back to Methuselah and Hilliard’s adaptation of Heinlein’s 
Children of Methuselah, the Capek brothers’ Insect People, 
O’Neill’s The Fountain, Flecker’s Hassan, Camino Real, Children of the Moon, The Beggar’s 
Opera, Mary of Scotland, Berkeley Square, The Road to Rome. 
There are also the costumes 
for all the special and variety 
performances we give of the 
plays: Hamlet in modem dress, 
Julius Caesar set in a dictatorship of the 1920’s, The Taming 
of the Shrew in caveman furs 
and leopard skins, where Petruchio comes in riding a dinosaur, The Tempest set on another planet with a spaceship 
wreck to start it off Karrumph! 
— which means a half dozen 
spacesuits, featherweight but 
looking ever so practical, and 
the weirdest sort of extraterrestrial-beast outfits for Ariel and 
Caliban and the other monsters. 
Oh, I tell you the stuff in the 
costumery ranges over such a 
sweep of space and time that 
you sometimes get frightened 
you’ll be whirled up and spun 
off just anywhere, so that you 
have to clutch at something very 
real to you to keep it from happening and to remind you where 
you really are — as I did now 
at the subway token on the thin 
gold chain around my neck 
(Siddy’s first gift to me that I 
can remember) and chanted very 
softly to myself, like a charm 
or a prayer, closing my eyes 
and squeezing the holes in the 
token: “Columbus Circle, Times 
Square, Penn Station, Christopher Street. .’’ 
B ut you don’t ever get really 
frightened in the costumery. Not exactly, though your 
goosehairs get wonderfully realistically tingled and your tummy 
chilled from time to time — 
because you know it’s all makebelieve, a lifesize doll world, a 
children’s dress-up world. It gets 
you thinking of far-off times 
and scenes as pleasant places 
and not as black hungry mouths 
that might gobble you up and 
keep you forever. It’s always 
safe, always just in the theatre, 
just on the stage, no matter how 
far it seems to plunge and roam 
. and the best sort of therapy 
for a pot-holed mind like mine, 
with as many gray ruts and 
curves and gaps as its cerebrum, 
that can’t remember one single 
thing before this last year in the 
dressing room and that can’t 
ever push its shaking body out 
of that same motherly fatherly 
room, except to stand in the 
wings for a scene or two and 
watch the play until the fear 
gets too great and the urge to 
take just one peek at the audience gets too strong . and I remember what happened the two 
times I did peek, and I have to 
come scuttling back. 
The costumery’s good occupational therapy for me, too, as 
my pricked and calloused fingertips testify. I think I must have 
stitched up or darned half the 
costumes in it this last twelvemonth, though there are so 
many of them that I swear the 
drawers have accordion pleats 
and the racks extend into the 
fourth dimension — not to mention the boxes of props and the 
shelves of scripts and promptcopies and other books, including a couple of encyclopedias and 
and the many thick volumes of 
'Furness’s Variorum Shakespeare, which as Sid had guessed 
I’d been boning up on. Oh, and 
I’ve sponged and pressed enough 
costumes, too, and even refitted 
them to newcomers like Martin, 
ripping up and resewing seams, 
which can be a punishing job 
with heavy materials. 
In a less sloppily organized 
company I’d be called wardrobe 
mistress, I guess. Except that to 
155 ^ 
NO GREAT MAGIC 
I 
i 
anyone in show business that 
suggests a crotchety old dame 
with lots of authority and scissors hanging around her neck on 
a string. Although I got my 
I crochets, all right, I’m not that 
I old. Kind of childish, in fact. 
As for authority, everybody outranks me, even Martin. 
Of course to somebody outside 
show business, wardrobe mistress might suggest a yummy gal 
who spends her time dressing up 
as Nell Gwyn or Anitra or Mrs. 
Pinchwife or Cleopatra or even 
Eve (we got a legal costume for 
it) and inspiring the boys. I’ve 
tried that once or twice. But 
Siddy frowns on it, and if Miss 
Nefer ever caught me at it I 
think she’d whang me. 
And in a normaller company 
it would be the wardrobe room, 
too, but costumery is my infantile name for it and the actors go 
along with my little whims. 
I don’t mean to suggest our 
company is completely crackers. 
To get as close to Broadway 
even as Central Park you got to 
I have something. But in spite of 
Sid’s whip-cracking there is a 
comforting looseness about its 
I efficiency — people trade around 
the parts they play without fuss, 
the bill may be changed a half 
hour before curtain without anybody getting hysterics, nobody 
gets fired for eating garlic and 
breathing it in the leading lady’s 
, 156 
face. In short, we’re a team. 
Which is funny when you come 
to think of it, as Sid and Miss 
Nefer and Bruce and Maudie are 
British (Miss Nefer with a touch 
of Eurasian blood, I romance); 
Martin and Beau and me are 
American (at least I think I am) 
while the rest come from just 
everywhere. 
T>esides my costumery work, 
I fetch things and run inside errands and help the actresses dress and the actors too. , 
The dressing room’s very coeducational in a halfway respectable 
way. And every once in a while 
Martin and I police up the 
whole place, me skittering about 
with dustcloth and wastebasket, 
he wielding the scrub-brush and 
mop with such silent grim efficiency that it always makes me 
nervous to get through and duck 
back into the costumery to collect myself. ‘ 
Yes, the costum ery’s a great 
place to quiet your nerves or 
improve your mind or even 
dream your life away. But this 
time I couldn’t have been there 
eight minutes when Miss Nefer’s 
Elizabeth-angry voice came 
skirling, “Girl! Girl! Greta, 
where is my niff with silver 
trim?” I laid my hands on it 
in a flash and loped it to her, 
because Old Queen Liz was 
known to slap even her Maids 
GALAXY : 
of Honor around a bit now and 
then and Miss Nefer is a bear 
on getting into character — a 
real Paul Muni. 
She was all made up now, I 
was happy to note, at least as 
far as her face went — I hate to 
see that spooky eight-spoked 
faint tattoo on her forehead 
(I’ve sometimes wondered if she 
got it acting in India or Egypt 
maybe). 
Yes, she was already all made 
up. This time she’d been going 
extra heavy on the burrowinginto-character bit, I could tell 
right away, even if it was only 
for a hacked-out anachronistic 
prologue. She signed to me to 
help her dress without even 
looking at me, but as I got busy 
I looked at her eyes. They were 
so cold and sad and lonely 
(maybe because they were so far 
away from her eyebrows and 
temples and small tight mouth, 
and so shut away from each other by that ridge of nose) that I 
got the creeps. Then she began 
to murmur and sigh, very softly 
at first, then loudly enough so 
I got the sense of it. 
“Cold, so cold,” she said, still 
seeing things far away though 
her hands were working smoothly with mine. “Even a gallop 
hardly fires my blood. Never 
was such a Januarius, though 
there’s no snow. Snow will not 
come, or tears. Yet my brain 
NO GREAT AAAGIC 
burns with the thought of 
Mary’s death-warrant unsigned. 
There’s my particular hell! — 
to doom, perchance, all future 
queens, or leave a hole for the 
Spaniard and the Pope to creep 
like old worms back into the 
sweet apple of England. Philip’s 
tall black crooked ships massing 
like sea-going fortresses southaway — cragged castles set to 
march into the waves. Parma in 
the Lowlands! And all the while 
my bright young idiot gentlemen spurting out my treasure as 
if it were so much water, as if 
gold pieces were a glut of summer posies. Oh, alackanight!” 
And I thought. Cry Iced! — 
thafs sure ipin^ to be one tyrannosauT of a prologue. And how 
you’ll ever shift back to being 
Lady Mack beats me. Greta, if 
this is what it takes to do just a 
bit part, you’d better give up 
your secret ambition of playing 
walk-ons some day when your 
nerves heal. 
S he was really getting to 
me, you see, with that characterization. It was as if I’d managed to go out and take a walk 
and sat down in the park outside and heard the President 
talking to himself about the 
chances of war with Russia and 
realized he’d sat down on a 
bench with its back to mine and 
only a bush between. You see, 
here we were, two females undignifiedly twisted together, at 
the moment getting her into that 
crazy crouch-deep bodice that’s 
like a big icecream cone, and yet 
here at the same time was Queen 
Elizabeth the First of England, 
three hundred and umpty-ump 
years dead, coming back to life 
in a Central Park dressing room. 
It shook me. 
She looked so much the part, 
you see — even without the red 
wig yet, just powdered pale 
makeup going back to a quarter 
of an inch from her own short 
dark bang combed and netted 
back tight. The age too. Miss 
Nefer can’t be a day over forty 
— well, forty- two at most — but 
now she looked and talked and 
felt to my hands dressing her, 
well, at least a dozen years older. I guess when Miss Nefer gets 
into character she does it with 
each molecule. 
That age point fascinated me 
so much that I risked asking her 
a question. Probably I was figuring that she couldn’t do me 
much damage because of the 
positions we happened to be in 
at the moment. You see, I’d 
started to lace her up and to do 
it right I had my knee against 
the tail of her spine. 
“How old, I mean how young 
might your majesty be?” I asked 
her, innocently wonderingly 
like some dumb serving wench. 
For a wonder she didn’t somehow swing around and clout me, 
but only settled into character 
a little more deeply. 
“Fifty-four winters,” she replied dismally. “ ‘Tiz Januarius 
of Our Lord’s year One Thousand and Five Hundred and 
Eighty and Seven. I sit cold in 
Greenwich, staring at the table 
where Mary’s death warrant 
waits only my sign manual. If 
I send her to the block, I open 
the doors to future, less official 
regicides. But if I doom her not, 
Philip’s armada will come inching up the Channel in a season, 
puffing smoke and shot, and my 
English Catholics, thinking only 
of Mary Regina, will rise and i’ 
the end the Spaniard will have 
all. All history would alter. That 
must not be, even if I’m damned 
for it! And yet . and yet. 
A bright blue fly came buzzing along (the dressing room 
has some insect life) and slowly 
circled her head rather close, 
but she didn’t even flicker her 
eyelids. 
“I sit cold in Greenwich, going mad. Each afternoon I ride, 
praying for some mischance, 
some prodigy, to wash from my 
mind away the bloody question 
for some little space. It skills 
not what: a fire, a tree a-falling, 
Davison or e’en Eyes Leicester 
tumbled with his horse, an assassin’s ball clipping the cold twigs 
: by my ear, a maid crying rape, 
a wild boar charging with dipping tusks, news of the Spaniard 
' at Thames’ mouth or, more hapI pily, a band of strolling actors 
j setting forth some new comedy 
to charm the fancy or some 
great unheard-of tragedy to tear 
the heart — though that were 
somewhat much to hope for at 
this season and place, even if 
Southwark be close by.” 
T he lacing was done. I stood 
back from her, and really 
she looked so much like Elia. beth painted by Gheeraerts or 
' on the Great Seal of Ireland or 
something — though the ash-colored plush dress trimmed in 
silver and the little silver-edge 
ruff and the black-silver tinselcloth cloak lined with ^ white 
plush hanging behind her lookI ed most like a winter riding 
costume — and her face was 
such a pale frozen mask of Elizabeth’s inward tortures, that I 
told myself. Oh, I got to talk to 
Siddy again, he’s made some big 
, mistake, the lardy old lackwit, 
I Miss Nefer just can’t be figuring 
I on playing in Macbeth tonight. 
As a matter of fact I was nerving myself to ask her all about 
I it direct, though it was going to 
I take some real nerve and maybe be risking broken bones or 
at least a flayed cheek to break 
j the ice of that characterization, 
' NO GREAT /AAGIC 
when who should come by calling the Fifteen Minutes but 
Martin. He looked so downright 
goofy that it took my mind off 
Nefer-in-character for all of 
eight seconds. 
His levied bottom half still 
looked like The Lower Depths. 
Martin is Village Stanislavsky 
rather than Ye Olde English 
Stage Traditions. But above that 
, , . well, all it really amounted 
to was that he was stripped to 
the waist and had shaved off the 
small high tuft of chest hair and 
was wearing a black wig that 
hung down in front of his shoulders in two big braids heavy 
with silver hoops and pins. But 
just the same those simple things, 
along with his tarpaper-solarium tan and habitual poker expression, made him look so like 
an American Indian that I 
thought. Hey Zeus! — he’s all 
set to play Hiawatha, or if he’d 
just cover up that straight-line 
chest, a frowny Pocahontas. And 
I quick ran through what plays 
with Indian parts we do and 
could only come up with The 
Fountain. 
I mutely goggled my question 
at him, wiggling my hands like 
guppy fins, but he brushed me 
off with a solemn mysterious 
smile and backed through the 
curtain. I thought, nobody can 
explain this but Siddy, and I followed Martin. 
159 
II 
History does not move in 
one current, 
like the wind across bare 
seas, 
but in a thousand streams 
and eddies, 
like the wind over a broken 
landscape. 
— Cary 
^ I *he boys’ half of the dressing 
^ room (two-thirds really) 
was bustling. There was the smell 
of spirit gum and Max Factor 
and just plain men. Several guys 
were getting dressed or un-, and 
Bruce was cussing Bloody-something because he’d just burnt his 
fingers unwinding from the neck 
of a hot electric bulb some 
crepe hair he’d wound there to 
dry after wetting and stretching 
it to turn it from crinkly to 
straight for his Banquo beard. 
Bruce is always getting to the 
theater late and trying shortcuts. 
But I had eyes only for Sid. 
So help me, as soon as I saw 
him they bugged again. Greta, 
I told myself, yoti’re going to 
have to send Martin out to the 
drugstore for some anti-bug 
powder. “For the roaches, boy? 
“No, for the eyes.” 
Sid was made up and had his 
long mustaches and elf-locked 
Macbeth wig on — and his cor
set too. I could tell by the way 
his waist was sucked in before 
he saw me. But instead of dark 
kilts and that bronze-studded 
sweat-stained leather battle harness that lets him show off his 
beefy shoulders and the top half 
of his heavily furred chest 
and which really does look great 
on Macbeth in the first act when 
he comes in straight from battle 
— but instead of that he was 
wearing, so help me, red tights 
cross-gartered with strips of 
gold-blue tinsel-cloth, a green 
doublet gold-trimmed and to top 
it a ruff, and he was trying to 
fit onto his front a bright silvered cuirass that would have looked just dandy maybe on one of 
the Pope’s Swiss Guards. 
I thought, Siddy, Willy S. 
ought to reach out of his portrait there and bop you one on 
the koko for contemplating such 
a crazy-quilt desecration of just 
about his greatest and certainly 
his most atmospheric play. 
Just then he noticed me and 
hissed accusingly, “There thou 
art, slothy minx! Spring to and 
help stuff me into this monstrous chest-kettle.” 
“Siddy, what is all this?” I 
demanded as my hands automotically obeyed. “Are you going 
to play Macbeth for laughs, except maybe leaving the Porter 
a serious character? You think 
you’re Red Skelton?” 
NO GREAT /MGIC 
“What monstrous brabble is 
this, you mad bitch?” he retorted, grunting as I bear-hugged his 
waist, shouldering the cuirass to 
squeeze it home. 
“The clown costumes on all 
you men,” I told him, for now 
I’d noticed that the others were 
in rainbow hues, Bruce a real 
eye-buster in yellow tights and 
violet doublet as he furiously 
bushed out and clipped crosswise sections of beard and 
slapped them on his chin gleaming brown with spirit gum. “I 
haven’t seen any eight-inch 
polka-dots yet but I’m sure I 
will.” 
Suddenly a big grin split Siddy’s face and he laughed out 
loud at me, though the laugh 
changed to a gasp as I strapped 
in the cuirass three notches too 
tight. When we’d got that adjusted he said, “I’ faith thou 
slayest me, pretty witling. Did I 
not tell you this production is 
an experiment, a novelty? We 
shall but show Macbeth as it 
might have been costumed at the 
court of King James. In the 
the clothes of the day, but gaudier, as was then the stage fashion. Hold, dove, I’ve somewhat 
for thee.” He fumbled his 
grouch bag from under his doublet and dipped finger and 
thumb in it, and put in my palm 
a silver model of the Empire 
State Building, charm bracelet 
size, and one of the new Kennedy dimes. 
A s I squeezed those two and 
gloated my eyes on them, 
feeling securer and happier and 
friendlier for them though I 
didn’t at the moment want to, I 
thought. Well, Siddy’s right 
about that, at least I've read they 
used to costume the plays that 
way, though I don’t see how 
Shakespeare stood it. But it was 
dirty of them all not to tell me 
beforehand. 
But that’s the way it is. Sometimes I’m the butt as well as the 
pet of the dressing room, and 
considering all the breaks I get 
I shouldn’t mind. I smiled at 
Sid and went on tiptoes and 
necked out my head and kissed 
him on a powdery cheek just 
above an aromatic mustache. 
Then I wiped the smile off my 
face and said, “Okay, Siddy, 
play Macbeth as Little Lord 
Faimtleroy or Baby Snooks if 
you want to. I’ll never squeak 
again. But the Elizabeth prologue’s still an anachronism. 
And — this is the thing I came 
to tell you, Siddy — Miss Nefer’s 
not getting ready for any measly 
prologue. She’s set to play Queen 
Elizabeth all night and tomorrow morning too. Whatever you 
think, she doesn’t know we’re 
doing Macbeth. But who’ll do 
Lady Mack if she doesn’t? And 
'162 
Martin’s not dressing for Malcolm, but for the Son of the 
Last of the Mohicans, I’d say. 
What’s more — ” 
You know, something I said 
must have annoyed Sid, for he 
changed his mood again in a 
flash. “Shut your jaw, you crook 
brained cat, and begone!” he 
snarled at me. “Here’s curtain 
time close upon us, and you 
come like a wittol scattering 
your mad questions like the 
crazed Ophelia her flowers. Begone, I say!” 
“Yessir,” I whipped out softly. 
I skittered off toward the door 
to the stage, because that was the 
easiest direction. I figured I 
could do with a breath of less 
grease-painty air. Then, “Oh, 
Greta,” I heard Martin call nicely
He’d changed his levis for 
black tights, and was stepping 
into and pulling up around him 
a very familiar dress, dark green 
and embroidered with silver and 
stage-rubies. He’d safety-pinned 
a folded towel around his chest 
— to make a bosom of sorts, I 
realized. 
He armed into the sleeves and 
turned his back to me. “Hook me 
up, would you?” he entreated. 
Then it hit me. They had no 
actresses in Shakespeare’s day, 
they used boys. And the dark 
green dress was so familiar to 
me because — 
“Martin,” I said, halfway up 
the hooks and working fast — 
Miss Nefer’s costume fitted him 
fine. “You’re going to play — ?” 
“Lady Macbeth, yes,” he finished for me. “Wish me courage, 
will you Greta? Nobody else 
seems to think I need it.” 
I punched him half-heartedly in the rear. Then, as I 
fastened the last hooks, my eyes 
topped his shoulder and I looked at our faces side by side in 
the mirror of his dressing table. 
His, in spite of the female edging and him being at least eight 
years younger than me, I think, 
looked wise, poised, infinitely 
resourceful with power in reserve, very very real, while mine 
looked like that of a bewildered 
and characterless child ghost 
about to scatter into air — and 
the edges of my charcoal sweater and skirt, contrasting with 
his strong colors, didn’t dispel 
that last illusion. 
“Oh, by the way, Greta,” he 
said, “I picked up a copy of The 
Village Times for you. There’s 
a thumbnail review of our Measure for Measure, though it mentions no names, darn it. It’s 
around here somewhere. .” 
But I was already hurrying 
on. Oh, it was logical enough to 
have Martin playing Mrs. Macbeth in a production styled to 
Shakespeare’s own times 
NO GREAT MAGIC 
(though pedantically over-authentic, I’d have thought) and 
it really did answer all my questions, eiifen why Miss Nefer could 
sink herself wholly in Elizabeth 
tonight if she wanted to. But it 
meant that I must be missing so 
much of what was going on right 
around me, in spite of spending 
24 hours a day in the dressing 
room, or at most in the small 
adjoining John or in the wings 
of the stage just outside the 
dressing room door, that it 
scared me. Siddy telling everybody, “Macbeth tonight in Elizabethan costume, boys and 
girls,” sure, that I could have 
missed — though you’d have 
thought he’d have asked my help 
on the costumes. 
But Martin getting up in Mrs. 
Mack. Why, someone must have 
held the part on him twentyeight times, cueing him, while 
he got the lines. And there must 
have been at least a couple of 
run-through rehearsals to make 
sure he had all the business and 
stage movements down pat, and 
Sid and Martin would have been 
doing their big scenes every 
backstage minute they could 
spare with Sid yelling, “Witling! 
Think’st that’s a wifely buss?” 
and Martin would have been 
droning his lines last time he 
scrubbed and mopped — 
Greta, they’re hiding things 
from you, I told myself. 
Maybe there was a 25th hour 
nobody had told me about yet 
when they did all the things they 
didn’t tell me about. 
Maybe they were things they 
didn’t dare tell me because of 
my top-storey weakness. 
I felt a cold draft and shivered and I realized I was at the 
door to the stage. 
I should explain that our 
stage is rather an unusual 
one, in that it can face two ways, 
with the drops and set pieces 
and lighting all capable of being switched around completely. 
To your left, as you look out the 
dressing-room door, is an openair theater, or rather an openair place for the audience — a 
large upward-sloping glade 
walled by thick tall trees and 
with benches for over two thousand people. On that side the 
stage kind of merges into the 
grass and can be made to look 
part of it by a green groundcloth. 
To your right is a big roofed 
auditorium with the same number of seats. 
The whole thing grew out of 
the free summer Shakespeare 
performances in Central Park 
that they started back in the 
1950’s. 
The Janus-stage idea is that in 
nice weather you can have the 
audience outdoors, but if it rains 
or there’s a cold spap, or if you 
want to play all winter without 
a single break, as we’ve been doing, then you can put your audience in the auditorium. In that 
case, a big accordion-pleated 
wall shuts off the out of doors 
and keeps the wind from blowing your backdrop, which is on 
that side, of course, when the 
auditorium’s in use. 
Tonight the stage was set up to 
face the outdoors, although that 
draft felt mighty chilly. 
I hesitated, as I always do at 
the door to the stage — though 
it wasn’t the actual stage lying 
just ahead qf me, but only backstage, the wings. You see, I always have to fight the feeling 
that if I go out the dressing room 
door, go out just eight steps, the 
world will change while I’m out 
there and I’ll never be able to 
get back. It won’t be New York 
City any more, but Chicago or 
Mars or Algiers or Atlanta, 
Georgia, or Atlantis or Hell and 
I’ll never be able to get back to 
that lovely warm womb with all 
the jolly boys and girls and all 
the costumes smelling like autumn leaves. 
Or, especially when there’s a 
cold breeze blowing, I’m afraid 
that I’ll change, that I’ll grow 
wrinkled and old in eight footsteps, or shrink down to the witless blob of a baby, or forget altogether who I am — 
— or, it occurred to me for 
the first time now, remember 
who I am. Which might be even 
worse. 
Maybe that’s what I’m afraid 
of. 
I took a step back. I noticed 
something new just beside the 
door: a high-legged, short-keyboard piano. Then I saw that the 
legs were those of a table. The 
piano was just a box with yellowed keys. Spinet? Harpsichord? 
“Five minutes, everybody,” 
Martin quietly called out behind 
me. 
I took hold of m5reelf. Greta, 
I told myself — also for the first 
time, you know that some day 
you’re really going to have to 
face this thing, and not just for 
a quick dip out and back either. 
Better get in some practice. 
I stepped through the door. 
T>eau and Doc were already 
out there, made up and in 
costume for Ross and King Duncan. They were discreetly peering past the wings at the gathering audience. Or at the place 
where the audience ought to be 
gathering, at any rate — sometimes the movies and girlie 
shows and brainheavy beatnik 
bruhahas outdraw us altogether. 
Their costumes were the same 
kooky colorful ones as the others’. Doc had a mock-ermine 
NO GREAT MAGIC 
robe and a huge gilt papiermache crown. Beau was carrying a ragged black robe and 
hood over his left arm — he 
doubles the First Witch. 
As I came up behind them, 
making no noise in my black 
sneakers, I heard Beau say, “I 
see some rude fellows from the 
City approaching. I was hoping 
we wouldn’t get any of those. 
How should they scent us out?” 
Brother, I thought, where do 
you expect them to come from if 
not the City? Central Park is 
bounded on three sides by Manhattan Island and on the fourth 
by the Eighth Avenue Subway. 
And Brooklyn and Bronx boys 
have got pretty sharp scenters. 
And whafs it get you insulting 
the woiking and non-woiking 
people of the woild’s greatest 
metropolis? Be grateful for any 
audience you get, boy. 
But I suppose Beau Lassiter 
considers anybody from north 
ef Vicksburg a “rude fellow” 
and is always waiting for the 
day when the entire audience 
will arrive in carriage and 
democrat wagons. 
Doc replied, holding down 
his white beard and heavy on 
the mongrel Russo-German accent he miraculously manages to 
suppress on stage except when 
“Vot does it matter? Ve don’t 
convinze zem, ve don’t convinze 
nobody. Nichevo.” 
Maybe, I thought. Doc shares 
my doubts about making Macbeth plausible in rainbow pants. 
Still unobserved by them, I 
looked between their shoulders 
and got the first of my shocks. 
It wasn’t night at all, but afternoon. A dark cold lowering 
afternoon, admittedly. But afternoon all the same. 
Sure, between shows I sometimes forget whether it’s day or 
night, living inside like I do. But 
getting matinees and evening 
performances mixed in something else again. 
It also seemed to me, although 
Beau was leaning in now and 
I couldn’t see so well, that the 
glade was smaller than it should 
be, the trees closer to us and 
more irregular, and I couldn’t 
see the benches. That was Shock 
Two. 
Beau said anxiously, glancing 
at his wrist, “I wonder what’s 
holding up the Queen?” 
Although I was busy keeping 
up nerve-pressure against the 
shocks, I managed to think, So 
he knows about Biddy’s stupid 
Queen Elizabeth prologue too. 
But of course he would. It’s only 
me they keep in the dark. If 
he’s so smart he ought to remember that Miss Nefer is always the last person on stage, 
even when she opens the play. 
And then I thought I heard, 
through the trees, the distant 
drumming of horses’ hoofs and 
the sound of a horn. 
^^ow they do have horseback 
-*• ^ riding in Central Park and 
you can hear auto horns there, 
but the hoofbeats don’t drum 
that wild way. And there aren’t 
so many riding together. And no 
auto horn I ever heard gave out 
with that sweet yet imperious 
ta-ta-ta-T A. 
I must have squeaked or something, because Beau and Doc 
turned around quickly, blocking 
my view, their expressions half 
angry, half anxious. 
I turned too and ran for the 
dressing room, for I could feel 
one of my mind-wavery fits coming on. At the last second it 
had seemed to me that the scenery was getting skimpier, hardly more than thin trees and 
bushes itself, and underfoot feeling more like ground than a 
ground cloth, and overhead not 
theater roof but gray sky. Shock 
Three and you’re out, Gerta, my 
umpire was calling. 
I made it through the dressing room door and nothing there 
was wavering or dissolving, 
praised be Pan. Just Martin 
standing with his back to me, 
alert, alive, poised like a cat inside that green dress, the prompt 
book in his right hand with a 
finger in it, and from his left 
hand long black tatters swing
ing — telling me he’d still be 
doubling Second Witch. And he 
was hissing, “Places, please, everybody. On stage!” 
With a sweep of silver and 
ash-colored plush. Miss Nefer 
came past him, for once leading 
the last-minute hurry to the 
stage. She had on the dark red 
wig now. For me that crowned 
her characterization. It made 
me remember her saying, “My 
brain bums.” I ducked aside as 
if she were majesty incarnate. 
And then she didn’t break her 
own precedent. She stopped at 
the new thing beside the door 
and poised her long white skinny 
fingers over the yellowed keys, 
and suddenly I remembered what 
it was called: a virginals. 
She stared down at it fiercely, 
evilly, like a witch planning an 
enchantment. Her face got the 
secret fiendish look that, I told 
myself, the real Elizabeth would 
have had ordering the deaths of 
Ballard and Babington, or plotting with Drake (for all they say 
she didn’t) one of his raids, that 
long long forefinger tracing 
crooked courses through a crabbedly drawn map of the Indies 
and she smiling at the dots of 
cities that would burn. 
Then all her eight fingers 
came flickering down and the 
strings inside the virginals began to twang and hum with a 
high-pitched rendering of Grieg’s 
NO GREAT AAAGIC 
“In the Hall of the Mountain 
King.” 
Then as Sid and Bruce and 
Martin rushed past me, along 
with a black swooping that was 
Maud already robed and hooded 
for Third Witch, I beat it for 
my sleeping closet like Peer 
Gynt himself dashing across the 
mountainside away from the 
cave of the Troll King, who only 
wanted to make tiny slits in his 
eyeballs so that forever afterwards he’d see reality just a little 
differently. And as I ran, the 
master-anachronism of that menacing mad march music was 
shrilling in my ears. 
Ill 
Sound a dumbe shew. Enter 
the three fatall sisters, 
with a rocke, a threed, 
and a pair of sheeres. 
— Old Play 
M y sleeping closet is just 
a cot at the back end of 
the girls’ third of the dressing 
room, with a three-panel screen 
to make it private. 
When I sleep I hang my outside clothes on the screen, which 
is pasted and thumbtacked all 
over with the New York City 
stuff that gives me security: 
theater programs and restaurant 
menus, clippings from the Times 
and the Minot, a torn-out pic
ture of the United Nations building with a hundred tiny gay paper flags pasted around it, and 
hanging in an old hairnet a 
home-run baseball autographed 
by Willy Mays. Things like that 
Right now I was jumping my 
eyes over that stuff, asking it to 
keep me located and make me 
safe, as I lay on my cot in my 
clothes with my knees drawn 
up and my fingers over my ears 
so the louder lines from the 
play wouldn’t be able to come 
nosing back around the trunks 
and tables and -bright-lit mirrors 
and find me. Generally I like to 
listen to them, even if they’re 
sort of sepulchral and drained 
of overtones by their crooked 
trip. But they’re always tensemaking. And tonight (I mean 
this afternoon) — no! 
It’s funny I should find security in mementos of a city I 
daren’t go out into — no, not 
even for a stroll through Central 
Park, though I know it from the 
Pond to Harlem Meer — the 
Met Museum, the Menagerie, the 
Ramble, the Great Lawn, Cleopatra’s Needle and all the rest. 
But that’s the way it is. Maybe 
I’m like Jonah in the whale, reluctant to go outside because the 
whale’s a terrible monster that’s 
awful scary to look in the face 
and might really damage you 
gulping you a second time, yet 
reassured to know you’re living 
in the stomach of that particular monster and not a seventeen 
tentacled one from the fifth 
planet of Aldebaran. 
It’s really true, you see, about 
me actually living in the dressing room. The boys bring me 
meals: coffee in cardboard cylinders and doughnuts in little 
brown grease-spotted paper sacks 
and malts and hamburgers and 
apples and little pizzas, and 
Maud brings me raw vegetables 
— carrots and parsnips and little 
onions and such, and watches 
to make sure . I exercise my 
molars grinding them and get 
my vitamins. I take spit-baths 
in the little john. Architects 
don’t seem to think actors ever 
take baths, even when they’ve 
browned themselves all over 
playing Pindarus the Parthian 
in Julius Caesar. And all my 
shut-eye is caught on this little 
cot in the twilight of my NYC 
screen. 
■\7" ou’d think I’d be terrified 
* being alone in the dressing room during the wee and 
morning hours, let alone trying 
to sleep then, but that isn’t the 
way it works out. For one thing, 
there’s apt to be someone sleeping in too. Maudie especially. 
And it’s my favorite time too 
for costume-mending and reading the Variorum and other 
books, and for just plain way
NO GREAT AAAGIC 
out dreaming. You see, the dressing room is the one place I really 
do feel safe. Whatever is out 
there in New York that terrorizes me, I’m pretty confident that 
it can never get in here. 
Besides that, there’s a great 
big bolt on the inside of the 
dressing room door that I throw 
whenever I’m all alone after the 
show. Next day they buzz for 
me to open it. 
It worried me a bit at first and 
I had asked Sid, “But what if 
I’m so deep asleep I don’t hear 
and you have to get in fast?” 
and he had replied, “Sweetling, 
a word in your ear: our own 
Beauregard Lassiter is the prettiest picklock unj ailed since 
Jimmy Valentine and Jimmy 
Dale. I’ll not ask where he learned his trade, but ’tis sober truth, 
upon my honor.” 
And Beau had confirmed this 
with a courtly bow, murmuring, 
“At your service. Miss Greta.” 
“How do you jigger a big iron 
bolt through a three-inch door 
that fits like Maudie’s tights?” 
I wanted to know. 
“He carries lodestones of great 
power and divers subtle tools,” 
Sid had explained for him. 
I don’t know how they work it 
so that some Traverse-Three cop 
or park official doesn’t find out 
about me and raise a stink. Maybe Sid just throws a little more 
of the temperament he uses to 
keep most outsiders out of the 
dressing-room. We sure don’t get 
any janitors or scrubwomen, as 
Martin and I know only too well. 
More likely he squares someone. 
I do get the impression all the 
company’s gone a little way out 
on a limb letting me stay here — 
that the directors of our theater 
wouldn’t like it if they found 
out about me. 
In fact, the actors are all so 
good about helping me and putting up with my antics (though 
they have their own, Danu digs!) 
that I sometimes think I must 
be related to one of them — a 
distant cousin or sister-in-law 
(or wife, my God!), because 
I’ve checked our faces side by 
side in the mirrors often enough 
and I can’t find any striking 
family resemblances. Or maybe 
I was even an actress in the 
company. The least important 
one. Playing the tiniest roles 
like Lucius in Caesar and Bianca 
in Othello and one of the little 
princes in Dick the Three Eyes 
and Fleance and the Gentlewoman in Macbeth, though me 
doing even that much acting 
strikes me to laugh. 
But whatever I am in that direction — if I’m anything — not 
one of the actors has told me a 
word about it or dropped the 
least hint. Not even when I beg 
them to tell me or try to trick 
them into it, presumably be
cause it might revive the shock 
that gave me agoraphobia and 
amnesia in the first place, and 
maybe this time knock out my 
entire mind or at least smash 
the new mouse-in-a-hole consciousness I’ve made for myself. 
I guess they must have got 
by themselves a year ago 
and talked me over and decided 
my best chance for cure or for 
just bumping along half happily 
was staying in the dressing room 
rather than being sent home 
(funny, could I bave another?) 
or to a mental hospital. And 
then they must have been cocky 
enough about their amateur psychiatry and interested enough 
in me (the White Horse knows 
why) to go ahead with a program almost any psychiatrist 
would be bound to yike at. 
I got so worried about the set 
up once and about the risks they 
might be running that, gritting 
down my dread of the idea, I 
said to Sid, “Siddy, shouldn’t I 
see a doctor?” 
He looked at me solemnly for 
a couple of seconds and then 
said, “Sure, why not? Go talk 
to Doc right now,” tipping a 
thumb toward Doc Pyeskov, who 
was just sneaking back into the 
bottom of his makeup box what 
looked like a half pint from the 
flash I got. I did, incidentally. 
Doc explained to me Kraepelin’s 
classification of the psychoses, 
muttering, as he absentmindedly fondled my wrist, that in a 
year or two he’d be a good illustration of Korsakov’s Syndrome. 
They’ve all been pretty dam 
good to me in their kooky ways, 
the actors have. Not one of them 
has tried to take advantage of 
my situation to extort an5dhing 
out of me, beyond asking me to 
sew on a button or polish some 
boots or at worst clean the wash 
bowl. Not one of the boys has 
made a pass I didn’t at least 
seem to invite. And when my 
crush on Sid was at its worst he 
shouldered me off by getting 
polite — something he only is to 
strangers. On the rebound I hit 
Beau, who treated me like a real 
Southern gentleman. 
All this for a stupid little 
waif, whom anyone but a gang 
of sentimental actors would 
have sent to Bellevue without a 
second thought or feeling. For, 
to get disgustingly realistic, my 
most plausible theory of me is 
that I’m a stage-struck girl from 
Iowa who saw her twenties slipping away and her sanity too, 
and made the dash to Greenwich 
Village, and went so ape on 
Shakespeare after seeing her 
first performance in Central 
Park that she kept going back 
there night after night (Christopher Street, Penn Station, Times 
Square, Columbus Circle 
see?) and hung around the stage 
door, so mousy but open-mouthed that the actors made a pet of 
her. 
And then something very 
nasty happened to her, either 
dowm at the Village or in a dark 
corner of the Park. Something 
so nasty that it blew the top of 
her head right off. And she ran 
to the only people and place 
where she felt she could ever 
again feel safe. And she showed 
them the top of her head with 
its singed hair and its jagged 
ring of skull and they took pity. 
My least plausible theory of 
me, but the one I like the most, 
is that I was bom in the dressing room, cradled in the top of 
a flat theatrical trunk with my 
ears full of Shakespeare’s lines 
before I ever said “Mama,” let 
alone lamped a TV; hush-walked when I cried by whoever was 
off stage, old props my first toys, 
trying to eat crepe hair my first 
indiscretion, sticks of greasepaint my first crayons. You 
know, I really wouldn’t be bothered by crazy fears about New 
York changing and the dressing 
room shifting around in space 
and time, if I could be sure I’d 
always be able to stay in it and 
that the same sweet guys and 
gals would always be with me 
and that the shows would always 
go on. 
NO GREAT AAAGIC 
T his show was sure going on, 
it suddenly hit me, for I’d 
let my fingers slip off my ears 
as I sentimentalized and wishdreamed and I heard, muted by 
the length and stuff of the dressing room, the slow beat of a 
drum and then a drum note in 
Maudie’s voice taking up that 
beat as she warned the other two 
witches, “A drum, a drum! Macbeth doth come.” 
Why, I’d not only missed Sid’s 
history - making - and - breaking 
Queen Elizabeth prologue (kicking myself that I had, now it 
was over), I’d also missed the 
short witch scene with its famous “Fair is foul and foul is 
fair,” the Bloody Sergeant scene 
where Duncan hears about Macbeth’s victory, and we were well 
into the second witch scene, the 
one on the blasted heath where 
Macbeth gets it predicted to 
him he’ll be king after Duncan 
and is tempted to speculate 
about hurrying up the process. 
I sat up. I did hesitate a minute then, my fingers going back 
toward my ears, because Macbeth is specially tense-making 
and when I’ve had one of my 
mind-wavery fits I feel weak for 
a while and things are blurry 
and uncertain. Maybe I’d better 
take a couple of the barbiturate 
sleeping pills Maudie manages 
to get for me and — but No, 
Greta, I told myself, you want 
to watch this show, you want to 
see how they do in those crazy 
costumes. You especially want 
to see how Martin makes out. 
He’d never forgive you if you 
didn’t. 
So I walked to the other end 
of the empty dressing room, 
moving quite slowly and touching the edges here and there, 
the words of the play getting 
louder all the time. By the time 
I got to the door Bruce-Banquo 
was sasdng to the witches, “If 
you can look into the seeds of 
time. And say which grain will 
grow and which will not,” — 
those lines that stir anyone’s 
imagination with their veiled 
vision of the tmiverse. 
The overall lighting was a little 
dim (afternoon fading already? 
— a late matinee?) and the stage 
lights flickery and the scenery 
still a little spectral-flimsy. Oh, 
my mind-wavery fits can be 
lulus! But I concentrated on the 
actors, watching them through 
the entrance-gaps in the wings. 
They were solid enough. 
Giving a solid performance, 
too, as I decided after watching 
that scene through and the one 
after it where Duncan congratulates Macbeth, with never a 
pause between the two scenes in 
true Elizabethan style. Nobody 
was laughing at the colorful costumes. After a while I began to 
accept them myself. 
Oh, it was a different Macbeth 
than our company usually does. 
Louder and faster, with shorter 
pauses between speeches, the 
blank verse at times approaching a chant. But it had a lot of 
real guts and everybody was just 
throwing themselves into it, Sid 
especially. 
''T^he first Lady Macbeth scene 
-*■ came. Without exactly realizing it I moved forward to 
where I’d been when I got my 
three shocks. Martin is so intent 
on his career and making good 
that he has me the same way 
about it. 
The Thaness started off, as she 
always does, toward the opposite 
side of the stage and facing a 
little away from me. Then she 
moved a step and looked down 
at the stage-parchment letter in 
her hands and began to read it, 
though there was nothing on it 
but scribble, and my heart sank 
because the voice I heard was 
Miss Nefer’s. I thought (and almost said out loud) Oh, dammit, 
he funked out, or Sid decided 
at the last minute he couldn’t 
trust him with the part. Whoever got Miss Nefer out of the 
ice cream cone in time? 
Then she swung around and 
I saw that no, my God, it was 
Martin, no mistaking. He’d been 
using her voice. When a person 
first does a part, especially get
NO GREAT MAGIC 
ting up in it without much rehearsing, he’s boimd to copy the 
actor he’s been hearing doing it. 
And as I listened on, I realized 
it was fundamentally Martin’s 
own voice pitched a trifle high, 
only some of the intonations 
and rythms were Miss Nefer’s. 
He was showing a lot of feeling 
and intensity too and real Martin- type poise. You’re off to a 
great start, kid, I cheered inwardly. Keep it up! 
Just then I looked toward the 
audience. Once again I almost 
squeaked out loud. For out 
there, close to the stage, in the 
very middle of the reserve section, was a carpet spread out 
And sitting in the middle of it 
on some sort of little chair, with 
what looked like two charcoal 
braziers smoking to either side 
of her, was Miss Nefer with a 
string of extras in Elizabethan 
hats with cloaks pulled around 
them. 
For a second it really threw 
me because it reminded me of 
the things I’d seen or thought 
I’d seen the couple of times I’d 
sneaked a peek through the curtain-hole at the audience in the 
indoor auditorium. 
It hardly threw me for more 
than a second, though, because 
I remembered that the characters who speak Shakespeare’s 
prologues often stay on stage and 
sometimes kind of join the au
dience and even comment on the 
play from time to time — Christopher Sly and attendant lords 
in The Shrew, for one. Sid had 
just copied and in his usual style 
laid it on thick. 
Welt, bully for you, Siddy, I 
thought, I’m sure the witless 
New York groundlings will be 
thrilled to their cold little toes 
knowing they’re sitting in the 
same audience as Good Queen 
Liz and attendant courtiers. And 
as for you. Miss Nefer, I added 
a shade invidiously, you just 
keep on sitting cold in Central 
Park, warmed by dry-ice smoke 
from braziers, and keep your 
mouth shut and everything’ll be 
fine. I’m sincerely glad you’ll be 
able to be Queen Elizabeth all 
night long. Just so long as you 
don’t try to steal the scene from 
Martin and the rest of the cast, 
and the real play. 
I suppose that camp chair 
will get a little uncomfortable 
by the time the Fifth Act comes 
tramping along to that drumbeat, but I’m sure you’re so 
much in character you’ll never 
feel it. 
One thing though: just don’t 
scare me again pretending to 
work witchcraft — with a virginals or any other way. 
Okay? 
Swell. 
Me, now, Fm going to watch 
the play. 
IV 
... to dream of new dimensions, 
Cheating checkmate 
by painting the king’s robe 
So that he slides like a 
queen; 
— Graves 
1 swung back to the play just 
at the moment Lady Mack 
soliloquizes, “Come to my woman’s breasts. And take my milk 
for gall, you murdering ministers.’’ Although I knew it was 
just folded towel Martin was 
touching with his fingertips as 
he lifted them to the top half of 
his green bodice, I got carried 
away, he made it so real. I decided boys can play girls better 
than people think. Maybe they 
should do it a little more often, 
and girls play boys too. 
Then Sid-Macbeth came back 
to his wife from the wars, looking triumphant but scared because the murder-idea’s started 
to smoulder in him, and she got 
busy fanning the blaze like any 
other good little hausfrau intent 
on her husband rising in the 
company and knowing that she’s 
the power behind him and that 
when there are promotions 
someone’s always got to get the 
axe. Sid and Martin made this 
charming little domestic scene 
so natural yet gutsy too that I 
wanted to shout hooray. Even 
Sid clutching Martin to that 
,( ridiculous pot-chested cuirass 
j didn’t have one note of horse1 play in it. Their bodies spoke. 
!} It was the McCoy. 
[' After that, the play began to 
: get real good, the fast tempo 
; and exaggerated facial expres^ sions actually helping it. By the 
I time the Dagger Scene came 
along I was digging my fingernails into my sweaty palms. 
' Which was a good thing — my 
i eating up the play, I mean — 
because it kept me from looking 
I at the audience again, even taki ing a fast peek. As you’ve gath1 ered, audiences bug me. All 
those people out there in the 
shadows, watching the actors in 
the light, all those silent voyeurs 
as Bruce calls them. Why, they 
might be anything. And sometimes (to my mind-wavery sorrow) I think they are. Maybe 
crouching in the dark out there, 
hiding among the others, is the 
. one who did the nasty thing to 
me that tore off the top of mv 
head. 
Anyhow, if I so much as 
glance at the audience, I begin 
^ to get ideas about it — and sometimes even if I don’t, as just at 
this moment I thought I heard 
horses restlessly pawing hard 
ground and one whinny, though 
that was shut off fast. Krishna 
I kressed us! I thought, Skiddy 
can’t have hired horses for Nefer-Elizabeth much as he’s a arcus man at heart. We don’t hare 
that kind of money. Besides — 
But just then Sid-Macbetfa 
gasped as if he were sucking in 
a bucket of air. He’d shed the 
cuirass, fortunately. He said, “Is 
this a dagger which I see before 
me. The handle toward my 
hand?” and the play hooked me 
again, and I had no time to think 
about or listen for anything else. 
Most of the offstage actors were 
on the other side of the stage, 
as that’s where they make their 
exists and entrances at this point 
in the Second Act. I stood alone 
in the wings, watching the play 
like a bug, frightened only of 
the horrors Shakespeare had in 
mind when he wrote it. 
Yes, the play was going great. 
The Dagger Scene was terrif 
where Duncan gets murdered 
offstage, and so was the part afterwards where hysteria mounts 
as the crime’s discovered. 
But just at this point I began 
to catch notes I didn’t like. Twice 
someone was late on entrance 
and came on as if shot from a 
cannon. And three times at least 
Sid had to throw someone a line 
when they blew up — in the 
clutches .Sid’s better than any 
prompt book. It began to look 
as if the play were getting out 
of control, maybe because the 
new tempo was so hot. 
B ut they got through the 
Murder Scene okay. As 
they came trooping off, yelling 
“Well contented,” most of them 
on my side for a change, I went 
for Sid with a towel. He always 
sweats like a pig in the Murder 
Scene. I mopped his neck and 
shoved the towel up under his 
doublet to catch the dripping 
armpits. 
Meanwhile he was fumbling 
around on a narrow table where 
they lay props and costumes for 
quick changes. Suddenly he dug 
his fingers into my shoulder, 
enough to catch my attention at 
this point, meaning I’d show 
bruises tomorrow, and yelled at 
me under his breath, “And you 
love me, our crows and robes. 
Presto!” 
I was off like a flash to" the 
costumery. There were Mr. and 
Mrs. Mack’s king-and-queen 
robes and stuff hanging and sitting just where I knew they’d 
have to be. 
I snatched them up, thinking, 
Boy, they made a mistake when 
they didn’t tell about this special 
performance, and I started back 
like Flash Two. 
As I shot out the dressing 
room door the theater was very 
quiet. There’s a short low-pitched 
scene on stage then, to give the 
audience a breather. I heard 
Miss Nefer say loudly (it had to 
be loud to get to me from even 
the front of the audience) : “ ‘Tis 
a good bloody play. Eyes,” and 
some voice I didn’t recognize reply a bit grudigingly, “There’s 
meat in it and some poetry too, 
though rough-wrought.” She 
went on, still as loudly as if she 
owned the theater, “ ‘Twill make 
Master Kyd bite his nails with 
jealousy — ha, ha!” 
Ha-ha yourself, you scenestealing witch, I thought, as I 
helped Sid and then Martin on 
with their royal outer duds. But 
at the same time I knew Sid 
must have written those lines 
himself to go along with his prologue. They had the unmistakable rough-wrought Lessingham 
touch. Did he really expect the 
audience to make an5d;hing of 
that reference to Shakespeare’s 
predecessor Thomas Kyd of The 
Spanish Tragedy and the lost 
Hamlet? And if they knew 
enough to spot that, wouldn’t 
they be bound to realize the 
whole Elizabeth-Macbeth tie-up 
was anachronistic? But when 
Sid gets an inspiration he can 
be very bull-headed. 
Just then, while Bruce-Banquo 
was speaking his broody low 
soliloquy on stage. Miss Nefer cut 
in again loudly with, “Aye, Eyes, 
a good bloody play. Yet somehow, methinks — I know not 
how — I’ve heard it before.” 
Whereupon Sid grabbed Martin 
by the wrist and hissed, “Did’st 
i hear? Ob, I like not that,” and 
I I thought, Oh-ho, so now she’s 
t beginning to ad-lib. 
Well, right away they all went 
I c«i stage with a flourish, Sid and 
1 Martin crowned and hand in 
d hand. The play got going strong 
1 again. But there were still those 
edge-of-control undercurrents 
and I began to be more uneasy 
than caught up, and I had to 
I stare consciously at the actors 
to keep off a wavery-fit. 
I 
O ther things began to bother 
me too, such as all the 
doubling. 
Macbeth’s a great play for 
doubling. For instance, anyone 
except Macbeth or Banquo can 
double one of the Three Witches 
— or one of the Three Murderers for that matter. Normally we 
double at least one or two of 
the Witches and Murderers, but 
this performance there’d been 
more multiple-parting than I’d 
ever seen. Doc had whipped off 
his Duncan beard and thrown on 
a brown smock and hood to play 
the Porter with his normal 
bottle-roughened accents. Well, 
a drunk impersonating a drunk, 
pretty appropriate. But Bruce 
was doing the next-door-to-impossible double of Banquo and 
Macduff, using a ringing tenor 
voice for the latter and wearing 
in the murder scene a helmet 
with dropped visor to hid his 
Banquo beard. He’d be able to 
tear it off, of course, after the 
Murderers got Banquo and he’d 
made his brief appearance as a 
bloodied-up ghost in the Banquet Scene. I asked myself. My 
God, has Siddy got all the other 
actors out in front playing courtiers to Elizabeth- Nefer? Wasting them that way? The whoreson rogue’s gone nuts! 
But really it was plain frightening, all that frantic doubling 
and tripling with its suggestion 
that the play (and the company 
too, Freya forfend) was becoming a ricketty patchwork illusion with everybody racing 
around faster and faster to hide 
the holes. And the scenery-wavery stuff and the warped Parksounds were scary too. I was actually shivering by the time Sid 
got to: “Light thickens; and the 
crow Makes wing to the rooky 
wood: Good things of day begin 
to droop and drowse; Whiles 
night’s black agents to their 
preys do rouse.” Those graveyard lines didn’t help my nerves 
any, of course. Nor did thinking 
I heard Nefer-Elizabeth say from 
the audience, rather softly for 
her this time, “Eyes, I have 
heard that speech, I know not 
where. Think you ’tiz stolen?” 
Greta, I told myself, you need 
a miltown before the crow makes 
wing through your kooky head. 
I turned to go and fetch me 
NO GREAT MAGIC 
17 / 
one from my closet. And stopped 
dead. 
Just behind me, pacing back 
and forth like an ash-colored 
tiger in the gloomy wings, looking daggers at the audience 
every time she turned at that 
end of her invisible cage, but 
ignoring me completely, was 
Miss Nefer in the Elizabeth wig 
and rig. 
Well, I suppose I should have 
said to myself, Greta, you imagined that last loud whisper 
from the audience. Miss Nefer’s 
simply unkinked herself, waved 
a hand to the real audience and 
come back stage. Maybe Sid just 
had her out there for the first 
half of the play. Or maybe she 
just couldn’t stand watching 
Martin give such a bang-up performance in her part of Lady 
Mack. 
Yes, maybe I should have told 
myself something like that, but 
somehow all I could think then 
— and I thought it with a steady 
mounting shiver — was. We got 
two Elizabeths. This one is our 
witch Nefer. I know. I dressed 
her. And I know that devil-look 
from the virginals. But if this 
is our Elizabeth, the company 
Elizabeth, the stage Elizabeth 
. who’s the other? 
And because I didn’t dare to 
let myself think of the answer 
to that question, I dodged 
around the invisible cage that 
the ash-colored skirt seemed to 
ripple against as the Tiger 
Queen turned and I ran into the 
dressing room, my only thought 
to get behind my New York City 
Screen. 
V 
Even little things are turning out to be great things 
and becoming intensely interesting. 
Have you ever thought 
about the properties of 
numbers? 
— The Maiden 
T ying on my cot, my eyes 
' crosswise to the printing, I 
looked from a pink Algonquin 
menu to a pale green New Amsterdam program, with a tiny doll 
of Father Knickerbocker dangling between them on a yellow 
thread. Really they weren’t covering up much of anything. A 
ghostly hole an inch and a half 
across seemed to char itself in 
the program. As if my eye were 
right up against it, I saw in vivid memory what I’d seen the 
two times I’d dared a peek 
through the hole in the curtain: 
a bevy of ladies in masks and 
Nell Gwyn dresses and men in 
King Charles knee-breeches and 
long curled hair, and the second 
time a bunch of people and 
creatures just wild: all sorts and 
colors of clothes, humans with 
hoofs for feet and antennae 
springing from their foreheads, 
furry and feathery things that 
had more arms than two and in 
one case that many heads — as 
if they were dressed up in our 
Tempest, Peer Gynt and Insect 
People costumes and some more 
besides. 
Naturally I’d had mind-wavery 
fits both times. Afterwards Sid 
had wagged a finger at me and 
explained that on those two 
nights we’d been giving performances for people who’d arranged a costume theater-party 
and been going to attend a masquerade ball, and ’zounds, when 
would I learn to guard my halfpatched pate? 
I don’t know, I guess never, 
I answered now, quick looking 
at a Giants pennant, a Korvette 
ad, a map of Central Park, my 
Willy Mays baseball and a Radio City tour ticket. That was 
eight items I’d looked at this 
trip without feeling any inward 
improvement. They weren’t reassuring me at all. 
The blue fly came slowly buzzing down over my screen and I 
asked it, “What are you looking 
for? A spider?” when what 
should I hear coming back 
through the dressing room 
straight toward my sleeping 
closet but Miss Nefer’s footsteps. 
No one else walks that way. 
She’s going to do something to 
you, Greta, I thought. She’s the 
maniac in the company. She’s 
the one who terrorized you with 
the boning knife in the shrubbery, or sicked the giant tarantula on you at the dark end of 
the subway platform, or whatever it was, and the others are 
covering up for. She’s going to 
smile the devil-smile and weave 
those white twig-fingers at you, 
all eight of them. And Birnam 
Wood’ll come to Dunsinane and 
you’ll be burnt at the stake by 
men in armor or drawn and 
quartered by eight-legged monkeys that talk or torn apart by 
wild centaurs or whirled through 
the roof to the moon without 
being dressed for it or sent burrowing into the past to stifle in 
Iowa 1948 or Egypt 4,008 B.C. 
The screen won’t keep her out. 
'"T^hen a head of hair pushed 
-*■ over the screen. But it was 
black-bound-with-silver, Brahma 
bless us, and a moment later 
Martin was giving me one of his 
rare smiles. 
I said, “Marty, do something 
for me. Don’t ever use Miss Nefer’s footsteps again. Her voice, 
okay, if you have to. But not 
the footsteps. Don’t ask me why, 
just don’t.” 
Martin came around and sat on 
the foot of my cot. My legs were 
already doubled up. He straight
NO GREAT MAGIC 
ened out his blue-and-gold skirt 
and rested a hand on my black 
sneakers. 
“Feeling a little wonky, 
Greta?” he asked. “Don’t worry 
about me. Banquo’s dead and so’s 
his ghost. We’ve finished the 
Banquet Scene. I’ve got lots of 
time.” 
I just looked at him, queerly I 
guess. Then without lifting my 
head I asked him, “Martin, tell 
me the truth. Does the dressing 
room move around?” 
I was talking so low that he 
hitched a little closer, not touching me anywhere else though. 
“The Earth’s whipping around 
the sun at 20 miles a second,” he 
replied, “and the dressing room 
goes with it.” 
I shook my head, my cheek 
scrubbing the pillow, “I mean 
. shifting,” I said. “By itself.” 
“How?” he asked. 
“Well,” I told him, “I’ve had 
this idea — it’s just a sort of 
fancy, remember — that if you 
wanted to time-travel and, well, 
do things, you could hardly pick 
a more practical machine than 
a dressing room and sort of stage 
and half-theater attached, with 
actors to man it. Actors can fit 
in anywhere. They’re used to 
learning new parts and wearing 
strange costumes. Heck, they’re 
even used to traveling a lot. And 
if an actor’s a bit strange nobody thinks anything of it — 
he’s almost expected to be foreign, it’s an asset to him.” 
“And a theater, well, a theater can spring up almost anywhere and nobody ask questions, 
except the zoning authorities 
and such and they can always 
be squared. Theaters come and 
go. It happens all the time. 
They’re transitory. Yet theaters 
are crossroads, anonymous meeting places, anybody with a few 
bucks or sometimes nothing at 
all can go. And theaters attract 
important people, the sort of 
people you might want to do 
something to. Caesar was stabbed 
in a theater. Lincoln was shot in 
one. And. 
My voice trailed off. “A cute 
idea,” he commented. 
I reached down to his hand on 
my shoe and took hold of his 
middle finger as a baby might. 
“Yeah,” I said, “But Martin, 
is it true?” 
He asked me gravely, “What 
do you think?” 
I didn’t say anything. 
“How would you like to work 
in a company like that?” he asked speculatively. 
“I don’t really know,” I said. 
TTe sat up straighter and his 
^ voice got brisk. “Well, all 
fantasy aside, how’d you like to 
work in this company?” He 
asked, lightly slapping my ankle. 
“On the stage, I mean. Sid thinks 
NO GREAT AAAGIC 
you’re ready for some of the 
smaller parts. In fact, he asked 
me to put it to you. He thinks 
you never take him seriously.” 
“Pardon me while I gasp and 
glow,” I said. Then, “Oh Marty, 
I can’t really imagine myself doing the tiniest part.” 
“Me neither, eight months 
ago,” he said. “Now, look. Lady 
Macbeth.” 
“But Marty,” I said, reaching 
for his finger again, “you haven’t 
answered my question. About 
whether it’s true.” 
“Oh that!” he said with a 
laugh, switching his hand to the 
other side. “Ask me something 
else.” 
“Okay,” I said, “why am I 
bugged on the number eight? 
Because I’m permanently behind 
a private 8-ball?” 
“Eight’s a number with many 
properties,” he said, suddenly as 
intently serious as he usually is. 
“The comers of a cube.” 
“You mean I’m a square?” I 
said. “Or just a brick? You 
know, ‘She’s a brick.’ ” 
“But eight’s most curious property.” he continued with a 
frown, “is that lying on its side 
it signifies infinity. So eight 
erect is really — ” and suddenly 
his made-up, naturally solemn 
face got a great glow of inspiration and devotion — “Infinity 
Arisen!” 
Well, I don’t know. You meet 
quite a few people in the theater 
who are bats on numerology, 
they use it to pick stage-names. 
But I’d never have guessed it of 
Martin. He always stmck me as 
the skeptical, cynical type. 
“I had another idea about 
eight,” I said hesitatingly. “Spiders. That 8-legged asterisk on 
Miss Nefer’s forehead — ” I suppressed a shudder. 
“You don’t like her, do you?” 
he stated. 
“I’m afraid of her,” I said. 
“You shouldn’t be. She’s a 
very great woman and tonight 
she’s playing an infinitely more 
difficult part than I am. No, 
Greta,” he went on as L started 
to protest, “believe me, you don’t 
understand anything about it at 
this moment. Just as you don’t 
understand about spiders, fearing them. They’re the first to 
climb the rigging and to climb 
ashore too. They’re the webweavers, the line-throwers, the 
connectors, Siva and Kali united 
in love. They’re the double mandala, the beginning and the end, 
infinity mustered and on the 
march — ” 
“They’re also on my New 
York screen!” I squeaked, 
shrinking back across the cot a 
little and pointing at a tiny 
glinting silver-and-black thing 
mounting below my Willy-ball. 
Martin gently caught its line 
on his finger and lifted it very 
close to his face. “Eight eyes 
I too,” he told me. Then, “Poor 
I little god,” he said and put it 
I' back. 
■ “Marty? Marty?” Sid’s desperate stage-whisper rasped the 
length of the dressing room. 
Martin stood up. “Yes, Sid?” 
Sid’s voice stayed a whisper 
but went from desperate to ferocious. “You villainous elf-skin! 
Know you not the Cauldron 
Scene’s been playing a hundred 
heartbeats? ’Tis ’most my entrance and we still mustering 
only two witches out of three! 
Oh, you nott-pated starveling!” 
Before Sid had got much more 
than half of that out, Martin had 
slipped around the screen, raced 
the length of the dressing room, 
and I’d heard a lusty thwack as 
he went out the door. I couldn’t 
help grinning, though with Martin racked by anxieties and reliefs over his first time as Lady 
Mack, it was easy to understand 
it slipping his mind that he was 
still doubling Second Witch. 
VI 
I will vault credit 
and affect high pleasures 
I Beyond death. 
— Ferdinand 
i 
I sat down where Martin had 
been, first pushing the 
. screen far enough to the side for 
me to see the length of the dressing room and notice anyone 
coming through the door and 
any blurs moving behind the 
thin white curtain shutting off 
the boys’ two-thirds. 
I’d been going to think. But 
instead I just sat there, experiencing my body and the room 
around it, steadying myself or 
maybe readying myself. I 
couldn’t tell which, but it was 
nothing to think about, only to 
feel. My heartbeat became a very 
faint, slow, solid throb. My spine 
straightened. 
No one came in or went out. 
Distantly I heard Macbeth and 
the witches and the apparitions 
talk. 
Once I looked at the New 
York Screen, but all the stuff 
there had grown stale. No protection, no nothing. 
I reached down to my suitcase and from where I’d been 
going to get a miltown I took a 
dexedrine and popped it in my 
mouth. Then I started out, beginning to shake. 
When I got to the end of the 
curtain I went around it to Sid’s 
dressing table and asked Shakespeare, “Am I doing the right 
thing. Pop?” But he didn’t answer me out of his portrait. He 
just looked sneaky-innocent, like 
he knew a lot but wouldn’t tell, 
and I found myself think of a 
little silver-framed photo Sid 
NO GREAT MAGIC 
had used to keep there too of a 
cocky German-looking young actor with “Erich” autographed 
across it in white ink. At least I 
supposed he was an actor. He 
looked a little like Erich von 
Stroheim, but nicer yet somehow nastier too. The photo had 
used to upset me, I don’t know 
why. Sid must have noticed it, 
for one day it was gone. 
I thought of the tiny blackand-silver spider crawling across 
the remembered silver frame, 
and for some reason it gave me 
the cold creeps. 
Well, this wasn’t doing me 
any good, just making me feel 
dismal again, so I quick went 
out. In the door I had to slip 
around the actors coming back 
from the Cauldron Scene and the 
big bolt nicked my hip. 
Outside Maud was peeling off 
her Third Witch stuff to reveal 
Lady Macduff beneath. She 
twitched me a grin. 
“How’s it going?” I asked. 
“Okay, I guess,” she shrugged. 
“What an audience! Noisy as 
highschool kids.” 
“How come Sid didn’t have a 
boy do your part?” I asked. 
“He goofed, I guess. But I’ve 
battened down my bosoms and 
playing Mrs. Macduff as a boy.” 
“How does a girl do that in a 
dress?” I asked. 
“She sits stiff and thinks 
pants,” she said, handing me her 
witch robe. “ ’Scuse me now. I 
got to find my children and go 
get murdered.” 
I ’d moved a few steps nearer 
the stage when I felt the 
gentlest tug at my hip. I looked 
down and saw that a taut black 
thread from the bottom of my 
sweater connected me with the 
dressing room. It must have 
snagged on the big bolt and unraveled. I moved my body an 
inch or so, tugging it delicately 
to see what it felt like and I got 
the answers : Theseus’s clew, a 
spider’s line, an umbilicus. 
I reached down close to my 
side and snapped it with my fingernails. The black thread leaped away. But the dressing room 
door didn’t vanish, or the wings 
change, or the world end, and I 
didn’t fall down. 
After that I just stood there 
for quite a while, feeling my new 
freedom and steadiness, letting 
my body get used to it. I 
didn’t do any thinking. I hardly 
bothered to study anything 
around me, though I did notice 
that there were more bushes 
and trees than set pieces, and 
that the flickery lightning was 
simply torches and that Queen 
Elizabeth was in (or back in) the 
audience. Sometimes letting your 
body get used to something 
is all you should do, or maybe 
can do. 
And I did smell horse dung. 
When the Lady Macduff Scene 
was over and the Chicken Scene 
well begun, I went back to the 
dressing room. Actors call it the 
Chicken Scene because Macduff 
weeps in it about “all my pretty 
chickens and their dam,” meaning his kids and wife, being murdered “at one fell swoop” on orders of that chickenyard-raiding 
“hell-kite” Macbeth. 
Inside the dressing room I 
steered down the boys’ side. Doc 
was putting on an improbablelooking dark makeup for Macbeth’s last faithful servant Seyton. He didn’t seem as boozywoozy as usual for Fourth Act, 
but just the same I stopped to 
help him get into a chain-mail 
shirt made of thick cord woven 
and silvered. 
In the third chair beyond, Sid 
was sitting back with his corset 
loosened and critically surveying 
Martin, who’d now changed to 
a white wool nightgown that 
climg and draped beautifully, 
but not particularly enticingly, 
on him and his folded towel, 
which had slipped a bit. 
From beside Sid’s mirror, 
Shakespeare smiled out of his 
portrait at them like an intelligent big-headed bug. 
Martin stood tall, spread his 
arms rather like a high priest, 
and intoned, “Amici! Romani! 
Populares!" 
I nudged Doc. “What goes on 
now?” I whispered. 
He turned a bleary eye on 
them. “I think they are rehearsing Julius Caesar in Latin.” He 
shrugged. “It begins the oration 
of Antony.” 
“But why?” I asked. Sid does 
like to put every moment to use 
when the performance-fire is in 
people, but this project seemed 
pretty far afield — hyper-pedantic. Yet at the same time I 
felt my scalp shivering as if my 
mind were jumping with speculations just below the surface. 
Doc shook hjs head and 
shrugged again. 
Sid shoved a palm at Martin 
and roared softly, “ ’Sdeath, boy, 
thou’rt not playing a Roman 
statua but a Roman! Loosen your 
knees and try again.” 
Then he saw me. Signing Martin to stop, he called, “Come 
hither, sweetling.” I obeyed 
quickly. He gave me a fiendish 
grin and said, “Thou’st heard 
our proposal from Martin. What 
sayest thou, wench?” 
'"T^his time the shiver was in 
my back. It felt good. I realized I was grinning back at him, 
and I knew what I’d been getting ready for the last twenty 
minutes. 
“I’m on,” I said. “Count me 
in the company.” 
Sid jumped up and grabbed 
NO GREAT /AAGIC 
me by the shoulders and hair 
and bussed me on both cheeks. 
It was a little like being bombed. 
“Prodigious!” he cried. 
“Thou’lt play the Gentlewoman 
in the Sleepwalking Scene tonight. Martin, her costume! 
Now sweet wench, mark me 
well.” His voice grew grave and 
old. “When was it she last 
walked?” 
The new courage went out of 
me like water down a chute. “But 
Siddy, I can’t start tonight” I 
protested, half pleading, half 
outraged. 
“Tonight or never! ’Tis an 
emergency — we’re short-handed.” Again his voice changed. 
“When was it she last walked?” 
“But Siddy, I don’t know the 
part.” 
“You must. You’ve heard the 
play twenty times this year past. 
When was it she last walked?” 
Martin was back and yanking 
down a blonde wig on my head 
and shoving my arms into a 
light gray robe. 
“I’ve never studied the lines,” 
I squeaked at Sdiney. 
“Liar! I’ve watched your lips 
move a dozen nights when you 
watched the scene from the 
wings. Close your eyes, girl! 
Martin, unhand her. Close your 
eyes, girl, empty your mind, and 
listen, listen only. When was it 
she last walked?” 
In the blackness I heard my
self replying to that cue, first in 
a whisper, then more loudly, 
then full-throated but grave, 
“Since his majesty went into the 
field, I have seen her rise from 
her bed, throw her nightgown 
upon her, unlock her closet, 
take forth — ” 
“Bravissimo! Siddy cried 
and bombed me again. Martin 
hugged his arm around my shoulders too, then quickly stooped 
to start hooking up my robe 
from the bottom. 
“But that’s only the first lines, 
Siddy,” I protested. 
“They’re enough!” 
“But Siddy, what if I blow 
up?” I asked. 
“Keep your mind empty. You 
won’t. Further, I’ll be at your 
side, doubling the Doctor, to 
prompt you if you pause.” 
That ought to take care of two 
of me, I thought. Then something else struck me. “But Siddy,” I quavered, “how do I play 
the Gentlewoman as a boy?” 
“Boy?” he demanded wonderingly. “Play her without falling 
down flat on your face and I’ll 
be past measure happy!” And 
he smacked me hard on the 
fanny. 
Martin’s fingers were darting 
at the next to the last hook. I 
stopped him and shoved my 
hand down the neck of my 
sweater and got hold of the subway token and the chain it was 
on and yanked. It burned my 
neck but the gold links parted. I 
started to throw it across the 
room, but instead I smUed at 
Siddy and dropped it in his 
‘ palm. 
I “The Sleepwalking Scene!” 
Maud hissed insistently to us 
from the door. 
VII 
I know death hath 
ten thousand several doors 
For men to take their exits, 
and ’tis found 
; They go on such strange 
geometrical hinges, 
! You may open them both 
ways. 
— The Duchess 
'^here is this about an actor 
on stage: he can see the audience but he can’t look at them, 
unless he’s a narrator or some 
sort of comic. I wasn’t the first 
(Grendel groks!) and only 
scared to death of becoming the 
second as Siddy walked me out 
of the wings onto the stage, over 
I the groundcloth that felt so 
much like ground, with a sort 
1 of interweaving policeman-grip 
1 on my left arm. 
Sid was in a dark gray robe 
I looking like some dismal kind 
' of monk, his head so hooded for 
I the Doctor that you couldn’t see 
^ his face at all. 
My skull was pulse-buzzing. 
My throat was squeezed dry. My 
heart was pounding. Below that 
my body was empty, squirmy, 
electricity-stung, yet with the 
feeling of wearing ice cold iron 
pants. 
I heard as if from two million 
miles, “When was it she last 
walked?” and then an iron bell 
somewhere tolling the the reply 
— I guess it had to be my voice 
coming up through my body from 
my iron pants: “Since his majesty went into the field — ” and 
so on, until Martin had come on 
stage, stary-eyed, a white scarf 
tossed over the back of his long 
black wig and a flaring candle 
two inches thick gripped in his 
hight hand and dripping wax on 
his wrist, and started to do Lady 
Mack’s sleepwalking half-hinted 
confessions of the murders of 
Duncan and Banquo and Lady 
Macduff. 
So here is what I saw then 
without looking, like a vivid 
scene that floats out in front of 
your mind in a reverie, hovering against a background of dark 
blur, and sort of flashes on and 
off as you think, or in my case 
act. All the time, remember, with 
Sid’s hand hard on my wrist and 
me now and then tolling Shakespearan language out of some 
lightless storehouse of memory 
I’d never known was there to belong to me. 
NO GREAT MAGIC 
^T'here was a medium-size 
glade in a forest. Through 
the half-naked black branches 
shone a dark cold sky, like ashes 
of silver, early evening. 
The glade had two horns, as it 
were, narrowing back to either 
side and going off through the 
forest. A chilly breeze was blowing out of them, almost enough 
to put out the candle. Its flame 
rippled. 
Rather far back in the horn 
to my left, but not very far, were 
clumped two dozen or so men in 
dark cloaks they huddled aroimd 
themselves. They wore brimmed 
tallish hats and pale stuff showing at their necks. Somehow I assumed that these men must be 
the “rude fellows from the City” 
I remembered Beau mentioning 
a million or so years ago. Although I couldn’t see them very 
well, and didn’t spend much 
time on them, there was one of 
them who had his hat off or excitedly pushed way back, showing a big pale forehead. Although that was all the conscious impression I had of his 
face, he seemed frighteningly 
familiar. 
In the horn to my right, which 
was wider, were lined up about 
a dozen horses, with grooms 
holding tight every two of them, 
but throwing their heads back 
now and then as they strained 
against the reins, and stamping 
tlieir front hooves restlessly. Oh, 
they frightened me, I tell you, 
that line of two-foot-long glossyhaired faces, writhing back their 
upper lips from teeth wide as 
piano keys, every horse of them , 
looking as wild-eyed and evil as 
Fuseli’s steed sticking its head 
through the drapes in his picture “The Nightmare.” 
To the center the trees came 
close to the stage. Just in front 
of them was Queen Elizabeth sitting on the chair on the spread 
carpet, just as I’d seen her out 
there before; only now I could 
see that the braziers were glowing and redly high-lighting her 
pale cheeks and dark red hair 
and the silver in her dress and 
cloak. She was looking at Martin 
— Lady Mack — most intently, i 
her mouth grimaced tight, swist- i 
ing her fingers together. 
Standing rather close around 
her were a half dozen men with 
fancier hats and ruffs and wideflaring riding gauntlets. 
Then, through the trees and 
tall leafless bushes just behind 
Elizabeth, I saw an identical i 
Elizabeth-face floating, only this 
one was smiling a demonic smile. 
The eyes were open very wide. 
Now and then the pupils darted 
rapid glances from side to side. 
^ I 'here was a sharp pain in my 
left wrist and Sid whispersnarling at me, “Accustomed ac
tion!” out of the corner of his 
shadowed mouth. 
I tolled on obediently, “It is 
an accustomed action with her, 
to seem thus washing her hands: 
I have known her continue in 
this a quarter of an hour.” 
Martin had set down the candle, which still flared and guttered, on a little high table so 
firm its thin legs must have been 
stabbed into the ground. And he 
was rubbing his hands together 
slowly, continually, tormentedly, trying to get rid of Duncan’s 
blood which Mrs. Mack knows 
in her sleep is still there. And 
all the while as he did it, the 
agitation of the seated Elizabeth 
grew, the eyes flicking from side 
to side, hands writhing. 
He got to the lines, “Here’s 
the smell of blood still: all the 
perfumes of Arabia will not 
sweeten this little hand. Oh, oh 
oh!” 
As he wrung out those soft, 
tortured sighs, Elizabeth stood 
up from her chair and took a 
step forward. The courtiers 
moved toward her quickly, but 
not touching her, and she said 
loudly, “Tis the blood of Mary 
Stuart whereof she speaks — the 
pails of blood that will gush 
j from her chopped neck. Oh, I 
, cannot endure it!” And as she 
[ said that last, she suddenly turned about and strode back toward 
the trees, kicking out her ash
NO GREAT MAGIC 
colored skirt. One of the courtiers turned with her and stooped toward her closely, whispering something. But although she 
paused a moment, all she said 
was, “Nay, Eyes, stop not the 
play, but follow me not! Nay, I 
say leave me, Leicester!” And 
she walked into the trees, he 
looking after her. 
Then Sid was kicking my ankle 
and I was reciting something 
and Martin was taking up his 
candle again without looking at 
it saying with a drugged agitation, “To bed; to bed; there’s 
knocking at the gate.” 
Elizabeth came walking out of 
the trees again, her head bowed. 
She couldn’t have been in them 
ten seconds. Leicester hurried 
toward her, hand anxiously outstretched. 
Martin moved offstage, torturedly yet softly wailing, 
“What’s done cannot be undone.” 
Just then Elizabeth flicked 
aside Leicester’s hand with playful contempt and looked up and 
she was smiling the devil-smile. 
A horse whinnied like a trumpeted snicker. 
As Sid and I started our last 
few lines together I intoned 
mechanically, letting words freefall from my mind to my tongue. 
All this time I had been answering Lady Mack in my 
thoughts. That’s what you think, 
sister. 
VIII 
God cannot effect that 
anything which is past 
should not have been. 
It is more impossible than 
rising the dead. 
— Summa Theologica 
T he moment I was out of sight 
of the audience I broke 
away from Sid and ran to the 
dressing room. I flopped down 
on the first chair I saw, my head 
and arms trailed over its back, 
and I almost passed out. It wasn’t 
a mind-wavery fit. Just normal 
faint. 
I couldn’t have been there 
long — well, not very long, 
though the battle-rattle and alarums of the last scene were echoing tinnily from the stage — 
when Bruce and Beau and Mark 
(who was playing Malcolm, 
Martin’s usual main part) came 
in wearing their last-act stagearmor and carrying between 
them Queen Elizabeth flaccid as 
a sack. Martin came after them, 
stripping off his white wool 
nightgown so fast that buttons 
flew. I thought automatically, 
rU have to sew those. 
They laid her down on three 
chairs set side by side and hurried out. Unpinning the folded 
towel, which had fallen around 
his waist, Martin walked over 
and looked down at her. He 
yanked off his wig by a braid 
and tossed it at me. 
I let it hit me and fall on the 
floor. I was looking at that white 
queenly face, eyes open and staring sightless at the ceiling, 
mouth open a little too with a 
thread of foam trailing from the 
comer, and at that ice-creamcone bodice that never stirred. 
The blue fly came buzzing over 
my head and circled down toward her face. 
“Martin,” I said with difficulty, “I don’t think I’m going 
to like what we’re doing.” 
He turned on me, his short 
hair elfed, his fists planted high 
on his hips at the edge of his 
black tights, which now were all 
his clothes. 
“You knew!” he said impatiently. “You knew you were 
signing up for more than acting 
when you said, ‘Count me in the 
company.’ ” 
Like a legged saphire the blue 
fly walked across her upper lip 
and stopped by the thread of 
foam. 
“But Martin . changing the 
past . dipping back and killing 
the real queen . .replacing her 
with a double — ” 
His dark brows shot up. “The 
real — You think this is the real 
Queen Elizabeth?” He grabbed 
a bottle of rubbing alcohol from 
the nearest table, gushed some 
on a towel stained with grease
paint and, holding the dead head 
by its red hair (no, wig — the 
real one wore a wig too) scrubbed 
the forehead. 
The white cosmetic came 
away, showing sallow skin and 
on it a faint tattoo in the form 
of 3n “S” styled like a yin-yang 
symbol left a little open. 
CtOnake!” he hissed. “Destroyerl The arch-enemy, 
the eternal opponent! God 
knows how many times people 
like Queen Elizabeth have been 
dug out of the past, first by 
Snakes, then by Spiders, and kidnaped or killed and replaced in 
the course of our war. This is 
the first big operation I’ve been 
on, Greta. But I know that 
much.” 
My head began to ache. I 
asked, “If she’s an enemy double, 
why didn’t she know a performance of Macbeth in her lifetime 
was an anachronism?” 
“Foxholed in the past, only 
trying to hold a position, they 
get dulled. They turn half zombie. Even the Snakes. Even our 
people. Besides, she almost did 
catch on, twice when she spoke 
to Leicester.” 
“Martin,” I said dully, “if 
there’ve been all these replacements, first by them, then by us, 
what’s happened to the real 
Elizabeth?” 
He shrugged. “God knows.” 
I asked softly, “But does He, 
Martin? Can He?” 
He hugged his shoulders in, 
as if to contain a shudder. “Look, 
Greta,” he said, “it’s the Snakes 
who are the warpers and destroyers. We’re restoring the past. 
The Spiders are trying to keep 
things as first created. We only 
kill when we must.” 
I shuddered then, for bursting 
out of my memory came the glittering, knife-flashing, nightshrouded, bloody image of my 
lover, the Spider soldier-ofchange Erich von Hohenwald, 
dying in the grip of a giant silver 
spider, or spider-shaped entity 
large as he, as they rolled in a 
tangled ball down a flight of 
rocks in Central Park. 
But the memory-burst didn’t 
blow up my mind, as it had done 
a year ago, no more than snapping the black thread from my 
sweater had ended the world. I 
asked Martin, “Is that what the 
Snakes say?” 
“Of course not! They make 
the same claims we do. But somewhere, Greta, you have to trust.” 
He put out the middle finger of 
his hand. 
I didn’t take hold of it. He 
whirled it away, snapping it 
against his thumb. 
“You’re still grieving for that 
carrion there!” he accused me. 
He jerked down a section of 
white curtain and whirled it 
NO GREAT MAGIC 
over the stiffening body. “If you 
must grieve, grieve for Miss Nefer! Exiled, imprisoned, locked 
forever in the past, her mind 
pulsing faintly in the black hole 
of the dead and gone, yearning 
for Nirvana yet nursing one lone 
painful patch of consciousness. 
And only to hold a fort! Only 
to make sure Mary Stuart is executed, the Armada licked, and 
that all the other consequences 
flow on. The Snakes’ Elizabeth 
let Mary live . and England 
die . and the Spaniard hold 
North America to the Great 
Lakes and New Scandinavia.” 
Once more he put out his 
middle finger. 
A ll right, all right,” I said, 
barely touching it. “You’ve 
convinced me.” 
“Great!” he said. “’By for 
now, Greta. I got to help strike 
the set.” 
“That’s good,” I said. He loped 
out. 
I could hear the skirling 
sword-clashes of the final fight 
to the death of the two Macks, 
Duff and Beth. But I only sat 
there in the empty dressing 
room pretending to grieve for a 
devil -smiling snow tiger locked 
in a time-cage and for a cute 
sardonic German killed for insubordination that I had reported .. but really grieving for a 
girl who for a year had been a 
rootless child of the theater with 
a whole company of mothers 
and fathers, afraid of nothing 
more than subway bogies and 
Park and Village monsters. 
As I sat there pitying myself 
beside a shrouded queen, a shadow fell across my knees. I saw 
stealing through the dressing 
room a young man in worn dark 
clothes. He couldn’t have been 
more than twenty-three. He was 
a frail sort of guy with a weak 
chin and big forehead and eyes 
that saw everything. I knew at 
one he was the one who had 
seemed familiar to me in the knot 
of City fellows. 
He looked at me and I looked 
from him to the picture sitting 
on the reserve makeup box by 
Siddy’s mirror. And I began to 
tremble. 
He looked at it too, of course, 
as fast as I did. And then he 
began to tremble too, though it 
was a finer-grained tremor than 
mine. 
The sword-fight had ended 
seconds back and now I heard 
the witches faintly wailing, 
“Fair is foul, and foul is fair — ” 
Sid has them echo that line offstage at the end to give a feeling 
of prophecy fulfilled. 
Then Sid came pounding up. 
He’s the first finished, since the 
fight ends offstage so Macduff 
can carry back a red-necked 
papier-mache head of him and 
show it to the audience. Sid 
stopped dead in the door. 
Then the stranger turned 
around. His shoulders jerked as 
he saw Sid. He moved toward 
him just two or three steps at a 
time, speaking at the same time 
in breathy little rushes. 
S id stood there and watched 
him. When the other actors 
came boiling up behind him, he 
put his hands on the doorframe 
to either side so none of them 
could get past. Their faces 
peered around him. 
And all this while the stranger 
was saying, “What may this 
mean? Can such things be? Are 
all the seeds of time . wetted by 
some hell-trickle . sprouted at 
once in their granary? Speak . 
speak! You played me a play . 
that I am writing in my secretest 
heart. Have you disjointed the 
frame of things ... to steal my 
unborn thoughts? Fair is foul 
indeed. Is all the world a stage? 
Speak, I say! Are you not my 
friend Sidney James Lessingham 
of King’s Lynn . singed by 
time’s fiery wand . sifted over 
with the ashes of thirty years? 
Speak, are you not he? Oh, there 
are more things in heaven and 
earth . aye, and perchance hell 
too. Speak, I charge you!” 
And with that he put his hands 
on Sid’s shoulders, half to shake 
him, I think, but half to keep 
from falling over. And for tfie 
one time I ever saw it, glib old 
Siddy had nothing to say. 
He worked his lips. He opened 
his mouth twice and twice shut 
it. Then, with a kind of desperation in his face, he motioned the 
actors out of the way behind 
him with one big arm and swung 
the other around the stranger’s 
narrow shoulders and swept him 
out of the dressing room, himself following. 
The actors came pouring in 
then, Bruce tossing Macbeth’s 
head to Martin like a football 
while he tugged off his horned 
helmet, Mark dumping a stack 
of shields in the corner, Maudie 
pausing as she skittered past me 
to say, “Hi Gret, great you’re 
back,” and patting my temple 
to show what part of me she 
meant. Beau went straight to 
Sid’s dressing table and set the 
portrait aside and lifted out 
Sid’s reserve makeup box. 
“The lights, Martin!” he 
called. 
Then Sid came back in, slamming and bolting the door behind him and standing for a moment with his back against it, 
panting. 
I rushed to him. Something 
was boiling up inside me, but 
before it could get to my brain 
I opened my mouth and it came 
out as, “Siddy, you can’t fool me, 
that was no dirty S-or-S. I don’t 
NO GREAT AAAGIC 
care how much he shakes and 
purrs, or shakes a spear, or just 
plain shakes — Siddy, that was 
Shakespeare!” 
“Aye, girl, I think so,” he told 
me, holding my wrists together. 
“They can’t find dolls to double 
men like that — or such is my 
main hope.” A big sickly grin 
came on his face. “Oh, gods,” he 
demanded, “with what words do 
you talk to a man whose speech 
you’ve stolen all your life?” 
I asked him, “Sid, were we 
ever in Central Park?” 
He answered, “Once — twelve 
months back. A one-night stand. 
They came for Erich. You 
flipped.” 
He swung me aside and moved 
behind Beau: AJl the lights went 
out. 
'^hen I saw, dimly at first, 
the great dull-gleaming 
jewel, covered with dials and 
green-glowing windows, that 
Beau had lifted from Sid’s reserve makeup box. The strongest 
green glow showed his intent 
face, still framed by the long 
glistening locks of the Ross wig, 
as he kneeled before the thing 
— Major Maintainer, I remembered it was called. 
“When now? Where?” Beau 
tossed impatiently to Sid over his 
shoulder. 
“The forty-fourth year before 
our Lord’s birth!” Sid answered 
instantly. “Rome!” 
Beau’s fingers danced over the 
dials like a musician’s, or a safecracker’s. The green glow flared 
and faded flickeringly. 
“There’s a storm in that vector of the Void.” 
“Circle it,” Sid ordered. 
“There are dark mists every 
way.” 
“Then pick the likeliest dark 
path!” 
I called through the dark, 
“Fair is foul, and foul is fair, 
eh, Siddy?” 
“Aye, chick,” he answered me. 
“ ’Tis all the rule we have!” 
— FRITZ LEIBER 
JACK WILLIAMSON 
Two of his greatest novels ini one volume 
THE LEGION OF TIME 
and 
AFTER WORLD'S END 
On sale at your newsstand in Galaxy Magabook No. II 
BESTER'S BEST! 
Have you read his famed THE DEMOLISHED ? Lived in 
its vividly real telepathic society, detailed so ingeniously and dramatically that, finishing the hook, you’ll find it hard to Ixlieve that 
society doesn’t exist — yet ! 
By special arrangement with the publisher of THE DEMOOSHED 
MAN, we can offer you this magnificent book for $1.00, 2/3 off the 
regular price, plus 25^ for postage and handling. 
Supplies are limited ! Send your order in immediately! 
(Use Coupon or Separate Sheet) 
GALAXY PUBLISHING CORP. 
Pleaso 421 Hudson St. 
rush me New York 
□ copies of 14, 
THE DEMOLISHED MAN N.Y. 
THE DEMOLISHED MAN 
The Original 
Edition — Completa I 
Not A Low Cost Reprint — 
Yet Yours For 
Only $1,001 
Plus Postage 25< 
Name 
Address — 
City -State. 
I Enclose. 
Stop wasting time in a dead-end jobl 
Enjoy the big rewards offered the 
law-trained man in business 
STUDY 
LAW 
LA SALLE 
EXTENSION UNIVERSITY 
A Correspondence Institution 
417 S. Dearborn, Dept. 24*034 
Chicago, Illinois 00605 
Please send lue. Uve of tosi or ooti^ation. your 
illustrated booklet ''l.aw Trainiog foE Lx^dership." 
Name Age. 
Add ress County 
City& 
Zone State 
Working 
Occupation Hours. .A.M.. P-M. 
321 C»nsdl*n rrMdrnlv LaSallr. Box 1001. Monliral J 
IN YQUR SPARE TIME 
as a way to 
increased earnings 
W HATEVER your present position — whatever 
your previous schooling — you can multiply your 
opportunities for rapid promotion, big income and 
prestige through LaSalle law training at home. 
A knowledge of Law is regarded today as indispensable equipment in every activity of business. 
The greatly increased role of government in business, 
the many new problems of I^w involving taxes, insurance. contracts, liability, employment, and much 
more — ail rt'quire the legally-trained executive who 
can make day-to-day dwisions efToctively. That is 
why leading corjwrations seek out such men for key 
positions and reward them with top salaries. 
You am master I,aw easily and enjoyably at home 
— at remarkably I(»w cost — under the su|X‘rvision of 
LaSalle’s distinguished Law faculty. Your study is 
illuslratcnl with actual legal cases. Upon completion 
of your training, you are awarded a Bachelor of I..aws 
degree if qualified. The famed LaSalle Law Library 
of 14 volumes is given to you as part 
of your course. 
For over half a century LaSalle has 
been an acknowledged leader in business training, with more than l,(KX).000 
students. Send for the free booklet 
“Law Training for Leadership" and see 
how LaSalle am help you move up 
rapidly in business. Address: 417 So. 
Dearborn, Chicago, Illinois 60605. 
Send 
for 
this 
Free 
Book
let