I 
IT DOESN’T TAKE A GENIUS 
to figure out how much you hate missing the best story of your favorite writer 
or the major part of a great novel. But 
we can’t compute a formula to stock 
every newsstand in the country with 
enough copies of our popular magazines 
to satisfy every reader. So we sometimes miss you and you miss us — and 
that's a double tragedy. 
BUT THERE’S AN ANSWER. 
It doesn’t take a genius to handle it. 
either. All it takes is a minute of your 
time, for which we want to repay you 
with a handsome saving over the newsstand price. Just fill in the coupon — 
or write the information on a piece of 
plain paper — and mail it to us. Then 
you’ll be sure instead of sorry. 
galaxy 
, 'i.:' 
UNIVERSAL PUBLISHING AND DISTRIBUTING CORPORATION 
236 EAST FORTY-FIFTH STREET, NEW YORK. N Y 10017 
Hurry and enter my subscription to GALAXY and WORLDS OF IF at your special combination 
rate. I enclose my check or money order for: 
□ 12 issues of each for $11.50 □ 24 issues of each for $22.50 □ 36 issues of each for $31 .50 
Name 
Zip Code . 
Prices outside the Western Hemisphere add $1.00 per 12 issues for postage 
Please check whether □ new or □ renewal 
Address. 
City & State 
Galaxy is published in French, German, Italian, Japanese and Spanish. 
The U. S. Edition is published in Braille 
and Living Tape. 
APRIL, 1970 Vol. 30, No. 1 
NOVELETTES 
ALLISON, CARMICHAEL 
AND TATTERSALL 4 
Stephen Tall 
DISCOVER A LATENT MOSES 32 
Michael G. Coney 
THE RUB 72 
A. Bertram Chandler 
SERIAL (Parti) 
THE TOWER OF GLASS 54 
Robert Silverberg 
EJLER JAKOBSSON 
Editor 
FREDERiKPOHL 
Editor Emeritus 
DONALD H. MENZEL 
Science Editor 
LESTER DEL REY 
Feature Editor 
JUDY-LYNN BENJAMIN 
Managing Editor 
FRANC l. ROGGERI 
Art Director 
JACK GAUGHAN 
Associate Art Director 
ARNOLD E. ABRAMSON 
Publisher 
BERNARD WILLIAMS 
Associate Publisher 
SHOUT STORIES 
NO PLANET LIKE HOME 107 
Robert Conquest 
KINDERGARTEN 116 
James E. Gunn 
MEDITATION 
DARWIN IN THE FIELDS 68 
Ray Bradbury 
ILLUSTRATED FEATURE 
SUNPOT 100 
Vaughn Bode' 
FEATURES 
EDITOR'S PAGE 2 
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 104 
Algis Budrys 
Cover by GAUGHAN, suggested by 
ALLISON, CARMICHAEL AND TATTERSALL 
GALAXY MAGAZINE is published monthly by Universal Publishing & Distributing Corporation, Arnold E. Abramson, President Main offices: 235 East 45 
Street, New York, N Y. 10017. 60c 
per copy. 12-issue subscription: 
S6.00 in the United States, elsewhere S7.00. Second class postage 
paid at New York, N Y. and addilional mailing offices. Copyright 
‘ 1970 by Universal Publishing & 
Distributing Corporation under 
International, Universal and PanAmerican Copyright Conventions. 
AM rights reserved. The publisher 
assumes no responsibility for unsolicited material. All stories 
printed in this magazine are fiction and any similarity between 
characters and actual persons is 
coincidental. Title registered U S. 
Patent Office Printed in U S A. 
ON GENETICS 
AND CONSENSUS 
SOM ETI MI'S I gel the feeling 
that I’m surrounded by a hideous 
reality arrived at by what is known 
as C onsensus. A believer is the guy 
who looks at the sunset and tells 
you Ihut it’s as beautiful as a post 
curd, One day he will meet a girl 
who is as pretty as a picture (don’t 
let this get past you), for whom he 
will vaguely evoke model males 
touted in mass media. These two 
will marry and breed children who 
will start life looking like all their 
cousins and other relatives on both 
sides but will grow up to be just 
like the old man or the old lady. 
And keep the faith. 
Some day the jerk will die either 
to confirm an accident or a medical statistic- or simply of never 
having lived or seen a sunset or 
known a woman or had anything 
but hand-me-down children. 
In his coffin he will look natural 
and lifelike for the first time since 
birth. Forgettable phrases will eulogize him — as pertinent to him as 
a post card is to a sunset or a picture to a lovely girl, for he Was, after all, human. But the one unforgettable truth about him will not 
be uttered. 
He lived by — and died for — 
Consensus. 
Some of us do. Others don’t. 
Some of us will see a sunset as a 
sunset, a woman as a woman, a 
man as a man and a child as something new — a genetic combination 
as individual as a fingerprint. An 
unprecedented life form about 
which no Consensus can exist, hu
man genetics being as helter-skelter as they are. 
Ostensibly, by consensus, we 
breed by skin color, common antecedents, religious or ethnic dogma, 
for money or status and sometimes 
just for kicks. The historic realities 
of human procreation, of course — 
and I think fortunately — have little to do with such irrelevancies. 
You and I — if you’re truly reading this — come from a long line of 
people and who knows what before 
that. We have this in common and 
I will say nothing more about your 
people. But if anyone were to tell 
me that over the millennia not one 
of mine crossed a frontier or 
jumped a fence I would know I 
was dealing with a clown. Or perhaps an idiot. 
I would know so from personal 
history, immediate family history 
and the recorded movements of 
more distant ancestors during the 
great churnings of Earth’s human 
populations^-mass migrations attended by violence, rapine, ravishment, conquest, love and lust. I 
come from restless, pagan stock 
and even a brief glance at a schematic diagram of the races of man 
would suggest that we are genetically related right around the 
globe. 
Regardless of race, color or 
creed. And this, right now, is 
where the action is. 
The Tower of Glass a great new 
serial by Robert Silverberg, starts 
in this issue. It deals with man’s 
mastery , of his own creation and 
genes. It also touches on the false 
gods of Consensus and is a book 
that makes science fiction not only 
pertinent but necessary. 
Enjoy it. — JAKOBSSON 
“We want to test your writing aptitude” 
If you have ever wanted 
to write, here is your 
opportunity to find out if you 
have talent worth developing. 
Take this revealing 
Aptitude Test created 
by 1 5 famous authors 
By Rod Serling 
If you want to write, my colleagues and 
I would like to test your writing aptitude. 
We’ll help you find out if you have the 
talent it takes to become a successful 
writer. 
Several years ago, I joined together 
with Max Shulman, Faith Baldwin, Bennett Cerf, Bruce Catton, J. D. Ratcliff 
and several others to form the Famous 
Writers School. Our aim was to help 
qualified people acquire the skills they 
need to break into print. We poured 
everything we know about writing into a 
new kind of professional training course, 
which you take at home in your free time. 
After a solid grounding in the fundamentals of all good writing, you get advanced 
training in the specialty of your choice. 
Each of your writing assignments is 
examined by instructors who are themselves professional writers or editors. 
Your instructor goes over your work 
word by word, blue-penciling corrections 
right on it— much as an editor does with 
established writers. Then he returns it to 
you with a long, personal letter of advice. 
This training works well. Our students 
Rod Serling, six-time Emmy Award 
winner, made TV writing an art form with 
Patterns, Requiem for a Heavyweight and 
T wilight Zone. He has also written many 
short stories and motion picture scripts. 
have sold their writing to hundreds of 
publications including Red book and True. 
Free Aptitude Test offered 
To find out if you can benefit from this 
training, send for the School's free Aptitude Test. If you test well, or offer other 
evidence of writing ability you may enroll. But there is no obligation. 
Famous Writers School 
Dept. W-4569 
Westport Connecticut 06880 
I want to know if I have writing aptitude 
worth developing. Please mail me, 
without obligation, your Aptitude Test 
and illustrated brochure. 
Mr. 
Mrs Age 
Miss [Circle one and please print] 
Street 
City 
State Zip 
Accredited by the Accrediting Commission 
of the National Home Study Council. 
ALLISON, 
CARMICHAEL 
and 
TATTERSALL 
Space history echoes with their 
achievements. If you haven't yet 
read about them — start now! 
STEPHEN TALL 
T HEY were all of them weird, 
by proper standards: Allison, 
Carmichael and Tattersall. Oddballs Starry-eyed nuts. The space 
program was the space program 
but you didn’t have to leave the human race to be a part of it. So said 
their contemporaries, with sly and 
good-humored scorn. 
How could they know that in 
the long list of special names in the 
history of space contemplation and 
exploration, names like Aristotle, 
Galileo, Einstein, Goddard, Shepherd, Lovell, Armstrong, Aldrin 
none would be more lustrous, 
more worthy of memory than Allison, Carmichael and Tattersall? 
Since the moon explorations, 
man had reached out. Mars was 
known. Four landings had been 
made on its bare and cratered crust 
and the hope of finding indigenous 
life and remnants of past civilizations had been sponged away by 
bleak fact. There was no life on 
Mars. Apparently there had never 
been. But it, loo, had served. Timonium power was first used on 
the Mars run— and the solar system opened. The stars still lay beyond. But an infant must learn to 
walk one step at a time. The next 
step, vast Jupiter, swung in its majestic orbit as always and now, 
with timonium, it was within reach. 
The target was Callisto. 
It had long been theorized that 
the giant planet might never be explored at first hand but that its big 
inner satellites were natural space 
stations, ready-built observatories 
for the studies that would have to 
be made before improving man 
moved on to the stars, out into the 
unknown systems that swung 
around other suns. 
The term was Callistonaut. 
There were to be three of them; 
three men intelligent enough to 
grasp the intricate technologies 
that would implement the entire 
project. Three men who could live 
together tranquilly and at peace for 
the two years of the journey to Jupiter’s great moon and return. 
Three men with competencies so 
special that location meant nothing to them. Three men who could 
work for days and weeks without 
thinking of their surroundings at 
all. Three men who could live happily without the human race. 
And when the te’sls and competitions and complex analyses and 
expert opinions were finally structured and programed and fed into 
the computers the three Callistonauts, by margins so wide that it 
was no contest, were Allison, Carmichael and Tattersall. 
Allison and Carmichael could 
play tick-tack-toe for literally days 
on end. They had a record of 
games that extended back to the 
first days of their space academy 
training. They had refined the 
game and complicated it but it was 
still tick-tack-toe. 
Tattersall loved to watch ants. 
He could and did watch them from 
earliest dawn until they grew quiet 
in the evening chill. He was happiest when he had a day all to himself, a day in which he could watch 
ants. 
It must not be inferred that these 
things were all they could do. Naturally' not. Carmichael was a 
space physicist-mathematician of 
such profundity that he thought — 
and sometimes spoke — in mathematical symbols. And his memory 
was legendary. Allison had designed the basic energy-detection 
devices with which the spaceship 
was equipped. He expected to work 
on them, to extend them, to test 
them, to use them for whatever 
purposes presented themselves 
during the two-year voyage. 
Tattersall’s concern was life. All 
kinds of life. Life interacting with 
life, life in whatever forms it could 
be imagined to exist and wherever 
it might possibly be found. Was 
there life on Jupiter? On Callisto? 
If there was, Allison would detect 
it, Tattersall would recognize and 
interpret it and Carmichael would 
reduce everything to formulae of 
unimaginable complexity and completeness and collaborate with the 
computers in deciding what they 
meant. 
I N THE orbiting assembly factory stabilized thirty-one hundred miles above the Colorado 
Rockies the Callisto ship finally 
reached completion. Its interior, 
designed by the best minds in the 
international space program, was 
modified slightly by its occupantsto-be to include a comfortable 
game cubicle where tick-tack-toe, 
space chess and other games could 
be played. Adequate provision also was made for the housing of 
Tattersall’s ant colonies, a number 
of which he planned to take along. 
The long artificial days, the weeks 
and months in deep space, would 
be ideal for ant-watching. 
The ship had little personality. 
It was a metallic, glittering, featureless teardrop, the blunt end 
destined to nose first into uncharted, uninvaded space, the tapered trailing end well suited for 
the extruding of sensors, and for 
the location of ion exhausts from 
the strange new timonium engines. 
On one side of the front bulge was 
painted the insignia banner of the 
International Space Council, on 
the other glowed the Stars and 
Stripes. The Callistonauts approved of these. They were proper 
and fitting. But the name Natalie 
across the front of the ship’s blunt 
snout annoyed them all. 
“That is ridiculous,’’ Allison 
said. “Whose bright idea was that? 
Naming the ship is the spaceman’s 
right. I wouldn’t be comfortable 
invading deep space in a ship called 
Natalie. I don’t even know a Natalie.” 
He had not been informed that 
Natalie was the name of the International Space Council President’s 
favorite niece. It would have made 
no difference if he had known. 
ALLISON, CARMICHAEL AND TATTERSALL 
Tattersall strode on long legs 
around the front of the vessel, his 
magnetized boots snapping onto 
the metallic scaffolding at each 
step. He liked the lines of the teardrop. 
“This is a good craft,” said Tattersall. “She fias a destiny. She 
will ride the oceans of space. She’ll 
be blown along by the solar winds. 
Let’s call her the Albatross.” 
“I used to be pretty good with a 
brush,” Carmichael said. “Probably I haven’t lost my touch.” 
So he called a construction foreman, borrowed the equipment he 
needed and had himself lifted up 
to where he could go to work. A 
few minutes with an expunger, and 
Natalie was no more. Then neatly, 
in Old English lettering, he painted 
Albatross in glittering blue. 
“Put a penetrator ray on that,” 
he directed the workman. “Make 
it a part of the hull. If Natalie has 
to have her name on something, 
we’ll call a mountain on Callisto 
Natalie.” 
“One on the back side,” Allison 
amended. 
Like Earth’s moon, Callisto always keeps the same side toward 
its planet. 
The Callistonauts thought nothing of this tweaking of the nose of 
Authority. In fact, they thought 
very little of Authority, period. As 
the first spacemen destined to pass 
the asteroid belt, to probe the far 
reaches of emptiness in which 
swung the Outer Planets, they 
knew they were special and thus 
entitled to a reasonable amount of 
privilege. This they were not backward about assuming. The prompt 
handling of the name incident set 
the tone for the entire operation. 
ISC could finance, construct, plan 
and propose but when the chips 
were down it would be the Callistonauts, the men on the spot, 
Allison, Carmichael and Tattersall, who would dispose. 
So no more was heard of Natalie. The Albatross was christened 
by breaking on its snout a bottle 
containing French champagne, 
Russian vodka, Japanese saki, 
Mexican tequila, Scotch whiskey 
and, at Tattersall’s insistence, a 
small dollop of good bourbon 
from a little still known to him in 
the Tennessee hills. Four hundred 
million television sets showed the 
ceremony to the world, while announcers and commentators chattered in five hundred languages, 
plus any number of dialects and 
accents. The composite fluid from 
the broken bottle had no effect on 
the ship’s hull, thus confirming a 
general impression. The Albatross 
was a sturdy craft. 
There was a great deal of oratory. Dignitaries from all the 
countries that had contributed to 
any extent to ISC were ferried up 
from the planet’s surface and occupied seats of honor on the great 
domed platform, looking down on 
the green and cloud-swathed Earth 
and out into the blue-black void of 
space. If they had contributed 
sizable amounts, they were on the 
program. The speeches went on for 
hours. They might have lasted 
longer had not the Callistonauts, 
growing bored, gotten up and 
walked out of the dome, crossed 
along the pressurized corridor and 
boarded the ship. 
“A man can takejust so much,” 
Allison commented. “After all 
that hot air, they’ll have to pump 
out the bubble.” 
“Live and let live,” said Carmichael generously. “They’re having fun. If they hadn’t seen us 
walk out, they’d never have missed 
us.” 
“Pity,” Allison said. “Still, I 
suppose we might sneak in a game 
or so while they’re winding things 
up. We can say we’re christening 
the game room.” 
They settled in, made themselves comfortable, and soon were 
lost in tick-tack-toe. Tattersall 
went to see about his ants. 
T HE pre-launch activities came 
to an end at last. The Callistonauts went through the final checklist of seven thousand four hundred and two items with Earth 
Control, Allison and Tattersall 
using conventional lists, Carmichael doing the whole thing in his 
head. Then they posed for final 
pictures, battened the last hatch 
and the Albatross pushed gently 
away from the domes and platform 
and scaffolding of her orbiting 
birthplace and floated quietly, a 
mile or so from the crowded platform of watching VIPs. The crew 
strapped and fitted into their acceleration couches. Ignition lights 
burned. There was a soft whine, a 
faint blue mist diffusing at the tail 
of the teardrop, and then, to the 
wide-eyed watchers, nothing. The 
Albatross was in her element, 
riding the solar winds. 
“There’s not much point in 
piling up all those Gs at take-off,” 
Carmichael remarked ten minutes 
later, as they unstrapped. “We 
could build speed slowly and get 
the same result.” 
“Makes your tummy unhappy, 
does it?” Tattersall grinned. He 
bounced his lanky form from one 
wall to the other of the observation-control room, finally steadied 
himself in midair but upside-down 
to his two companions, who still 
clung to their couches. 
“Not really,” Carmichael said, 
“though I’ve got more tummy to 
be unhappy than either of you.” 
Carmichael was short, had a pink 
face and platinum hair and tended 
to be plump. “It’s just that the fast 
take-off is an atavism. Like having 
a buggy-whip socket on a racing 
car.” 
“We can pul that in the report,” 
Allison suggested. “It’s true 
enough and it’s a good line.” He 
rolled off his couch and floated 
free in the zero gravity. 
They all spent a few minutes 
bounding about, enjoying weight
ALLISON, CARMICHAEL AND TATTERSALL 
lessness. They handled the situation expertly, for each had had several moon runs and Allison had 
been a member of the last Mars 
expedition. They had their space 
legs. But probably what they were 
enjoying mosj was the knowledge 
that the wordy VIPs were receding 
into the distance at a comfortable 
fifty thousand miles an hour. 
“Well, to work,” Carmichael 
said. “Let's check out with Earth 
Control and verify what they know 
as well as we do. Once they’re 
happy we can have a bite of something and then I'll feel we’re in 
business.” 
“I’ll do it,” Tattersall offered. 
“After we pass the moon I’ve got 
a watch program to set up. Let me 
get my routine over first.” 
So he went through the seven 
thousand, four hundred and twoitem checklist with Earth Control, 
exchanged a couple of pleasantries 
and switched off audio contact. 
Everything green. Everything Go. 
Earth Control could monitor every 
system and activity on the craft, 
could activate back-up systems, 
could even detect need for and initiate repairs. As far as the responsibilities of the Callistonauts were 
concerned, the Albatross was as 
completely automatic as any space 
entity had ever been. 
The one thing Earth Control 
could not monitor without the cooperation of the crew of the Albatross was conversation. And that 
probably was just as well. 
Actually the Albatross was a luxury situation. Due to the launch 
from high Earth orbit and the marvelous efficiency of the timonium 
reactors, there were no practical 
restrictions on needed equipment, 
materials or space. The ship’s calculated fuel need, for all situations 
and for two years, was just thirtyone pounds of timonium. And a 
three hundred per cent margin for 
unanticipated emergency was included in this. 
A two-year supply of food biomass, in forms that each man 
found most palatable and perfectly 
maintained in fresh or living condition, was no great problem. In addition, a hydroponics room, which 
ran itself, provided everything 
from radishes to melons. And if 
both of these were, for some highly 
unlikely reason, no longer available, the ship’s organic recycling 
systems would still feed the Callistonauts. Not as enjoyably — but 
they would be nourished indefinitely. They wouldn’t starve. 
Each man had a small but comfortable stateroom. The workshop 
was the result of an inordinate 
amount of planning and designing and there was no reasonable 
equipment that could not be constructed in it. Raw materials were 
in adequate supply, including projected possible needed amounts of 
every element in pure form. In 
short, the Callisto run was more 
than a simple expedition to explore a sector of the Solar System. 
It was preparation and training for 
the stars. 
A FTER ten hours in space the 
Callistonaunts were not only 
settled in, they felt more at home 
than they had felt for months. They 
had watched the moon drift by at a 
close four thousand miles and had 
received a bon voyage message 
from the dome at Tranquillity. 
They had had a meal, a rest period, 
and each had taken a first step on 
an activity that was particularly his 
own. 
Tattersall had gotten his ant colonies properly installed and normally active. In the stress of takeoff he had neglected to activate 
the rotation of the ant lab and had 
found each colony capsule an unhappy, leg-waving cloud of ant 
workers floating about aimlessly in 
the zero gravity or clinging together in violently agitated balls. There 
was considerable individual injury. 
With the establishment of normal 
one-G, the ants promptly resumed 
instinctive behavior and no permanent harm resulted from the oversight. 
“In any ecosystem, damage to 
the individual is only a symptom,” 
Tattersall mused as he watched his 
pets clear away the debris after the 
disaster. “If the species adjusts, 
the species persists.” 
Allison set up the first of a proposed series of screens designed to 
make visual the sophisticated winnowing of a matter-detecting de
vice. This was simply a variation 
of his energy-detecting and analyzing principle and he had high 
hopes for it. Trained on a space 
quadrat of known size, the sensors were designed to locate and 
eventually to record each material 
particle as it appeared in and traversed the area. Since these were 
of many kinds and values, the first 
screen showed a confusing kaleidoscope of streaks and clusters of 
light. But Allison sat and studied 
it happily. 
Carmichael’s concern was with 
the computers. There were three of 
them and each reinforced and extended the potential of its next 
smaller predecessor. Hence the 
first two actually digested and 
structured data for involved analysis by the third. They required no 
maintenance or adjustment but 
Carmichael faced them with problem after problem, all manner of 
probability speculations, hypotheses in a variety of frames and contexts. In his way he was quite as 
content as Allison or Tattersall. 
They had the second meal together, This was not to be a pattern. None of them had the same 
metabolism, the same rest needs, 
the same work-period length preferences. The ship’s maintenance 
was completely automatic. Its 
speed and guidance was one of the 
functions of the first computer and 
never required the collective attention of the Callistonauts. This 
second meal, therefore, was en
ALLISON, CARMICHAEL AND TATTERSALL 
tirely social, before individual activity rhythms became established. 
“Request a conference,” Tatll»tersail said, after the eggs 
and bacon, toast and orange juice. 
There was both California and 
Florida orange juice, to be fair. 
With the second cup of coffee they 
were leaning back in their chairs, 
relaxing. The ship had been given 
a one-G spin, so normal eating 
procedure was possible. 
“I’m available,” Carmichael 
said, stirring his coffee. As his 
well-nourished build indicated, he 
took both sugar and cream. Allison liked cream only, while Tattersall drank his black. 
“Fire away,” said Allison. 
Tattersall sipped tentatively at 
his steaming cup. 
“I’m concerned,” he said, “with 
all that empty space out there.” 
“Aren’t we all?” Carmichael 
asked. 
“A partial misstatement,” Allison pointed out. “It’s space, of 
course, but it’s not entirely empty. 
Matter is simply more widely 
scattered. Everything’s relative.” 
“This we know,” Tattersall conceded. “I used conventional 
phrasing. My concern is this: In 
every life situation that I’m aware 
of, each living thing has a minimum space requirement. It also 
must have a consistent energy 
source and sufficient matter for a 
corporeal entity. The availability of 
these basics results in persistence 
of life form. No sweat?” 
“Ecology I,” Carmichael said. 
“Carry on.” 
“In any ecosystem,” Tattersall 
lectured, “given the energy and the 
matter in usable form, the competition is for space. Hence Earth, 
with its carbon-based life molecules adjusted to a free-oxygen atmosphere and able to aggregate into complex life forms, is limited in 
population numbers only by the 
space it can provide.” 
“Obvious, but relevant to what? 
This is out of my field,” commented Allison. 
“I’ll get to you,” Tattersall said. 
“I think you’re important. But 
first, more kindergarten. Why 
isn’t there life on Earth’s moon? 
On Mars?” 
“Atmosphere, naturally,” Allison said. “Lacking that, the other 
missing basics, if any, make no 
difference. No oxygen, no life.” 
“As we know it,” Tattersall 
added. “There’s space, though. 
Just no way to make a usable 
energy flow available to complex, 
replicating molecules. Q.E.D.” 
“So what’s the question?” asked 
Carmichael. 
“There could be living entities 
on Mars, perhaps,” went on Tattersall, “if they had other than a 
carbon-based molecular organization and another way of garnering the needed energy supply. We 
don’t believe they’re there, for such 
‘living things,’ if you will, would be 
likely to approach densities com
parable to the substrate and would 
hence be detectable. We could see 
’em, weigh ’em, count ’em, take 
their pictures. And the available 
space for such forms, the surface 
space of the planet, would be negligible compared to all this lovely 
nothing we can see out the view 
ports. In other words, if life could 
get its basic requirements of matter 
and energy in some other fashion, 
why should it aggregate around 
any miserable little dense matter 
complex? Its other need is space. 
And there's space. Endless, ageless 
distances of it.” 
“You’re beginning to interest 
me,” Allison said. “Tie it up.” 
“When I saw my ants tumbling 
about in zero gravity, totally unable to adjust to the lack of the attraction of their bodies to a dense 
substrate, I began to think. If there 
were no large, appreciable aggregations of matter in the universe, 
would there be no life? If matter 
and energies are diffuse, are they 
any less there? That space out 
there is older than any planet, 
older than any sun. Why couldn’t 
it also be the oldest life space, the 
ancestral biosphere?” 
Carmichael bounced out of his 
chair, took quick strides up and 
down the small dining room. 
“Beautiful,” he said. “Logical, 
loo. I’ll compute some general 
probabilities, then dig into the likelihood of other living molecular 
combinations, using known atomic structure, elemental affinities 
and behavior, for data. It could 
take me a while.” 
“We’re twelve hours from 
Earth,” Allison pointed out. 
“We’re concerned, among other 
things, with the possible life on 
Jupiter, on Callisto, and the rest of 
the Jovian complex as opportunity 
offers. Are you trying to reason 
that life out of existence before we 
even get there?” 
Tattersall grinned. 
“Not at all,” he said. “You 
weren’t listening. The probabilities 
are the same as they were before I 
said a word. And I wasn’t saying 
that the possibilities of life on those 
aggregates are particularly remote. 
Carmichael can do some playing 
with that. I was reasoning after the 
fact with the moon and Mars. If 
there’s life there, nothing we’ve yet 
devised can detect it.” 
He paused and his long, homely, 
Lincolnesque face looked blankly 
into distance. 
“No,” he continued, “what I’m 
really concerned with is the space 
between here and there. Is it waste, 
non-usable space as far as life is 
concerned? Since the beginning of 
time, whatever that means, have no 
replicating, behaving masses ever 
made use of all that apparent emptiness? As an ecologist, suddenly I 
don’t believe it.” 
He eyed Allison’s classic profile, 
so different from his own. 
“You’ve got sensors out,” he 
said. “You’re probing that same 
space with equipment so special I’ll 
ALLISON, CARMICHAEL AND TATTERSALL 
never have sense enough to understand it. Do I challenge you?” 
“You know, you do,” Allison 
said, “I’m surveying space because 
it’s full, not because it’s empty. 
You’re hypothesizing concerning 
what it may possibly be full of.” 
Tattersall unfolded his long 
form. 
“As far as I'm concerned, conference is over,” he said. “I’ve got 
my money’s worth.” 
II 
T attersall knew he’d get 
his money’s worth in more than 
discussion. The organization, or 
rather the complete lack of it, of 
the Albatross personnel practically guaranteed that. He had 
planted an idea. Each Callistonaut 
had hisown competencies, his own 
special areas of concern. He had 
no obligatory tasks, no restrictions 
on how he should or should not 
spend his time. No man had authority, save over his own activities. It shouldn’t have worked, 
men being men. But it did. 
For three activity spans, roughly 
three Earth days, the men barely 
noticed each other. Carmichael 
slept twice, Allison had his eight 
hours three times, while Tattersall 
had four brief naps. Carmichael 
had roast beef, lamb chops, a huge 
pizza and lots of ice cream during 
his waking hours, Allison had run 
heavily to vegetables and eggs and 
had visited the hydroponics room 
twice for fresh leafy greens. He also took setting-up exercises after 
each sleep. Tattersall wasn’t hungry, so he knew he must have eaten 
now and then, but he couldn’t remember what. 
The spaceship was tooling along 
at the agreed-on fifty thousand 
miles an hour. Earth Control monitored but made no adjustments, 
since none were needed. For the 
Callistonauts the ship was home, 
transportation and undisturbed 
lab space. That was as near Utopia 
as they ever expected to come. 
Having watched ants and speculated on hypothetical space populations for his three days, Tattersall mentally came up for air. He 
wondered if Allison’s sensors 
were picking up anything new and 
different. Carmichael may have 
pin-pointed some new molecular 
affinities with possible life potential. He found them in the game 
cubicle, just launching on a session 
of tick-tack-toe. 
“I don’t mean to intrude,” he 
apologized. “Just curious about 
the sensors.” 
“We’ve only just begun the 
game,” Allison said. “Afraid I’ve 
got nothing you can use yet.” His 
handsome f^ce brightened. “One 
thing, though. I’ve made the solar 
wind visible. The proton flow 
shows nicely. Carmichael is going 
to calculate concentration and 
spacing after we relax a little. I 
think I’ve got enough for him to 
work with.” 
“Only subatomic particles?” 
Tattersall was disappointed. 
“As of now,” Allison said. “I 
think I’ve figured out how to 
broaden the settings, though. After 
all, it’s just radar.” 
“Plus,” said Carmichael. 
“Plus,” Allison agreed. “Go in 
the lab and take a look. The 
screen’s on.” 
Tattersall left them to their 
game. Since he had been invited, 
he had no hesitancy in seating 
himself before the big screen and 
watching the even streams of tiny 
blips move endlessly across it. 
If he can broaden the settings, 
he mused, we might learn something. Visualizing a known entity 
is just game playing. But some provision for sensing all matter in a 
section of space simultaneously — 
now that would be progress! 
He decided he was hungry, so he 
punched for eggs and bacon and 
Florida orange juice. He’d had 
California the last time he recalled 
eating, but couldn’t detect any difference. After plenty of black coffee he was suddenly ready to sleep, 
which he did for twelve hours. 
“I’ve adjusted the sensors,” Allison told him when they happened 
to meet in the control room a couple of days later. “I get the gross 
space trash now, meteors and the 
like, and some gas clouds, mostly 
hydrogen and helium. Nothing I 
didn’t know to be there but I love 
to be able to see them.” 
“Sounds good,” said Tattersall. 
*TT 7| Ballantino 
Boohs 
IN MARCH the winds of science fiction blow strong and boisterous, what 
with the Nebula Awards and all. It 
seems to be a month in which everyone is publishing large numbers of 
titles, ourselves included. So we'd 
better get our books sorted out right 
off. First, our magnificent adult fantasy list has two new entries— Lord 
Dunsany's AT THE EDGE OF THE 
WORLD, rare short stories, and each 
one a delight. With the added plus of 
Lin Carter's Introduction and biography. Lin has also discovered a real 
gem in Hope Mirrlees' LUD-IN-THEMIST. We have been unable to find 
this lady and very little is available 
from standard records. Someone 
must have information about an author of such charm and ingenuity as 
this— so whoever you are, please 
communicate with us. 
• 
FOR science fiction this month, our 
favorite Irish dramatic soprano, 
Anne McCaffrey, and THE SHIP 
WHO SANG. A wow of a book. You've 
all read pieces of it. Here is the whole 
fiery history of Helva, a glorious 
creature (who, by the way, has the 
endorsement, of the Medical World 
News— fairly rocked the AMA). Also 
in March, if you are nimble, you'll be 
able to find displays of three John 
Brunner titles, THE WHOLE MAN, 
ALLISON, CARMICHAEL AND TATTERSALL 
THE SQUARES OF THE CITY and 
THE LONG RESULT, Also look for, 
demand and buy Poul Anderson's 
classic novel BRAIN WAVE and his 
grand collection GUARDIANS OF 
TIME. 
«. 
• 
AND NOW, at last, other people (outside of the ever alert science-fiction 
field, that is) have become aware that 
the planet is in an ecological crisis. 
April will see an ecological teach-in. 
Support it. In Ballantine's Conservation Series (actually our Survival 
Series, but until now you couldn't 
come right out and say so— like who 
wants to know how to survive, no?) 
we are releasing THE PERILS OF 
THE PEACEFUL ATOM. The rest of 
the list presently includes THE POPULATION BOMB, SST : The Sonic 
Book Handbook, THE FRAIL 
OCEAN, MOMENT IN THE SUN and 
of course our text on the ecological 
teach-in with the unlikely title of THE 
FIRST ANNUAL ENVIRONMENTAL HANDBOOK, or possibly THE 
HANDBOOK FOR THE FIRST ENVIRONMENTAL TEACH-IN; both 
strike us as marvelously unwieldy. 
Or it may end up being just E-DAY or 
THE E-DAY TEACH-IN. In any case 
it will have been on the stands a while 
by the time you read this. A Ballantine Friends of the Earth Book, at 
95c. Watch for it. And watch out for 
your planet. BB 
He grinned as he added: “I’ve just 
had a gentle scolding from Earth 
Control. They’ve been trying to 
talk to us for two days. They seem 
to think someone should be available for contact at all times.” 
“Why?” asked Allison. 
“They didn’t say,” said Tattersall. “May 1 see the screen?” 
The dark surface was different 
now, with blips large and small, 
some in regular patterns and many 
jumbled in no detectable arrangement. 
“I’ve raised my sights,” Allison 
explained. “Nothing subatomic 
showing now. Everything you see 
is at least molecular in size. But 
the variety is so great the picture’s 
not very analyzable. Carmichael 
put counters on some of the commoner items but it soon was evident what they were — so he lost 
interest.” 
“Blips the same size don’t behave alike,” Tattersall pointed out. 
Long experience watching details 
of ant activity had sharpened his 
awareness of minutiae. “If there 
were some easy way to tell them 
apart, your counting could be 
done on a much enlarged scale.” 
“How about color?” Allison 
suggested. “There’s a spectroscopic arrangement I might make 
that would, I hope, distinguish. If 
I can pick it up, putting the color 
on the screen would be a cinch.” 
H E WENT back to the ants. But 
he didn’t have his usual con
centration. He found his mind 
wandering back to Allison’s screen 
with its endless variety and fluctuating concentrations and patterns 
of little flashes of light. He wondered if closer observation, the 
kind a student of limited ecosystems could make, would extract any further profit from Allison’s detection skills. He watched 
ants for a day, then gave up. 
Allison had been busy. Not only 
had he changed and modified the 
emphases of his detectors but he 
had set up another screen, one that 
occupied almost one entire wall of 
the little lab. And it was a marvel 
of colored blips and clusters of 
lights, moving and whirling and 
flowing in dozens of simultaneous 
patterns. 
“This one gives perspective,” 
Allison explained. “The scale is 
smaller, the area much larger. It is 
concerned only with molecular 
clusters, which makes the situation 
less complex. Any questionable 
area can be examined in subatomic detail by the more refined sets of 
sensors which utilize the smaller 
screen.” 
“High and low power.” Tattersall grinned. “That’s as far as I 
can follow you. But the movement 
on the big screen is practically 
hypnotic, now you’ve got color. 
Mind if I watch a while?” 
Allison waved a hand, 
“Feel free,” he said. “Watch 
’em both. Have a ball. I think I’ve 
revealed all the matter that’s out 
there, but so what? I make no organized sense out of what I see.” 
“There’s order,” Taltersall said. 
“That’s apparent.” 
“To you, maybe,” Allison said, 
“Ye-es,” Tatlersall agreed. 
“Maybe to me. Thai’s why I’d better look on.” 
He spent two Earth days looking on. For a while he and Allison 
talked but gradually each withdrew 
into his own area of concern. Allison ever more preoccupied with 
the intricacies of his sensor complexes, Tattersall just watching — 
watching. Even the ants had never 
been like this. 
Carmichael brought them back 
to general awareness. 
“Earth Control is in an uproar,” 
he reported. 
“Ah,” Tattersall said. “We 
weren’t available for verbal communication again. I guess we’ll 
have to watch it.” 
“Worse. They say we’re losing 
fuel.” 
“How?” Allison reluctantly left 
his sensor controls. “We’re not 
under drive. No maintenance 
systems are malfunctioning. We’d 
have had the alarm.” 
“They know how,” Carmichael 
said, “but not why.” 
“Let’s start with how,” Tattersall suggested. 
’’You know the timonium disintegration pattern. The only 
residue is ionized krypton. When 
this exceeds the pressure deter
ALLISON, CARMICHAEL AND TATTERSALL 
mined as optimum in the bleedoff chamber, the krypton ions are 
released as a trickle and the lowered pressure in the chamber initiates more timonium breakdown. 
The energy so derived is stored 
in the battery banks. Lowering of 
their charges can also trigger more 
fuel utilization.” 
“There have been no excess energy needs in the systems?” 
“None. Utilization is exactly as 
predetermined.” 
“So?” 
“Krypton ions are being drawn 
from the bleed-off chamber,” Carmichael reported gravely. “I didn’t 
believe it but I programed all the 
data and Computer Three says the 
same thing.” 
“How fast?” Allison inquired. 
“Appreciable,” Carmichael said. 
“We couldn’t stand it for too long. 
We’ve lost almost two ounces of 
timonium.” 
“Where's the energy going? Two 
ounces of timonium would take 
our happy home here halfway to 
the asteroids.” 
“The battery banks can’t overcharge, as you know. So the excess 
energy is being released as provided for in Emergency Pattern A. 
We’ve been trailing a streamer of 
light like a nova. We can be seen 
on Earth.” 
“Man, oh, man,” Tattersall 
murmured. “What was that again 
about anticipating everything?” 
“Even anticipation is based on 
data,” Carmichael said. “We had 
no basis for anticipating this.” 
“Evidently not. We’ve got to 
solve it, though. Pronto. What’s 
happening to the krypton?” 
“That,” Carmichael said, “is 
the question they pay off on.” 
#. 
T HE spaceship Albatross hurtled on toward the asteroids, 
all its systems doing their jobs 
normally, the habitat of the Callistonauts still exactly as it had 
been planned. But a fantastic cone 
of waste light energy flared out 
behind it. 
Then, without warning or apparent reason, the krypton trickle reduced to expected volume and 
slowly the light died. 
“You’ve lost your tail,” Earth 
Control reported. “Your fuel is 
now normal and there is no energy loss. We can’t detect malfunction or change of rate of anything 
on the ship. You seem to have a 
problem we can’t help you with — 
but there isn’t at this moment any 
evidence of its existence. You are 
completely Go, without any reservations.” 
“We’re out here to learn.” Carmichael was at the microphone. 
“Maybe we were already getting a 
little dull. You’ll be happier, 
though. There’ll be a man on duty 
in Control until we hatch this egg. 
So you can have a chat with us 
anytime.” 
“Nice of you,” said Earth Control. 
Back in Allison’s lab, Tattersall 
wondered aloud. 
“Why,” he asked, “didn’t your 
sensors pick up all that light? We 
seem to have been the last to 
know.” 
Allison showed his even teeth. 
“I can imagine the talk. The answer is obvious. We’re not adjusted for so-called pure energy. We 
were looking at matter. The small 
screen can show the krypton 
trickle, though. Watch. 
In a moment the trailing, wavering series of blips showed on 
the small screen. Each spread, 
grew dim, then vanished beyond 
the focus of the sensors. 
Tattersall sat and studied them. 
After an hour he said, “Could 
you readjust the large screen to include particles this small? How 
about color?” 
“Might do.” 
Allison worked, the big screen 
panorama shifted. Tattersall 
watched with an inhuman, endless 
patience. Finally the pattern of the 
krypton trickle on the small screen 
duplicated itself in the corner of 
the larger as a faint series of purple 
dots. And Tattersall gave the display his fixed, fascinated attention. 
At last he sank back with a sigh. 
“There’s more krypton in the 
environment out there,” he observed. “Not ionized, though. We 
aren’t making the only contribution. Where else would it come 
from?” 
“No idea. It’s normally inert, of 
course. Only something unusual, 
as timonium disintegration, can 
produce it in ionized form.” 
“The purple is due to it,” Tattersail pointed out. “Change the larger screen to molecular aggregates 
again. Give me a smaller scale, a 
wider area, more perspective.” 
He seemed unaware that he was 
giving an order. He was talking to 
Allison, but Allison knew that as a 
person he did not at that moment 
exist. He was only an extension of 
Tattersall’s thinking, a datagathering device. He grinned with 
appreciation as he made the requested adjustments. 
“Ah-h!” The ant-watcher’s long 
form settled back in his chair. It 
was his last word for six hours. 
When he was convinced that 
Tattersall had retired into a 
thought world of his own, Allison 
left him. Carmichael, in the computer room, was willing to be disturbed. They discussed the fuel 
loss problem; Tattersall’s preoccupation with the detection 
screens; the reasonableness of 
Earth Control’s insistence on continually available voice communication. Finally they gravitated to 
the game cubicle and launched a 
new tick-tack-toe series, which 
they agreed would continue, with 
interruptions for essentials like 
work, rest and food, until they 
passed the first asteroid. The 
winner at this point would be officially designated as champion of 
the Inner Planets. 
A WEEK later all was still well. 
Mars now loomed larger in the 
viewports than Earth. There had 
been no resumption of ihe fuel 
loss. Earth Control was almost 
happy, for voice communication 
with the Albatross had been scheduled for specific time slots and so 
far every one had been met. Actually Carmichael and Allison had 
simplified this situation by installing a brilliantly flashing attention 
light, an alarm buzzer and a microphone in the game cubicle. They 
could thus conform to the schedule 
with minimum distraction from 
the games. They did, however, 
firmly negate the one activity that 
would have filled the cup of Earth 
Control to overflowing. They 
steadily refused to do public 
broadcasts. 
“We’ve passed this stage years 
ago,” Carmichael summed it up 
with finality. “We’re the Callistonauts, not show business personalities. We explore. We collect 
data. We do not entertain.” 
And from this point of view 
they would not budge. 
They did not forget about Tattersall but they respected his privacy. Apparently he spent most of 
the week in the chair before Allison’s screens but he was seen several times in the corridors. He 
probably ate and no doubt napped 
in the chair. The last time Allison 
checked his equipment, Tattersall 
was busily making line sketches, 
one after another, using a small 
ALLISON, CARMICHAEL AND TATTERSALL 
lap board. Allison was curious but 
he waited. Tattersall would doubtless report eventually. 
And he did. 
He appeared at the game cubicle 
door just after an Earth Control 
voice check. Allison and Carmichael wete between games. 
“Request a conference,” Tattersall said. 
His fellow Callistonauts looked 
him over. 
“When did you eat last?” Allison inquired. “You do look 
seedy.” 
“Why — ” Tattersall paused and 
thought. “I don’t know. Must 
have, though. I don’t feel weak.” 
“That’s not the way I tell.” Carmichael patted his growing paunch. 
“Why don’t we have a meal while 
we confer?” 
He got no negatives, so they 
shifted to the dining area. 
“I like breakfasts best,” Tattersall remarked and punched for 
scrambled eggs, bacon, toast and 
orange juice. The last item 
wouldn’t deliver until he specified, 
so he selected California, at random. 
“Dinner time for me,” Carmichael said and had a steak and 
trimmings. 
“I’ll just have a green salad,” 
Allison decided. “I’m over on 
my protein intake.” 
“How can you remember?” 
Tattersall sounded envious of this 
remarkable ability. 
He expected no answer to his 
question and got none. He sighed. 
“Now,” Carmichael said, with 
the expansiveness that a good 
steak induced, “what’s the conference about?” 
They all had coffee and were 
leaning back, more relaxed than 
anyone on Earth would have believed possible. 
Tattersall had brought a small 
sheaf of his sketches, which he now 
began to shuffle. 
“The topic is appropriate,”, he 
said. “Food.” He looked considerably better after his breakfast, 
which, once his attention had been 
called to it, he had obviously enjoyed. He patted the sketches. 
“Food chains, I suppose, 
would be more specific. I’m well 
on my way to working out several 
simple ones.” 
“You haven’t watched ants for 
a week,” Allison pointed out. 
“You’ve been living in front of my 
matter screens. No other life 
there, I thiiik.” 
“That’s why we’re meeting,” 
Tattersall said. “There is.” 
He slouched in his chair, drank 
coffee and shuffled the sketch papers. 
“You remember my hypothesis,” he went on. “You listened, 
you liked it, it made sense, but you 
didn’t really believe it. Carmichael 
played around with possible atomic affinities. Allison surveyed the 
space we’re going through but 
neither of you were thinking in 
life terms. 1 was.” 
Ill 
He held up a sketch, 
“What would you say this is?” 
he asked. 
Allison and Carmichael examined it closely, passed it from 
hand to hand. 
“Well?” prodded Tattersall. 
“There isn’t a kindergarten 
within thirty million miles,” Carmichael said, “so you must have 
done that yourself. But as art it 
doesn’t rank high.” 
Tattersall grinned. 
“As a diagram, it’s better. That 
is the commonest matter aggregate in the space around us. Those 
seven interlinked clusters occur in 
exactly that relationship. They are, 
compared to other arrangements 
I’ve isolated, quite small, and they 
exist in countless millions. They’re 
the predominant unit on your big 
screen, Allison.” 
He waited and finally Allison 
said, “Carry on! Spin it out! 
You’ve got a repeating pattern and 
how you picked it out I don’t 
know but we were sure that 
there would be lots of similar 
units. Where’s the life?” 
“That item you’re looking at,” 
Tattersall said impressively, “is 
what I’ve tentatively called a diatom. A space diatom. It can replicate itself and I predict that it’ll 
be found to be energy-rich. How it 
gets the energy, how it holds it, I 
don’t know. Probably one of you 
will tell me. But there’s a space 
plankton out there and that’s the 
basic form in it.” 
T O THE Callistonauls any point 
of view, any datum, was considered on its merits. That was 
among the reasons they had been 
chosen. So Allison and Carmichael didn’t laugh. They thought. 
“Diatoms are eaten,” Carmichael said. “They form the food 
base of many larger forms. Does 
something eat those?” 
Tattersall shuffled, handed over 
several sketches. 
“Those eat them.” 
“The art’s no better,” Allison 
commented. “The idea, though, is 
fascinating. These are bigger, naturally.” 
“The scale’s indicated on each,” 
said Tattersall. “I’ve used the diatom as the basic size unit.” 
“You’ve measured?” Carmichael seized on an interest. 
“Actually, no. Everything’s relative. Direct comparison. I was 
depending on you to measure the 
diatom for me. If I were guessing, 
I’d say well under a hundred yards 
in greatest dimension.” 
“Then the larger forms are miles 
long?” 
“Consider how diffuse they are. 
Hundreds of miles is more likely. 
There’s plenty of space.” 
The Callistonauts sat silently, 
thinking. Finally, Allison: “I’m 
glad Earth Control isn’t listening,” 
he said. “They’d abort the mission 
and haul us back to be tucked 
safely away in padded quarters. 
ALLISON, CARMICHAEL AND TATTERSALL 
Have you lengthened the food 
chain?” 
Tattersall held out another 
sketch. 
“This is really big and incredibly 
fast. On your screen it looks like a 
boat outlined with colored lights 
plowing along in a dark ocean. In 
its path all these other units disintegrate. I’d say it is sort of a generalized carnivore.” 
“Abundant?” 
“No, quite rare. Only occasionally more than one on the screen at 
a time. I haven’t been able to diagram it well. They’re always far off 
in the distance.” 
“Afraid of little old Albatross ?” 
scoffed Carmichael. “Why, it’s not 
much bigger than a diatom!” 
“I don’t know why,” Tattersall 
said patiently. “I only know I 
haven’t had one very close.” 
Allison stood up abruptly. 
“Let’s look. I’d almost forgotten that we weren’t listening to a 
fairy tale. You’ve only had the 
screen at one adjustment. You 
haven’t scratched the possibilities 
of those sensor banks.” 
It took time. But they were fed, 
rested and challenged. Once Tattersall was able to show them the 
diatom, the rest was easy. And 
when a diatom, brought up close 
and carefully tracked, divided 
while they watched, they finally 
had no remaining doubts. That 
empty space in the view ports, all 
that endless distance, actually 
teemed with life. In one week of 
dedicated staring at a screen, an 
ant-watcher had given a new 
meaning to space biology. 
M ARS finally lay behind them. 
Ahead the first of the asteroids 
swam into the view ports as tiny, 
twinkling dots of light. But they 
went almost unnoticed. At the 
screens Allison probed, Carmichael measured and calculated 
abundance and distribution, Tattersall read organization into new 
light clusters and sketched new life 
forms. And once again Earth Control had trouble making voice contact. The crew of the Albatross had 
no time for routine. It was working. 
Occasionally Carmichael remembered and checked the control 
room for ominous signs. One day 
he found them. The entire fuel-use 
panel glittered with red lights and 
Earth Control was making frantic 
signals. Carmichael brought them 
in. 
“You’re losing fuel,” Earth 
Control reported. The voice 
sounded resigned. “Situation exactly as before. You’ve broken 
down an extra ounce and a half 
of timonium and your waste light 
cone has obliterated our view of 
Mars. Please check and report.” 
“You have every indicator we 
have,” Carmichael reminded 
Earth. “Let’s compare each checklist.” 
He started to repeat them from 
memory as was his custom, then 
stopped. 
“Wait,” he directed. “There’s 
one thing I can do. I’ll call you in 
an hour. Out.” 
A few crisp sentences oriented 
Allison and Tattersall. Allison 
swung the focus of his sensor 
banks toward the rear of the space 
craft, adjusted for subatomic particles and, where he had earlier 
been able to demonstrate the trickle of krypton ions, a steady purple 
stream now flowed across the 
screen. Allison increased the focal 
depth, watched the ions spread, 
swiftly cluster with other, different 
particles, and form large, shadowy 
blue aggregates. These thinned out 
with ever-increasing distance, arranged themselves in widespread 
patterns with aggregates glowing 
yellow and pink and green. And 
while the men looked, the krypton 
flow slowed to a trickle. Allison 
worked rapidly to decrease his 
magnification to the level of molecular clusters. The eyes of the 
watchers, now adjusted to the outlines of diaphanous space creatures, saw a form of unbelievable 
vastness slowly drop astern. 
“Smallest scale, deepest focus,” 
urged Tattersall. 
It was enough. 
The great shape, faintly limned 
with electron discharge, swung 
sidewise, paralleled the course of 
the A Ibalross and kept pace. 
It seemed to loom but Carmichael, calculating, said, “Six mil
lion miles, give or take a few, to the 
nearer edge. One hundred sixty 
thousand miles long. I think it's 
aware of us.” 
“It should be,” Tattersall said 
quietly. “It swallowed us.” 
Allison and Carmichael viewed 
their lanky coworker with some 
admiration. This was objectivity, 
plus. Tattersall was not impressed 
by the incredibility of his statement. He simply knew that it was 
so. 
“We’ve been immersed in Galactic gastric juice?” Carmichael 
was not jeering. 
“IUOT exactly,” said Tattersall. 
*"“As a matter complex it’s not 
likely that the ship is within its 
frame of reference at all. We’re too 
dense, like a meteor or an asteroid. 
No, the life form responded to 
what it could detect and utilize.” 
“The krypton trickle!” Allison 
exclaimed. 
“Exactly. We could see the ions 
form complexes, form molecules. 
Krypton is one of its nutrients, one 
of its ‘tissue’ components. Probably in the environment of that entity out there such dainties as our 
fuel residue are hard to come by.” 
They sat and studied the screen 
showing the scarcely visible but 
still obvious monster undulating 
majestically along, the clouds of 
lesser forms boiling around it and 
swirling and churning in its wake. 
“Leviathan.” Allison spoke the 
name with feeling. “Trite, but all 
ALLISON, CARMICHAEL AND TATTERSALL 
I can think of. At one hundred 
sixty thousand miles long, gentlemen, that is one big varmint!” 
Carmichael said. “We're impressed by dimension, not mass. 1 
would guess that if old Leviathan 
were concentrated to our density 
he'd be about the si/e of a chihuahua." 
“Whereas you,” Tattersall 
picked it up, “if you were diluted 
to his ” he eyed the Carmichael 
paunch “would probably extend 
out beyond the orbit of Saturn." 
"An exaggeration,” Carmichael 
said placidly. “But it does illustrate the point." 
They all grinned. As would be 
expected, each had an immense 
feeling of satisfaction, of well-being. 
“We have opened a door," Allison said. “We have two immediate problems, though. One, what 
can we tell Earth Control? And 
two, how are we going to make old 
Leviathan keep his bill out of our 
fuel supply? Even if we could afford to feed him, which we can’t, 
he may have friends." 
“Probably has,” Carmichael 
agreed. “But Earth Control first. I 
promised to call them in an hour. 
That was three hours ago.” 
“Space exploration is an unconventional activity,” Tattersall said. 
“They’ll just have to realize that.” 
Both matters were discussed at 
length. To Carmichael, as probably 
the best contact man of the three, 
was finally delegated the job of 
ALLISON, CARMICHAEL AND TATTERSALL 
placating Earth Control. 
“Snow them,” Allison urged. 
“Tell them how hard we're working on the problem. Don't be handicapped by the truth. They 
wouldn’t believe it anyway.” 
P ERHAPS it was due to the validity of the complex series of 
analyses by which the Callistonauts were chosen. Accidental 
compatibility of personalities 
could have been responsible. The 
concrete occurrence of the fuel 
drain may have contributed. Or 
maybe it was just plain blind luck. 
But by the time the Albatross 
went plunging into the asteroid 
belt three brilliant, eccentric individuals had coalesced into a team 
— the fabulous team your space 
history records: Allison, Carmichael and Tattersall. 
The preoccupation of each with 
his own concerns gradually disappeared. They had problems in 
common, problems toward the 
solutions of which each could 
make unique contributions. The 
ants lived their lives almost without supervision. There was little 
time for tick-tack-toe. 
The practical situations among 
the asteroids kept them for a time 
from the diffuse matter screens. 
The first computer was constantly 
activating avoidance patterns and 
had reduced the finite speed of the 
vessel by half. The tiny planets 
were continually in sight. Meteor 
nets seined space around the space 
ship. Cameras recorded on miles 
of microlape and the telescopes 
probed without ceasing. 
All these activities and maneuvers required energy. 
“Dodging and recording all this 
flying real estate,” Tattersall said, 
“is increasing our krypton trickle. 
What happens when you throw 
bread out the back of the boat?” 
“You get followed,” Allison 
said promptly. “Everything from 
gulls to sharks. Let’s look.” 
The space biome seemed unaffected by the many little islands 
of dense matter. Plankton swarmed. The diatoms, and several forms 
much like them, jogged across the 
colored matter in endless profusion. Larger entities darted 
through them, scooping them up, 
yet seeming to have no effect on 
their numbers. And off in the distance, in his usual location off the 
port bow, Leviathan wallowed 
along with grotesque ease. 
Allison changed the orientation 
of his sensors, surveying space in 
every direction. There were new 
forms, just as there had been every 
observation session. He looked 
most carefully in the sector to the 
rear of the Albatross. Far back in 
the space wake, leisurely zig-zagging, a foreshortened hulk of fantastic size came on steadily. 
“Another Leviathan type,” 
whispered Tattersall. 
“He’s gleaning,” Allison said. 
“He doesn’t know where the stuff 
is originating.” 
“When he catches us he’ll 
sponge a free meal. Goodbye two 
more ounces of timonium!” 
“Suppose Leviathan detects 
him? There’s no reason why the 
territorial imperative can’t pertain 
out here, is there? This is Leviathan’s bailiwick. Why shouldn’t 
he defend it? With his size he needs 
a really big territory.” 
Tattersall sighed happily. 
“This beats ants four ways from 
Sunday,” he said. 
“Don’t sell ’em short,” Carmichael advised. “You trained on 
ants.” 
W ITHIN an hour the vast bulk 
of Leviathan II filled the color 
screen and overwhelmed it. The 
familiar outlines of the many 
known space forms gave way to 
alien groups and smudges, swirling 
and roiling in new and different 
patterns. 
“We’re inside,” Tattersall pronounced. “He has swallowed us.” 
Allison pinched himself. 
“I don’t feel any different.” 
“Look at the krypton trickle. I’ll 
bet it’s a river.” 
Allison adjusted the finer sensor 
banks. The purple stream rippled 
and pulsed. 
“Our waste light cone is bugging Earth again but don’t contact 
’em. Let ’em wail. How can we get 
this thing off us? Or how can we 
get out? It may have a bigger appetite than Leviathan the First has 
shown. This could get serious.” 
“Look at the screen!” Carmichael exclaimed. 
The patterns were suddenly familiar again. Diatoms, space 
amoebae, other plankton and the 
many forms that fed on them and 
on each other, all were back — but 
in a stale of wild disorder. 
“Smallest scale, deepest focus,” 
Tattersall urged breathlessly. 
Allison worked. 
Far in the distance two vast 
forms swung around each other 
in a swift and sinuous dance, flashing across millions of miles of 
space as they feinted and parried 
like fighting porpoises. They came 
together with impact that seemed 
to blend theirdiaphanous outlines, 
then boundedawaywith forms unimpaired. 
“Sic 'im, Leviathan!” Carmichael whooped. “You can handle him! You’ve trained on the 
best krypton!” 
It was a brief battle. One monster made a wide sweep — then, instead of closing the circle, it kept 
on going. In minutes it was out of 
range, completely undetectable. 
“But who won?” Allison asked 
plaintively. “They looked exactly 
alike.” 
“Doesn’t really matter,” said 
Tattersall soothingly, “but if it’ll 
make you feel better, that’s our old 
friend out there. A dog generally 
wins the fights in his own yard. 
And look where he’s positioning 
himself.” 
, The huge outline was again in 
ALLISON, CARMICHAEL AND TATTERSALL 
convoy position, plunging along 
far off the port bow, pacing without effort the twenty-five-thousand-mile-an-hour speed of the 
Albatross. 
“He’s not about to be ousted,” 
Tattersall said. “He knows we give 
krypton ions.” 
“Maybe I’ll grant that.” Carmichael looked only mildly dubious. “He’s still a problem, isn’t 
he? He won’t be content to sniff 
the fragrance. He’ll be back for 
another feed. And another. And 
another. He keeps off others — but 
we can’t afford him.” 
“I’ve been thinking,” Allison 
said slowly. “If he can be attracted, it follows that he can be 
repelled. Rats learn from mild 
electric shocks. Dogs won’t eat 
food with pepper. You follow?” 
“You want to teach him no-nol 
I’m sympathetic. But how?” 
“Feed him something he doesn’t 
like.” 
Tattersall chuckled. 
“You have an idea,” he said, 
“but you’ve created another problem. What doesn’t he like?” 
“You’ve watched the life 
forms,” Allison pointed out. “You 
discovered them, discovered their 
behavior. But I’ve looked more 
closely at their compositions. I’ve 
identified a number of atomic and 
subatomic particles out there. And 
many that are common to large 
aggregates, to suns and planets 
and asteroids, are missing in open 
space. We’ve got pure elements. 
Let’s feed him a small dose of one 
not a part of his structure or his 
environment.” 
“Oxygen?” Tattersall’s eyes 
gleamed. “It’s active, we can release it in minute amounts and it 
might make a nice paradoxical irritant. No life we’ve previously 
known can exist without it. But I 
seem to remember that it isn’t 
found in practical quantities in 
space.” 
F OR the first time the crew of 
the Albatross grew impatient 
as it waited. It had baited a trap 
and the quarry would not come in. 
Between stints in the control room 
Allison and Carmichael played 
space chess but neither cared who 
won. Tattersall alternated between 
his ants and Allison’s screen, 
where Leviathan rolled tranquilly 
along his chosen track, day after 
Earth day. 
“Krypton must just be dessert,” 
Tattersall decided, “He really 
doesn’t need us.” 
But their monster-watch came to 
an end, as it had to. Tattersall saw 
him as he peeled off, swung in a 
million-mile circle and dropped in 
behind the Albatross, following up 
the spreading ions of the krypton 
trickle. Allison and Carmichael 
left a game unfinished. 
Leviathan came on steadily. The 
space life boiled away from his 
snout, then the screen no longer 
showed it asheengulfed the spaceship and speeded up the trickle of 
the appetizing krypton. 
“We’re inside,” exclaimed Allison. 
“Here goes,” Carmichael said 
and pressed a release button. 
The tiny jet of oxygen would 
not have sustained a mouse for a 
minute but the colors on the screen 
rioted. In an instant the swarming plankton were visible again, 
roiled and lashed as by a typhoon. 
Allison worked swiftly, deepening 
the focus of the senior banks. 
Far off fo the sunside of the little ship Leviathan flung himself 
about with frantic abandon, 
swapping ends like a bucking 
horse, probably creating untold 
havoc among the packed shoals of 
lesser life. Three pairs of human 
eyes stared in fascination. 
“Look well, gentlemen,” Carmichael said in a hushed tone. 
“Never, I think, will you see a 
more colossal case of celestial 
belly-ache.” 
An asteroid, one of the largest 
they had recorded, lay directly in 
the path of the plunging, writhing 
monster. The little world, its sunside glittering, was not obscured 
and had no effect as it drifted 
through the diffuse mass from end 
to end. Miles in diameter, it was 
nothing Leviathan could detect, 
nothing of which he could be 
aware. 
“On through like an aspirin 
tablet,” Carmichael said with awe. 
“Fellow dreamers, how are we going to comraunicate what we have 
seen on that screen? Who will believe in the space biome? We can’t 
record it.” 
“Not yet,” Allison said, “but we 
will. As l see it, Callisto and the 
Jovian complex have become secondary for us. We’re the first space 
ecologists. Our job is and will be to 
analyze the life between worlds, the 
life between suns.” 
Tattersall nodded his rough 
head slowly. 
“We’ve got the biggest ecosystem of all,” he agreed. “We’ve 
got the Universe!” ♦ 
DISCOVER 
A LATENT 
Green Earth was a memory — and 
memories were not for builders 
I 
S WITCH and Cockade were 
talking together in the ice corridors. 
“I don’t like it,” Switch was 
muttering nervously, his forefinger tracing abstract patterns on 
the roughly hewn walls of the tunnel. 
“What can we do?" 
Cockade held the lamp which re
flected infinities in the ice around 
them. Her voice echoed shrill and 
hollow. 
“I don’t know what the hell we 
can do except just get out.” 
They were walking again; the 
corridor widened, although Switch 
was still obliged to stoop. Weirdly 
refracted through thin ice, the 
giant word SUPERMARKET 
danced in the glow of Cockade’s 
lamp. 
“Why don't we, then?” flesh hunters would get us, right 
“Two of us —alone?” away.” 
She was stacking cans on a “Not if we took Jacko’s snowrough sledge while Switch chipped boat.” Her voice was sly. 
at the shelves with his pick. The “Just take it? Just sail it away, 
lamp was on the floor, smoking you mean?” 
black. “Yes.” 
“Just the two of us? We “I’m not sure I know how.” 
wouldn’t stand a chance.” He “I do.” She looked smug, 
paused in his work to watch her “Sometimes he took me hunting 
face hopefully. Maybe they would with him. Before you came, that is. 
stand a chance. Maybe. “The I can sail it quite easily.” 
DISCOVER A LATENT MOSES 
“What about Jacko and the 
others?” Switch was experiencing a 
belated twinge of conscience. 
“What will they do? How will they 
manage for meat?” 
“There’s plenty down here.” 
“Yes, built’s not fresh. I t’s been 
here for years and years. It’s good 
to have fresh meat sometimes. I 
wonder if Jacko had any luck today.” 
His broad face lightened with 
anticipation. 
“Don’t you want to get away?” 
She leaned toward him, eyes narrowed. “Do you want to stay? Is 
that it?” 
“It’s not loo bad here.” 
“Look — ” She raised her hand 
before his face, fingers spread, 
ticking off points. “The flesh hunters know we’re here. The Old Man 
won’t leave. Jacko won’t leave 
without the Old Man. Shrug and 
Paladin won’t leave without Jacko. 
Soon the flesh hunters will come 
and we won't stand a chance. 
Don’t you see, Switch? We’ve got 
to move on.” 
The sledge was fully loaded 
now. They began to pull it back 
along the ice corridor. Two human 
beings — the man dressed in a skindiving suit with a tweed jacket over 
the top, the woman in Wellington 
boots and a sable coat. Trudging 
along the blue-silver ice tunnel, 
dragging a sledge stacked with 
canned food from an entombed 
supermarket. 
“We’ve got to move on,” re
peated Cockade her voice urgent. 
T HE Old Man was talking to 
Shrug and Paladin in the bell 
tower. 
“I’ve seen them all.” His voice 
issued piping from misshapen lips. 
“Cattle, sheep, pigs, goats, horses 
— domestic animals, they called 
them. Milk, wool, fresh meal 
whenever you wanted. You 
wanted fresh because you had run 
out? You killed a domestic animal. 
Except horses.” He shook his head 
sagely. “You didn’t eat horses.” 
“Why did you keep them?” 
asked Paladin. 
“To ride. You rode them across 
the fields, along the roads, hoofs 
clattering, galloping, the wind 
singing in your face, the hoofs 
beating time.” 
The Old Man’s skin was flushed, 
like raw chewed leather. His eyes, 
shining, far away, looked across 
sixty years. 
The old fool will have another 
turn unless he takes it easy, 
thought Shrug in the corner, taking 
another swig of Harvey’s Merienda from the dark bottle. 
“Didn’t the horses hoofs sink 
in?” asked Paladin eagerly. 
He was about twenty-six, palefaced and intense, a dreamer. The 
Old Man’s words lent his dreams 
shape and substance. 
“Of course not. There wasn’t 
any snow, not then. Only in winter, that is. No. The land was firm 
so you could walk on it, like this 
floor. All these buildings joined by 
tunnels — once they stood firm on 
the land, open to the sky. There 
was no snow. Only in winter, that 
is. Then the snow would lie a foot 
thick, at most two feet — and when 
you waded through it you could 
feel the land solid beneath.” 
Shrug, listening, shivered, remembering his last trip Up Top. 
Jacko had taken him in the snowboat to hunt Pads and a gust of 
wind had capsized the vessel. He 
had sunk into the powdery snow, 
thrashing with his legs in search for 
a footing and finding none. The 
snow was up to his shoulders before Jacko, spreadeagled on 
boards, had reached him and 
dragged him to safety. That was 
the last time he had gone Up Top. 
The experience had led to a recurrent dream which tortured him 
on the days when Switch forgot to 
bring liquor back from the Wine 
Lodge. Again he had fallen into 
the snow but this time Jacko was 
nowhere near. As he sank, shouting, his feet touched something 
and he thought, I'm saved. It was 
the roof of the Wine Lodge, a 
mere five feet below the surface. 
But the roof was steeply pitched 
and slippery and Shrug’s feet, although performing the motions of 
running, could not obtain purchase. For minutes he ran up the 
slates while all the time his feet 
were losing ground and he was 
slipping deeper, deeper into the 
snow. He was screaming. 
He usually woke at this point to 
find one of the others slapping his 
face and shouting at him but it always took him some time to recall 
where he was. He was glad to see 
the others, although they were annoyed at being disturbed by his 
yelling. 
But suppose, one day, they 
didn’t wake him up. 
He took another drink and 
looked around the small bell tower, timber-strutted and comfortable. Against one wall was nailed 
a ladder leading to the hole in the 
spire Up Top, where Jacko went. 
There was a square hole in the 
floor beside his mattress and a 
flight of steps leading down to the 
ice tunnels. Life was simple and 
straightforward in the bell tower. 
The Old Man was still talking^ 
he was always talking. 
“There were the cars, too, and 
the trains and the airplanes, carrying you fast and safe, much better 
than the snowboat. They didn’t 
rely on the wind — they had their 
own power, built in. I used to go to 
car races sometimes. The Monaco 
Grand Prix — that was a sight. Cars 
weaving in and out between the 
houses like wheeled rockets, their 
exhaust noise bouncing from the 
buildings like bombs. The drivers 
were princes, the winner a crowned 
king.” 
Paladin sighed. His eyes burned. 
“I should have liked to have 
been a racing driver,” he whispered, hands crooked around the 
D I SCO V E R A L AT ENT MOS E S 
wheel the Old Man had pictured 
for him so many times. “I would 
have won — they would have 
crowned me King Paladin. There 
would never have been a driver like 
me.” 
Shrug laughed harshly from his 
corner then listened, cocking his 
head. 
“Quiet,” said softly. “I think 
they’re coming.” 
A regular thumping could be 
heard, the familiar sound of Switch 
and Cockade dragging their sledge 
up the stairs, punctuated by the occasional rattle as a can slid over 
the backplate and went tumbling 
back down. Next, a scraping as 
they reached the floor below and 
pulled their load over to the stockpile — then the clack-clack of unloading and restacking. 
Presently Cockade’s head appeared, disembodied, through the 
hole at floor level. 
“One of these days you lazy 
bastards might come and give us a 
hand,” she shrilled, heaving herself 
through the hatch and sprawling on 
the dirty floor. 
Switch arrived next, glancing 
guiltily at the others and lying 
down beside her. 
“What did ' you get?” asked 
Shrug anxiously, misinterpreting 
Switch’s sheepish look. 
Without replying Switch handed 
him a bottle, which he examined in 
the light of the lamp Cockade had 
placed on the floor. 
“Tonic Wine,” he said, recog
nizing the label without reading it. 
“What the hell did you bring this 
junk for?” 
He uncorked the bottle and 
drank. 
“Long way to the Wine Lodge,” 
explained Switch briefly. “There’s 
been a fall,” he added as an afterthought. “We had to get what we 
could from the Supermarket.” 
“A fall?” Shrug was alarmed. 
“It’ll have to be cleared.” 
“You volunteering?” asked 
Cockade sharply. 
A potentially awkward situation 
was averted by a sudden fading of 
the light. A figure was backing 
clumsily through the gaping hole in 
the spire, feet feeling for the ladder. Jacko was home. 
“Flesh hunters,” Jacko said. 
I ’D SHOW them,” Paladin 
shouted, feet clattering on the 
wooden floor as he capered, his 
shadow dancing on the walls. “I’d 
mow them down, whoosh, whoosh, 
one after the other — ” He brandished a broken lath, cutting and 
slashing, driving his imaginary 
opponent to the wall and dispatching him with a thrust to the gut. 
“Take that, you swine — ” 
“Whereabouts?” asked Shrug 
nervously, propped up on one elbow. 
“Over to the southwest,” explained Jacko, pointing, his tall 
figure dwarfing Paladin. “Ten or 
twelve there were, about three 
miles away. I was following a Pad 
when I saw smoke from a square 
roof beside a spire — then they appeared out of the smoke. They 
were carrying things — people, I 
think, and they dumped them on 
sledges. They pulled away on skis. 
They went north.” 
“They know we’re here,” muttered Switch. “It’s only a matter of 
time.” 
“I don’t think so.” This from 
Shrug. “I reckon they’d have been 
here already, if they’d known.” 
Cockade sniffed. 
“You’re too bloody idle to 
move.” She tore a strip of flesh 
from the ham of the Pad sizzling 
on the improvised spit. They were 
all gathered around the fire glowing in the huge, tilled bell. “If 
you saw them coming, Christ, 
you’d just have another drink and 
welcome them in. You’re so damn 
pickled you wouldn’t feel their 
knives.” 
Shrug belched in disgust, staring 
into the fire. 
“I remember the green fields,” 
mumbled the Old Man. “It wasn’t 
always like this — oh, no. In those 
days a man could walk in the 
fields, on the roads — anywhere — 
safe. No flesh hunters then.” 
“Jacko.” Cockade’s voice was 
sharp. “Tell that old fool to shut 
up. He’s just not with it. Now—” 
she regarded them all one by one, 
sizing them up— “what are we 
going to do about it?” 
“Defend ourselves.” Paladin 
laughed recklessly. “Mow them 
down, one by one, as they come 
through the hole.” 
“No chance of that.” Switch’s 
mouth twisted in a sneer. “They’ll 
smoke us out that’s the way they 
work. They’ll pour petrol in here 
and set fire to the place and we’ll 
get the chop when we climb out, 
coughing up our guts.” 
“What do you think, Jacko?” 
Cockade asked. She moved close 
to him, putting her arm around 
him the way she used to before his 
indifference got her down and 
Switch arrived. “Can’t we go and 
find somewhere else?” 
Her voice was unusually pleading. 
“I’m not leaving the Old Man.” 
He said it flatly, as if reciting a 
catechism by rote. 
“For God’s sake.” She flung 
her arms wide. “Can’t you forget 
about that old fool? His time’s 
nearly up, anyway. It’s us that 
matter — the young ones, you and 
me and Switch and Paladin. And 
Shrug. Not that old parasite.” 
“You can go without us if you 
want.” 
“How? We haven’t got a snowboat.” 
“Build one.” 
“Build one? That would take 
weeks. We haven’t got time. Look 
— ” she lowered her voice to a persuasive wheedle — “if you’re that 
fond of the Old Man, why not 
take him with us? All of us, with 
the snowboat and the sledges and 
skis.” 
DISCOVER A LATENT AAOSES 
“You know he’s too old to 
stand any journey.” 
“It’s the colors I miss most,” 
the Old Man was saying, his voice 
filling the sudden silence. He had 
been speaking quietly all the time. 
“The green fields and the red 
roofs. The blue sky and the white 
buildings. Not like here^-here 
everything’s brown. Brown walls, 
brown floor, brown roof. Brown 
dirt. This place is the color of 
decay — ” 
“Tell me about the fields, Old 
Man.” Jacko squatted beside the 
thin, ragged figure. “Tell me about 
the trees and the hills.” 
His eyes were far away, imagining what he had never seen. 
“The hills were purple with 
heather and the trees were emerald 
in spring and gold in autumn — and 
even in winter there was color, 
with the berries and the birds.” 
“Tell us about the birds,” Paladin murmured, sitting down. 
Cockade shrugged, then sat 
down, too. The discussion appeared to be over. Discussions 
were futile anyway. 
II 
A JAGGED shaft of light 
speared through the hole in 
the spire and Cockade stirred, 
grumbling to herself. She opened 
her eyes reluctantly and, rolling 
over, found herself looking 
straight into Switch’s face, bloated 
with sleep. His skin was flushed. 
his breathing stertorous. She shook 
him disgustedly. 
“Wha’7” He squinted at her, 
tiredly. # 
“Wake up. I want to talk to 
you.” 
“Later.” 
He rolled over, facing the other 
way. 
She shrugged and lay down 
again. It could wait. As long as 
they didn’t leave matters too late. 
Occasionally the bell tower 
trembled to the touch of distant, 
underground thunder. 
P ALADIN dreamed, sweating 
with his dream companions at 
the mortar, dropping in the canister, whang as it sailed away over 
enemy lines. Whump, as the charge 
exploded, killing, maiming, a cylindrical emissary of death from 
him, Paladin. Whump. He grinned 
fiercely in his sleep. 
T HE Old Man dreamed of rainbows. Jacko awoke, stretched 
and scratched himself, looked 
around and rose quietly to his feet. 
He stretched again, sinews crackling, and yawned silently. He 
shrugged his shoulders into a wellcut overcoat, made for the ladder 
and began to climb. As always he 
paused at the hole, scanning the 
horizon for signs of strangers, then 
stepped through into the snowboat 
tethered outside. 
The eternal wind swept by as it 
had for years, no stronger, no 
weaker — just a continuous driving 
wall against which a man could 
lean. The surface of the snow was 
rippling waves, the tips whipped off 
by the wind into a shallow mist so 
that the waves themselves swam 
out of focus. 
Jacko untied the painter, hoisted 
the sail and pushed off with his 
foot. The boat moved away slowly 
at first. Then, heeling as it left the 
lee of the spire, it raced across the 
snow with a keen hissing. Jacko 
settled himself in the stern, letting 
out the mainsheet. He set a course 
for the southwest. 
Behind him the only evidence of 
the buried village was the church 
spire, projecting solid and incongruous from the shifting field of 
silver. 
S HRUG worked intently and 
fast, striving by concentrated 
thought and effort to outpace and 
put behind him the demons of the 
night. He had seen them so clearly 
that he knew — surely he could not 
have been dreaming those huge 
white shapes which had paced the 
bell tower toward him, stepping 
through the vanished bodies of 
Switch and Cockade, Paladin, 
Jacko and the Old Man and coming for him only— him. Shrug. 
He had screamed once and 
Jacko had suddenly been there, 
bending over him— but still the 
Pads had come on inexorably, 
pacing about the walls and occasionally dropping to all fours, 
circling, but all the lime closing in 
on him. Jacko had returned to his 
mattress and gone to sleep again, 
ignoring the white beasts. 
So, as soon as he felt a little better, Shrug had risen, lit a lamp and 
descended the steps to the ice tunnels. Stooping, he had scuttled 
along the corridors, past the tailor’s, Woolworths, the Supermarket then turned left along the 
spur which led to the Wine Lodge. 
It was months, maybe years, since 
he had last been in the tunnels — 
certainly he had not ventured here 
since Switch had arrived. Since 
then he had relied on the others to 
bring his supplies. 
Finding the spur blocked by the 
fall Switch had mentioned, he had 
retraced his steps to the ironmongers, where he had obtained a 
spade and a case of blasting charges and fuses. A couple of satisfactory explosions had reduced the 
ice boulders to powder without 
bringing down the roof and he was 
now shifting the rubble. 
His back was already aching. A 
dull throbbing concentrated 
around the lumbar region rose to 
a crescendo of pain each time he 
lifted the spade. The sweat oozing 
from his body felt as if it were 
solidifying to ice drops on his skin, 
so intense was the cold in the tunnel. He was seized with bouts of 
shivering as he toiled. 
For the time being, however, he 
had conquered the demons. 
As he worked he thought of 
DISCOVER A LATENTMOSES 
Jacko and wondered once again 
why the big man stayed with them. 
Was he thinking of founding a 
tribe? If so, the material with 
which he was starting was hardly 
inspiring. An alcoholic, a menial 
case and a dotard — which left 
Switch and Cockade. These two 
had been together for some time 
now— ever since Jacko had saved 
Switch from the flesh hunters and 
given him Cockade — but there was 
no promise of children on the way. 
No. Jacko would be better off 
elsewhere. He could be a leader in 
one of the larger communities if he 
chose — there was no need for him 
to stay here in this doomed group. 
Maybe Jacko was just a philanthropist. 
Shrug considered Jacko to be 
the finest person he had ever met. 
He labored on, shoveling, 
shoveling in the tunnel too low to 
allow an upright stance and barely 
wide enough to permit him to 
swing the spade. Frequently -as 
he turned the spade caught on 
the rough wall and spilled the 
contents in exactly the spot from 
where they had been lifted. When 
this happened Shrug cursed quietly and sincerely. 
After a while he could no longer 
think even of Jacko and concentrated on his goal, striving with 
what little will remained to visualize the Wine Lodge, the row upon row of bottles — brandy, whiskey, gin (but hadn’t Switch said 
they were all gone now?), vodka. 
creme de menlhe, Pernod, Cherry 
Heering, Drambuie, Glayva and 
hundreds more besides — all glowing with their bright labels. And 
then the ports and sherries Old 
Monk, Directors’ Bin, Bristol 
Cream, Rubio, even Whiteways’ 
British. A bottle of Whiteways’ 
British would go down very nicely 
right now. 
T HE mother Pad and her two 
cubs hadn’t caught Jacko’s 
scent. He approached upwind tacking the snowboat silently and 
expertly against the stinging, snowladen breeze — and reached for his 
rifle. Within range, he turned the 
boat directly into the wind and, 
as she slowed and the sail began 
to flog, he moved forward to the 
bows and raised the rifle, balancing carefully and sighting along 
the barrel. 
The crack of an unexpected shot 
was borne downwind and the 
mother Pad reared up, standing 
huge and white on her grotesquely 
splayed hind feet, peering myopically this way and that, head thrust 
forward. Jacko waited, lowering 
his unfired rifle. Someone else 
was after the beast. It was good 
policy in such cases to keep quiet 
and await developments to ascertain the strength of the opposition before acting. 
Soon he saw them, a group of 
indistinct shapes beyond the Pad, 
moving fast downward on skis, in 
his direction. As they approached 
he recognized the huge, wingiike 
sails extended from each man’s 
shoulders -these were the flesh 
hunters. With the bellying silver 
material straining from long poles 
strapped horizontally across their 
shoulders they had the appearance 
of giant birds of prey, swooping 
towards him. 
There must have been a dozen 
of them and a distant shout 
warned Jacko that he had been 
sighted. A fusillade of shots 
sounded as they gunned down the 
Pad and her cubs and, leaving two 
men to guard the bodies, swept 
toward the snowboat. 
Meanwhile Jacko had been sawing the tiller frantically. At last the 
bows of the vessel unstuck from 
the teeth of the wind and the sail 
filled. He spun the snowboat almost in her own length and began 
to pick up speed, running before 
the breeze, the shouts of his pursuers shrill in his ears. He was in 
a bad position. He could not outrun them — his only chance was to 
outmaneuver them. 
Gradually he altered course on a 
wide curve until the wind was 
blowing from abeam. Another 
crackle of shots announced that 
the flesh hunters had guessed his 
purpose and a part of the force 
parted from the main body to head 
him off, fabric shivering and skis 
throwing up cascades of snow as 
they endeavored to sail close to 
the wind. Jacko watched them anxiously. These men were experts. 
The snowboat scribed a wide arc 
on the drifting sea of snow. Not 
far behind flew the birdlike sail 
skiers- a predatory flock but 
losing ground gradually as the arc 
took Jacko’s path aslant to the 
wind. But then, cutting inside on a 
chord to the arc, raced the real 
danger, the smaller group of skiers 
on a parallel course and closing in. 
The main body of his pursuers 
was definitely falling behind. It 
was not easy to point close to the 
wind with shoulder sails. The. sails 
were designed for use with the 
wind behind with the full length of 
the skis acting as an effective, 
steady platform. 
But the smaller group was coming on, shooting, closing in. These 
men were proficient. 
Jacko quickly decided on a final, desperate maneuver. No matter 
how accomplished a sailor a skier 
may be, a snowboat will always 
have the advantage on a really 
close haul. Dragging the sail tight, 
Jacko pointed the vessel as close 
into the wind as he dared, on a 
course that would intersect his pursuers at a point some eighty yards 
ahead. The snowboat heeled 
alarmingly, running almost on her 
gunwales. 
Then, as he closed with the flesh 
hunters, he threw himself to the 
floorboards, hidden from the men 
by the angle of the heeling hull. 
He heard the smack of shots 
tearing through the light ply and 
waited for the numbing shock of a 
DISCOVER A LATENT MOSES 
bullet in the back — then the weird 
shape of a skier passed close 
astern, towering over him, staring 
down at him and trying to get a 
revolver to bear but hampered by 
the straining shoulder sails. A 
few shots Spattered harmlessly into the woodwork and within seconds the danger was past as the 
figure disappeared from view. The 
flesh hunters had been outmaneuvered. 
After a while Jacko set an easier 
course and headed for home. It 
was too dangerous on the snowfields, that day. 
T HE glow from Shrug’s lamp 
revealed row upon row of 
empty shelves and for a while he 
stood motionless, struggling to understand. The icy, tomblike atmosphere was chill to his skin and he 
was shivering while his stomach, 
bereft of nutrient alcohol for several hours, was rebelling. He 
swallowed heavily. 
It was inconceivable that he had 
drunk the place dry over a period 
of a few years. He had been obtaining his drinks from the Wine 
Lodge for so long that he had subconsciously come to believe that 
the supply was inexhaustible* More 
recently Switch and Cockade had 
been doing his shopping for him, 
so any diminution of the slock had 
not been apparent to him. They 
had brought him the bottles and 
when he had drunk them they had 
brought him more. He had had no 
reason to believe that the state of 
affairs would not continue forever. 
Presently he lay down on the 
floor, the lamp beside him, his face 
gray, his beard reflecting sparks of 
light from the trapped ice particles. 
“11JHEN I was a young man,” 
»■ the Old Man was saying, 
“this village was called Manaton, 
I think. Or it may have been Bickleigh.” 
“Where’s Shrug?” asked Switch 
suddenly. 
“It’s difficult to tell just from a 
church spire — But to me this 
seems very much like Manaton.” 
“He wasn’t here when I woke 
up,” said Cockade. 
“You used to live in this part of 
the country?” asked Paladin. “Before, I mean?” 
“I think so. It’s difficult to tell.” 
“You’ve got no idea,” remarked 
Cockade acidly. “You don’t know 
where the hell you are. You live in 
a world of your own. Christ, you 
haven’t been outside the bell tower 
since I can remember.” 
“True. But then, don’t we all 
live in our own private worlds 
now?” The Old Man, surprisingly, 
seemed to be entering into a discussion. “Not only mentally but 
physically as well? When did you 
last go Up Top?” 
Cockade shifted uneasily. 
“More recently than you anyway. And I go down to the tunnels 
often.” 
“But what about your mind? I 
heard you talking about Shrug 
just now. Did you think: Shrug’s 
not here ? Or did you think: Shrug's 
down in the Stock Room or else in 
the tunnels . and could you visualize him there?” 
“I just thought he wasn’t with 
us, that’s all. So what?” 
The Old Man chuckled. 
“So Shrug had moved out of 
your private world both physically 
and mentally. And for you that 
was the end of the matter.” 
Paladin showed signs of alarm. 
“I don’t think he ought to be 
down in the tunnels. He’s not well. 
He was screaming again last 
night.” 
“Well done, Paladin. We’ll 
make a human being of you, yet.” 
The Old Man looked pleased. 
“All right. All right.” Cockade 
was annoyed. “What do you think 
about, Old Man?” 
“Jacko, mostly. I wonder what’s 
happening to him when he’s Up 
Top — and if he’s safe. I worry a 
lot about Jacko. He’s been a good 
friend to me.” 
A maudlin note entered the Old 
Man’s voice. His moment of lucidity was over and he was about to 
commence another monologue. 
Fortunately for the others there 
was an interruption. Jacko had arrived and was descending the ladder. He jumped the last few rungs 
to the floor, landing with a thump. 
“Christ.” He threw off his coat 
and crouched before the fire, rasp
ing his hands together. “I’ve had a 
hell of a morning ” He glanced 
around. “Where’s Shrug?” 
Silence. 
Then: “We don’t know,” said 
Switch. “We think he may be in 
the tunnels.” 
“You knew he’d gone alone and 
you didn’t go to look for him?” 
Jacko’s expression was ominous. 
“Oh, for God’s sake — ” 
Putting on his coat again, he 
made for the stairs. 
S HRUG lingered below the surface of consciousness for a long 
time, as though in suspended animation. He was dimly aware that 
he was back in the bell tower. The 
wooden floor was warm to his 
back and he could here the voices 
of the others discussing him. His 
thoughts were slow and strangely 
clear, as though purified from extraneous influences and distractions. 
The group in the bell tower had a 
purpose. He could see that now 
but the reason behind the purpose 
was more difficult to define. The 
purpose of the group, directed by 
Jacko, was to sustain the life of the 
Old Man, who otherwise would 
have died. All action was directed 
toward that end. The reason for 
prolonging a useless existence? 
That was more difficult. Maybe 
the reason was that, without a reason, there would be no purpose. So 
there had to be a reason, otherwise 
DISCOVER A LATENT MOSES 
the purposeless group would scatter and the individuals would not 
survive. 
No. It was not only that. Jacko 
himself was another reason. It 
was a condition of Jacko’s looking 
after them that they all cared for 
the Old Man. And without the 
leadership of Jacko they would all 
perish. So they did what Jacko 
said and sustained the Old Man 
out of fear that otherwise Jacko 
would go. 
What a pity that all their efforts 
were concentrated on preserving 
and encouraging decay. 
If only Cockade were pregnant, 
that would give them all true purpose. 
What would happen if the Old 
Man died today?” 
Why was the Wine Lodge 
empty? 
Why had Jacko saved his life 
again when his. Shrug’s, survival 
was not essential to the well-being 
of the Old Man? 
Was Jacko real? Or was he an 
ephemeral antithesis to the ghostly 
Pads who came at night — a sort of 
Christ? 
His mind a seething turmoil of 
unanswered questions, Shrug returned moaning to full consciousness. 
Ill 
S WITCH, come up here quickly.” Jacko was standing on 
the ladder. His head was level with 
the hole in the spire. Switch left 
Cockade and joined him. “Look.” 
Together they stared out across 
the snowfields. 
About a hundred and fifty yards 
away, indistinct in the driving 
snow, clustered a group of men. 
They stood motionless, sledges at 
their feet, obviously discussing a 
plan of action that could only concern the spire — there was no other 
landmark to discuss. They were, 
clearly, flesh hunters. 
All this Switch divined in a matter of seconds before he hastily descended the ladder, almost falling 
into the arms of Cockade. 
“What is it?” 
“Flesh hunters,” he said, trembling uncontrollably. He had not 
set eyes on the snowfields for a 
long time— the men out there were 
not his only enemies. 
Jacko called down, “I think 
it’s the lot that was after me this 
morning. They must have followed 
the direction I took.” 
Paladin joined Jacko at the 
hole. 
“Christ — ” he muttered, counting. “There’s over a dozen of them. 
Do you think we can hold them 
off?” 
“We’ll just have to try, won’t 
we?” 
A figure detached itself from 
the group and approached, gaining 
focus with proximity, moving 
laboriously against the wind on 
broad skis. Paladin could see the 
eyes, red-rimmed within a swath
ing of fur, regarding them. 
“What do you want?” asked 
Jacko quietly. 
“How many are you?” 
“I said, what do you want?” re'peated Jacko. 
The eyes narrowed and Paladin 
felt that under the furs the mouth 
was grinning mirthlessly. 
“We want food,” came the muffled voice, “and drink and women. 
We want shelter, clothes, guns, 
ammunition. We want everything 
you’ve got.” 
“Try it,” said Jacko. 
“Try it!” yelled Paladin suddenly. “Yes, you just try it, that’s all! 
We’ve got guns enough to hold you 
all off. You don’t stand a chance. 
Hey, Cockade!” He shouted down 
to the others. “Pass me a rifle. 
There’s a man up here wants trouble.” He stared at the fur-covered 
figure ferociously. “You want 
trouble, we’ll give it to you. You 
just try us.” 
“We will,” replied the man. 
He gazed at Paladin, who stared 
back. 
But after a moment Paladin’s 
eyes dropped. 
T HEY’VE upended their 
sledges,” reported Jacko from 
his post. The bell tower reverberated as he sent a shot whining out 
across the snow. “I think they’re 
going to wait until dark. At least 
I can pin them down for the time 
being.” He fired again, uselessly, 
at the thick timbers of the improvised shield. 
An answering shot sang through 
the hole as Jacko ducked. The slug 
smacked into the beams of the 
spire, raining dust and bat guano 
upon the group below. 
“What are we going to do?” 
asked Paladin nervously. “When 
it’s dark they’ll take us easily. If 
we guard the hole they’ll chop another one and set fire to the place.” 
He moved toward the stairs. “Let’s 
go down to the tunnels. We’ll be 
safer there.” 
“Don’t be a fool,” called Jacko, 
peering down at him. “If they take 
the bell tower they’ve got us. 
There’s no other way out!” 
“What’s going on?” whined the 
Old Man, sensing uncertainty 
around him. 
“Flesh hunters Up Top,” Shrug 
informed him with a certain relish. 
“You’re supposed to be in 
charge,” Cockade called, staring 
up aggressively. “Can’t you suggest anything?” 
Jacko did not reply. 
Cockade said, “He’s had it. 
He’s about as good as a bloody 
leader as he is in bed. Well, I’m 
not staying here to be fried.” She 
glanced around uncertainly, her 
eye falling upon Switch. “Any 
ideas, lover?” 
No reply. 
“I might have known it.” Cockade was talking fast now, her voice 
high-pitched. “When it comes to 
the crunch you men can only think 
DISCOVER A LATENT MOSES 
of yourselves. Every man for himself and the devil take the woman. 
First Jacko and now you.” 
“Nobody’s running out on you. 
Cockade,” said Switch gently. 
“That’s because you’ve got nowhere to rjun to,” she shrilled. “My 
God, if you had an escape hole 
you’d be out like greased lightning. 
Why didn’t he think to build an 
escape hole?” She jerked a thumb 
upward. “Fine leader he is. I bet 
when it gets dark he’ll sneak out 
there and make a deal with them. 
He’ll trade his life for ours -” 
Shrug slapped her hard and effectively across the face. 
Cockade reeled back, hand to 
her cheek, eyes blazing. Switch 
moved as if to hit Shrug, then 
changed his mind, his fist dropping abruptly to his side. 
Staggering slightly. Shrug made 
for the ladder and began to climb. 
Close beside Jacko, he looked out 
across the snow for a while. He 
laid his hand firmly on Jacko’s 
shoulder for a moment. 
“Wouldn’t you say, Jacko,” he 
remarked, “that those men are 
about one-hundred and fifty yards 
southwest from here?” 
Then he descended to the floor. 
The others watched him silently as 
he made for the stairs. 
“MOW much longer before it 
*lgets dark?” asked Paladin, 
standing beside Jacko at the hole. 
Jacko glanced at the sky. 
“About an hour before they can 
move,” he replied thoughtfully. 
“What are we going to do?” 
asked Paladin because he had to. 
He didn’t want to fret like Cockade but he just had to ask that 
question. 
“Wait,” said Jacko, sending another shot ringing into the twilight. 
“I can’t stand waiting,” replied 
Paladin immediately, as though he 
had known exactly what Jacko 
would say. “I want to fight. Let 
me have the gun.” 
He seized the rifle, unleashed a 
useless fusillade, then handed the 
gun back, looking suddenly foolish. 
“Keep them pinned down as 
long as we can,” remarked Jacko 
understandingly. “That’s all we 
can do for the time being.” 
“What the hell are you two 
cooking up?” yelled Cockade from 
below. 
Paladin ignored her, feeling 
strangely confident in the presence 
of Jacko’s impeturbability. 
“And when it gets dark?” he 
asked. 
“They’ll come for us. They’ll 
surround the spire, I should think, 
and they’ll hack their way in at several places.” Jacko was talking to 
himself more than to Paladin, 
working it out. “Then they’ll push 
rifles through the holes and start 
shooting. They won’t see anything 
because we’ll have put out the fire. 
In any case, they won’t hit us because we’ll have withdrawn to the 
storeroom. So they’ll set fire to 
pieces of cloth and wood and drop 
them through to the floor of the 
bell tower — ” 
Jacko’s voice trailed off. 
The flesh hunters would see that 
the bell tower had been evacuated 
so they would occupy it. They 
would shoot their way down the 
stairs, driving the defenders into 
the tunnels. Then they would hunt 
them through the tunnels or just 
leave them there to freeze. 
Seemingly there was no escape. 
Minutes passed and it grew 
darker. 
“Switch,” Jacko called. “You 
and Cockade get the Old Man 
down to the storeroom. Make him 
comfortable and load a gun for 
him. Shrug.” 
Silence. 
“Shrug?” 
“He’s not here,” came Cockade’s voice. “You pal’s run out on 
us. He went down the tunnels — to 
the Wine Lodge, I expect, to get 
blind drunk. That leaves four of us 
against God knows how many. If 
you think we’re going to trust the 
Old Man with a rifle you must be 
crazy.” 
“Paladin,” Jacko said tiredly, 
“go down there and put out the 
fire. Pour water into the bell and 
make sure it’s really dead.” 
“What are you going to do?” 
“I’ll stay up here for a while.” 
For a long time Jacko stared into the dusk, watching the barricade 
of upturned sledges until his vision blurred and it seemed that the 
sledges were moving and there 
were men everywhere, creeping 
about in the gloom, at the perimeter of his vision. 
This was the finish of the group. 
Partly he blamed himself. He must 
have been the one who had led the 
flesh hunters here, although they 
would have found the place eventually. The tip of a church spire is 
a conspicuous object in a landscape of flat snow. 
Mostly he blamed everyone. 
The Old Man, who could have 
brought wisdom but gave them 
only senility. Cockade, a barren 
virago in a childless community^ 
she should feel shame, not belligerence. Switch, a willing worker 
but nothing more. Paladin, an adolescent coward. Shrug, intelligent 
and a potential leader except for 
his overriding weakness. 
Had Jacko done the right thing, 
a few nights ago, when he had 
worked through the hours when 
the others slept, systematically 
emptying the shelves of the Wine 
Lodge and concealing the bottles 
in an abandoned spur at the far end 
of the village? He had hoped to 
snap Shrug into his senses but he 
appeared to have demoralized the 
man. Of course, it was early days 
to hope for a cure — but unfortunately there didn't seem to be any 
more days left. 
So mainly this was his fault. The 
leader of the group, he was dull, 
unimaginative and had proved 
himself lacking in foresight. Given 
DISCOVER A LATENT MOSES 
another chance — would he do 
things differently? 
Yes. 
He had learned now that losses 
had to be cut that there was no 
profit in merely postponing the 
inevitable. Above all, he now felt 
that the present way of life was 
wholly artificial and that life 
would be extinguished upon the 
exhaustion of the stockpiles. 
For life to continue, there must 
be a borning and a growing. 
If ever he had the chance he 
would go to the lands that the Old 
Man had spoken of — to the west, 
where the hills were taller than the 
snow and the green trees flourished. He would plant crops and 
reap their golden harvest. He 
would build a cabin in the open air. 
Life would be hard but good — and 
he would live quickly, rather than 
die slowly. All this he would do, if 
he had the chance. 
A subterranean rumbling shook 
the spire. The foot of the ladder 
danced on the floor so that he had 
to hang on to the rough, split timbers of the hole. He heard distant 
slammings and a blast of air 
gusted past him into the twilight. 
There was a reverberating crash 
from below as one of the bells 
broke free from its mountings and 
thundered, tolling, to the storeroom floor far beneath. Yells of 
alarm echoed from the group — he 
could hear Cockade’s shrill 
screaming and looked down but 
saw only blackness. 
Another screaming he heard and 
he stared into the half-light outside. Where the flesh hunters’ barricade had been was a billowing 
cloud of fine snow, quickly 
whisked away by the wind to reveal 
a chasm many yards across. There 
was scarely a sign of the enemy. As 
the gulf widened rapidly, the circumference poured down like a 
bottomless, circular cataract. 
Wider and wider the chasm extended. He watched as the last 
sledge tumbled from view. 
After a while the rumbling died 
but the wind whined on unperturbed, as it had for years. 
T HE lamp was lit in the storeroom. In the flickering glow 
they stood around the broken body 
of Paladin, 
“Two dead,” said Switch heavily. “At least Shrug died to some 
purpose but this — ” 
He sighed. Paladin had been the 
youngest of the group. 
“He didn’t suffer, Jacko,” said 
Cockade, for once subdued. “He 
was standing right under the bell 
when it came down. He was dead 
when we lit the lamp. I think he 
was dead before — I didn’t hear 
any sound from him. But it was 
dark — ” 
Jacko was silent, looking down 
at the twisted form, somehow 
smaller than in life and defenseless. 
“What about old Shrug, then?” 
said Switch with an attempt at 
heartiness. 
Then he remembered that Shrug 
was dead, too. 
“I never thought Shrug had it in 
him,” remarked Cockade, trying 
to cheer up Jacko. There was 
something ominous about his silence. “He must have pul a match 
to the whole case of dynamite. It 
seemed that the Wine Lodge was 
empty and I suppose he felt that he 
had nothing left to live for — and 
the dynamite was there and the 
flesh hunters were camped directly 
above. It all added up. He went 
out like a man.” 
Like a man betrayed by his leader, thought Jacko: I am responsible 
for Shrug’s death. He regarded the 
remains of his group, noticing the 
Old Man lying on a mattress, clad 
in rags. Why was the Old Man 
dressed like that? There were plenty of good clothes at the tailor’s. 
“Thanks, Cockade,” he muttered, as though she had complimented him personally. “It’s no 
good, though. We’re going to have 
to split up. We’re all dying slowly 
here.” 
After a miserable silence 
Cockade said with somewhat watery brightness, “It’s okay, Jacko. 
You’re right, of course. What will 
you do? Take the Old Man and try 
to find the hills and trees he’s always talking about?” 
“Yes, I think so. How about 
you?” 
“Oh, I expect we’ll go and join 
one of the larger communities east. 
Provided we can steer clear of flesh 
hunters on the way. We’ll be fine.” 
“Good.” Jacko turned away 
awkwardly. “I’d best be getting 
the snowboat loaded up for an 
early start. We’ve got a long trip 
ahead of us. I only hope the Old 
Man lasts out.” 
Gathering an armful of cans, he 
climbed the stairs to the bell tower. 
It seemed that they had all been 
expecting his decision. 
J ACKO watched the spire fade 
astern, then put his gaze on the 
featureless wastes ahead. He had 
no sense of adventure. Maybe that 
would come later, with the sun. At 
the moment, in the early morning 
light, he felt despair rather than 
any other sensation. Failure, as 
though he were running away, instead of setting out to find a new 
life. The Old Man, lying on the 
floorboards, wrapped in rugs, 
looked like a corpse with his parchment skin, wispy hair fluttering 
sparsely in the breeze. 
On an impulse Jacko bent forward and touched the puckered, 
sunken cheeks. The Old Man 
stirred, mumbling. 
Straightening up, Jacko sailed 
on. 
S WITCH and Cockade wandered about the bell tower, surrounded by stacks of canned food. 
They moved in silence, occasionally lifting a can from a stack and 
replacing it again to give each other 
DISCOVER A LATENTAAOSES 
the impression that they were making last-minute checks. From time 
to time one or the other would 
glance up at the ladder leading to 
the hole in the spire. 
“Well, I think that’s about it,” 
remarkecf .Cockade at last with 
studied casualness. 
“Yes,” agreed Switch. 
“Going to load the sledge, 
then?” 
“Right.” Switch dropped a selection of cans into a string bag. 
They made a dull clatter. Jacko 
had already fixed up a sledge for 
them; it was tethered outside the 
spire, in the snow. 
In the snow, outside. 
Slowly Switch walked to the 
ladder and began to climb, one 
hand reaching for the rungs and 
the other holding the bag. The ascent was extraordinarily difficult 
— the bag was heavy and the floor 
below seemed somehow to impede 
his progress like a magnet. The 
task of lifting a foot to the next 
rung took his entire concentration. 
He noticed that the rungs were 
worn in an area around the center 
of each tread, so that the square 
section had become almost oval 
and he focused on speculating upon this indisputable, physical fact. 
Suddenly his reaching hand encountered no rung and he could 
feel the wind on his face. Jacko 
was not beside him this time. He 
looked up. 
There was the snow, a vast area 
of tossing, drifting whiteness under 
DISCOVER A LATENT MOSES 
a sky equally white, so similar that 
he could not tell where the two 
joined; which was the top and 
which the bottom, the snow or the 
sky. It was a vision of infinity 
composed of two physical elements, snow and sky — and Switch, 
a small mammal clinging to the 
fringe of this greatness, was utterly, totally insignificant. 
It beckoned him like a tunnel. 
It repelled him like a wall. 
“Get on with it.” 
Gasping, retching, he clung to 
the ladder, shutting his eyes and 
concentrating on the existence of 
the rungs beneath his hands and 
feet, the only solid objects within 
his present frame of reference. 
Dimly he heard the bag of cans 
clatter to the floor below. 
“What the hell’s the matter with 
you?” 
He moved over — or was pushed 
aside — as Cockade climbed up beside him. Together they crouched 
at the top of the ladder. Cockade 
staring at the snow, Switch regarding Cockade. He saw her eyelids 
droop, flickering, and caught a 
flash of white as her pupils turned 
up, vanished under the lids. He 
grasped her around the waist as 
her eyes closed. 
She shook her head. 
“Christ,” she muttered. 
He followed her down the ladder. 
As they stood in the bell tower 
looking at each other they heard 
the sound of footsteps, heavy and 
slow, ascending the steps from the 
storeroom. Suddenly Cockade 
was in Switch’s arms and they 
clung together. He could feel her 
heart racing as he watched, over 
her shoulder, the square aperture 
in the floor. 
Shrug appeared, rubbing his 
head. 
“Hi, there,” he greeted them. 
“God, I took a knock down there. 
The blast through those tunnels — I 
just about made it to the tailor’s 
before I passed out again. I must 
have slept the clock round. Feel 
better for it, though. What’s for 
breakfast? Or am I too late?” 
, “Shrug — ” Cockade had twisted 
from Switch’s arms at the familiar 
voice. “What the hell are you doing here?” Suddenly she was crying. “We thought you were dead.” 
“I’ve never known you so glad 
to see me.” Shrug chuckled. “No, 
I’m not dead. Why should I be?” 
“We thought you blew yourself 
up with the Wine Lodge.” 
“What?” Shrug laughed openly. 
“Me blow myself up? Do you take 
me for some sort of bloody hero?” 
HE LAY more easily now,
propped up in the stern of the 
snowboat. He looked around, eyes 
shining. 
“It doesn’t change,” he murmured. “I’d amost forgotten what 
such colors look like. Have you 
ever seen green like that, Jacko?” 
He pointed up at the giant, branching column he called a tree, tan
gled against the staring sky. “That 
color is the essence of life. You can 
keep your snowboats, your food 
hoards, your ice tunnels and hideyholes — all those dreary man-made 
blacks and whites and grays. And 
even the shades of gray are somehow the same — the red-gray of 
dead meat, the blue-gray of 
chipped tunnels, all created by 
Man and all dead. That tree is 
green. It’s alive. And it was made 
by God, 
“That is the difference, Jacko — 
the difference between death and 
life, between gray and green. Seeing this place I feel as if 1 had been 
dead for years and now, when life 
is soon to leave me, I think I’ve 
gotten back what 1 lost as a child 
and come alive again.” 
The effort of talking was weakening him further, his voice was 
faltering. Jacko kneeled beside 
him, putting an arm about his 
shoulders. 
“I want you to stay here, 
Jacko,” the Old Man whispered. 
“Find yourself a wife and come to 
live here. Stop living in a hole and 
build yourself a cabin here among 
the green trees, under the blue sky. 
Fetch seeds from the stores beneath 
the snow and grow yourself vegetables — carrots, peas, beans, onions, sweet corn — and around the 
cabin plant color — orange marigolds, scarlet roses, lupins of every 
color you can think of and more 
besides. Surround yourself with 
life and your own life will be fuller 
and more worthwhile because you 
will be living it with God, who 
never intended Man to grovel underground in caves.” 
He was silent, watching intently. 
Jacko followed his gaze and saw, 
silhouetted against the silver sky, 
a small, scampering animal in the 
branches. 
“They’re all here,” the Old Man 
said so faintly that Jacko had to 
lean close to catch the words. “All 
the old animals and birds, too, I 
shouldn’t be surprised. It only 
needs Man to comeback.” 
His eyes closed and his shoulders sagged suddenly against 
Jacko’s arm. Shivering a little 
Jacko stood up, brushing the powdery snow from- his knees. He took 
the spade from the bows of the 
snowboat, dug a trench and buried 
the Old Man under the trees which 
he valued so greatly that he considered it worthwhile sacrificing 
his last few years to revisit. 
But Jacko couldn’t see it that 
way. 
They call it the bleaches, the 
condition that affects the eyesight 
of those who spend their days 
hunting fresh meat in the snowboats. It comes of skimming 
through the dazzling snowfields 
day after day until, at last, there is 
no need to squint against the glare 
because the eyes have become completely accustomed to it. 
Jacko was fifteen years old when 
the blue sky finally changed to sil( Please turn to page 158) 
DISCOVER A LATENT MOSES
SFGRAM_START_SILVERBERG
Krug rivaled God Almighty as the creator 
of Heaven and Earth and Man. Now he just 
wanted to talk to all three of them! 
I 
LOOK, Simeon Krug wanted to
say, a billion years ago there 
wasn’t even any man, there was 
only a fish. A slippery thing with 
gills and sgales and little round 
eyes. He lived in the ocean and the 
ocean was like a jail and the air 
was like a roof on top of the jail. 
Nobody could go through the roof. 
You’ll die if you go through, everybody said, and there was this fish — 
he went through and he died. And 
there was this other fish that went 
through and died. But another fish 
went through and it was like his 
brain was on fire and his gills were 
blazing — the air was drowning 
him and the sun was a torch in his 
eyes and he was lying there in the 
mud, waiting to die — and he didn’t 
die. He crawled back down the 
beach, went into the water and 
said. Look, there's a whole other 
world up there. And he went up 
there again and stayed for maybe 
two days before he died. But other 
fishes wondered about that world. 
And crawled up onto the muddy 
shore. And stayed. And taught 
themselves how to breathe the air. 
And taught themselves how to 
stand up, how to walk around, 
how to live with the sunlight in 
their eyes. And they turned into 
lizards, dinosaurs, whatever they 
became, and walked around for 
millions of years. Next they started 
to get up on their hind legs and use 
their hands to grab things. They 
turned into apes and the apes got 
smarter and became men. And all 
the time some of them, a few, anyway, kept looking for new worlds. 
You say to them. Let’s go back into the ocean — let’s be fishes again, 
it’s easier that way. And maybe 
half of them are ready to do it — 
more than half, maybe — but there 
are always some who say, ‘Don't 
be crazy. We can’t be fishes any 
more. We're men. And so they 
don’t go back. They keep climbing 
up. 
September 20, 2218. 
Simeon Krug’s tower now rises 
a hundred meters above the graybrown tundra of the Canadian 
Arctic, west of Hudson Bay. At 
present the tower is merely a glassy 
stump, hollow, open-topped, 
sealed from the elements only by a 
repellor field hovering shieldlike 
just a few meters above the current 
work level. Around the unfinished 
structure cluster the work crews, 
made up entirely of androids — 
thousands of synthetic humans 
who toil to affix glass blocks to 
scooprods and send the rods 
climbing to the summit, where 
other androids put the blocks in 
place. Krug has his androids working three shifts around the clock. 
When it gels dark, the construction site is lit by millions of reflector plates strung across the sky at 
a height of one kilometer and 
powered by the little million-kilo
wall fusion generator at the north 
end of the site. 
From the tower’s huge octagonal base radiate wide silvery strips 
of refrigeration tape, embedded 
fifty centimeters deep in the frozen 
carpet of soil, roots, moss and lichens that is the tundra. The tapes 
stretch several kilometers in each 
direction. Their helium-II diffusion cells soak up the heal generated by the androids and vehicles 
used in building the tower. If the 
tapes were not there, the tundra 
would soon be transformed by the 
energy-output of construction into a lake of mud; the colossal tower’s foundation-caissons would 
lose their grip, and the great building would tilt and tumble like a 
felled titan. The tapes keep the tundra icy, firm, capable of bearing 
the immense burden that Simeon 
Krug is now imposing on it. 
Subsidiary buildings are centered on a thousand-meter radius 
around the tower. To the west of 
the site is the master control center. To the east is the laboratory 
where the tachyon-beam ullrawave 
communications equipment is being fabricated — a small pink dome 
which usually contains ten or a 
dozen technicians, patiently assembling the devices with which 
Krug hopes to send messages to 
the stars. North of the site is a clutter of miscellaneous service buildings. On the south side is the bank 
of transmat cubicles that link this 
remote region to the civilized 
world. People and androids flow 
constantly in and out of the transmats, arriving from New York or 
Nairobi or Novosibirsk, departing 
for Sydney or San Francisco or 
Shanghai. 
Krug himself invariably visits the 
site at least once a day alone or 
with his son Manuel. Or with one 
of his women, or some fellow industrialist. Customarily he confers 
with Thor Watchman, his android 
foreman; he rides a scooprod to the 
top of the tower and peers into it; 
he checks the progress in the tachyon-beam lab; he talks to a few of 
the workmen, his way of inspiring 
loftier effort. Generally Krug 
spends no more than fifteen minutes at the tower. Then he steps 
back into the transmat and is instantaneously hurled to the business that awaits him elsewhere, 
T ODAY he has brought a fairly 
large party, perhaps to celebrate 
the attainment of the 100-meter 
level. Krug stands near what will 
be the tower’s western entrance. 
He is a stocky man of sixty, deeply 
tanned, heavy-chested and shortlegged, with narrow-set, glossy 
eyes and a seamed nose. There is 
a peasant strength about him. His 
contempt for all cosmetic editing 
of the body is shown by his coarse 
features, his shaggy brows, his 
thinning hair — he is practically 
bald and will do nothing about it. 
Freckles show through the black 
strands that cross his scalp. He is
worth several billion dollars fissionable, though he dresses plainly 
and wears no jewelry. Only the infinite authority of his stance and 
expression indicate the extent of 
his wealth. 
Nearby is his son and heir, Manuel, his only child, tall, slender, almost foppishly handsome, elegantly dressed in a loose green robe, 
high buskins, an auburn sash. He 
affects earlobe plugs and a mirrorplate in his forehead. He will shortly be thirty. His movements are 
graceful but he seems fidgety. 
The android Thor Watchman 
stands between father and son. He 
is as tall as Manuel, as powerfully 
built as the elder Krug. His face is 
that of a standard alpha-class android, with a lean caucasoid nose, 
thin lips, strong chin, sharp cheekbones — an idealized face, a plastic 
face. Yet he has impressed a surprising individuality on that face 
from within. No one who sees 
Thor Watchman will mistake him 
the next time for some other android. A certain gathering of the 
brows, a certain tension of the lips, 
a certain hunching of the shoulders, mark him as an android of 
strength and purpose. He wears an 
openwork lace doublet. He is indifferent to the biting cold at the 
site and his skin, the deep red, 
faintly waxy skin of an android, is 
visible in many places. 
There are seven others in the 
group that has emerged from the 
transmat. They are: 
Clissa, the wife of Manuel Krug, 
Quenelle, a woman younger 
than Manuel, who is his father's 
current companion. 
Leon Spaulding, Krug’s private 
secretary, an ectogene. 
Niccolo Vargas, at whose observatory in Antarctica the first 
faint signals from an extrasolar 
civilization were detected. 
Justin Maledetlo, the architect 
of Krug’s tower. 
Senator Henry Fearon of Wyoming, a leading Witherer. 
Thomas Buckleman of the 
Chase/Krug banking group. 
“Into the scooprods, everybody,” Krug bellows. “Here — 
here you you up to the top!” 
“How high will it be when it’s 
finished?” Quenelle asks. 
“Fifteen hundred meters,” Krug 
replies. “A tremendous tower of 
glass, full of machinery that nobody can understand. And then 
we’ll turn it on. And then we’ll 
talk to the stars.” 
In the beginning there was Krug 
and He said, Let there be Vats, and 
there were Vats. 
And Krug looked upon the Vats 
and found them good. 
And Krug said, Let there be 
high-energy nucleotides in the 
Vats. And the nucleotides were 
poured and Krug mixed them until 
they were bonded one to another. 
And the nucleotides formed the 
great molecules and Krug said, Let 
there be the father and the mother 
both in the Vats and let the cells 
ilivide and let there be life brought 
forth upon the face of the Earth. 
And there was life, for there was 
Replication. 
And Krug presided over the 
Replication and touched the fluids 
with His own hands and gave them 
\hape and essence. 
Lget man come forth from the 
Vats, said Krug, and let women 
come forth and let them live and 
go among us and be sturdy and 
useful and we shall call them Androids. 
A nd so it came to pass. 
And there were Androids, for 
Krug had created them in His own 
image and they walked upon the 
face of the Earth and did service 
for mankind. 
And for these things, praise be 
to Krug. 
W ATCHMAN woke that morning in Stockholm. Groggy — 
four hours of sleep. Much loo 
much. Two hours would suffice. 
He cleared his mind with a quick 
neural ritual and got under the 
shower for a skin-sluicing. Better, 
now. The android stretched, wriggled muscles, studied his smooth 
rosy hairless body in the bathroom 
mirror. 
A moment for religion, next. 
Krug deliver us from servitude. 
Krug deliver us from servitude. 
Krug deliver us from servitude. 
Praise be to Krug! 
Watchman popped down his 
breakfast and dressed. The pale 
light of late afternoon touched his 
window. Soon it would be evening 
here- but no mailer. The clock in 
his mind was set to Canadian time, 
tower time. He could sleep whenever he wished, as long as he took 
at least one hour out of twelve. 
Even an android body needed 
some rest, although not in the 
rigidly programed way of humans. 
Off to the construction site, 
now, to greet the day’s visitors. 
The android began setting up the 
transmat coordinates. He hated 
these daily tour sessions. They 
slowed the work. Extraordinary 
precautions had to be observed 
while important human beings 
were on the site. They introduced 
special and unnecessary tensions 
and their presence carried the hidden implication that his work was 
not really trust-worthy, that he had 
to be checked every day. Of course. 
Watchman was aware that Krug’s 
faith in him was limitless. The android’s faith in that faith had sustained him superbly through the 
task of erecting the tower thus far. 
He knew that it was not suspicion 
but the natural human emotion of 
pride that brought Krug to the site 
so often. 
Krug preserve me. 
Watchman stepped through the 
transmat. 
He strode out into the shadow 
of the tower. His aides greeted 
him. Someone handed him a list of 
the day’s visitors.
“Is Krug here yet?” 
“Fiveminutes,”he was told and 
in five minutes Krug came through 
the transmat, accompanied by his 
guests. 
Watchman was not cheered to 
see Krug’s secretary, Spaulding, 
in the group. He and Spaulding 
were natural enemies — they felt 
toward one another the instant antipathy of the vat-born and the 
bottle-born, the android and the 
ectogene. But aside from that they 
were rivals for eminence among 
Krug’s associates. To the android, 
Spaulding was a spreader of suspicions, a potential underminer of 
his status, a fount of poisons. 
Watchman greeted him cooly, distantly, yet properly. One did not 
snub humans, no matter how important an android one might be. 
And at least by technical definition 
Spaulding had to be considered 
human. 
Krug was hustling everybody into scooprods. Watchman went up 
with Manuel and Clissa Krug. As 
the rods rode toward the truncated 
summit of the tower, Watchman 
glanced across at Spaulding in the 
rod to his left and glowered at the 
ectogene, the prenatal orphan, the 
man of cramped soul and baleful 
spirit in whom Krug perversely 
placed so much trust. 
May Arctic winds sweep you to 
destruction, bottle-born. May l see 
you float sweetly toward the 
frozen ground and break beyond 
repair . 
Spaulding took no notice. 
Clissa Krug asked, “Thor, why 
do you suddenly look so fierce?” 
“Do I?” 
“I see angry clouds crossing 
your face.” 
Watchman shrugged. 
“I’m doing my emotion drills, 
Mrs. Krug. Ten minutes of love, 
ten minutes of hate, ten minufes of 
shyness, ten minutes of selfishness, 
ten minutes of awe, ten minutes of 
arrogance. An hour a day makes 
androids more like people.” 
“Don’t tease me,” Clissa said. 
She was very young, slim, darkeyed, gentle and, Watchman supposed, beautiful. “Are you telling 
me the truth?” 
“I am. Really. I was practicing 
a little hatred when you caught 
me.” 
“What’s the drill like? I mean, 
do you just stand there thinking 
Hatehatehatehatehate, or what?” 
He smiled at the girl’s suggestion. Looking over her shoulder, 
he saw Manuel wink at him. 
“Another time,” Watchman 
said. “We're at the top.” 
T HE three scooprods clung to 
the highest course of the tower. 
Just above Watchman’s head hung 
the gray haze of the repellor field. 
The sky, too, was gray. The short 
northern day was nearly half over. 
A snowstorm was heading southward toward them along the shore 
of the bay. Krug, in the next scooprod, was leaning far into the tower, 
pointing out something to Buckleman and Vargas. In the other rod 
Spaulding, Senator Fearon and 
Maledetto were closely examining 
the satiny texture of the great glass 
bricks that made up the tower’s 
outer skin. 
“When will it all be finished?” 
Clissa asked. 
“Less than a year,” the android 
told her. “We’re moving along 
nicely. The big technical problem 
was keeping the permafrost under 
the building from thawing. But 
now that that’s behind us, we 
ought to be rising several hundred 
meters a month.” 
“Why build here in the first 
place,” she wanted to know, “if the 
ground wasn’t stable?” 
“Isolation. When the ultrawave 
is turned on, it’ll scramble all communications lines, transmats and 
power generators for thousands of 
square kilometers. Krug was pretty 
well limited to putting the tower 
in the Sahara, the Gobi, the Australian desert or the tundra. For 
technical reasons — having to do 
with transmission — the tundra 
seemed most desirable, provided 
the thawing problem could be beaten. Krug told us to build here. So 
we found a way to beat the thawing 
problem.” 
Manuel asked, “What’s the status of the transmission equipment?" 
“We begin installing it when the 
lower’s at the five-hundred-meter 
level. Say, mid-November.” 
Krug’s voice boomed across to 
them. “We’ve already got the five 
satellite amplifying stations up. A 
ring of power sources surrounding 
the tower — enough boost to kick 
our signal clear to Andromeda 
between Tuesday and Friday.” 
“A wonderful project,” said 
Senator Fearon. He was a dapper, 
showy-looking man with startling 
green eyes and a mane of red hair. 
“Another mighty step toward the 
maturity of mankind.” With a 
courtly nod toward Watchman the 
Senator added: “Of course, we 
must recognize our immense debt 
to the skilled androids who are 
bringing this miraculous project to 
fruition. Without the aid of you 
and your people, Alpha Watchman, it would not have been possible to — ” 
Watchman listened blankly, remembering to smile. Compliments 
of this sort meant little to him. The 
World Congress and its Senators 
meant even less. Was there an android in the Congress? Would it 
make any difference if there were? 
Some day, no doubt, the Android 
Equality Party would get a few of 
its people into the Congress — three 
or four alphas would sit in that 
august body and, nevertheless, androids would continue to be property, not people. The political process did not inspire optimism in 
Thor Watchman. 
His own politics, such as they 
were, were definitely Witherer — 
in a transmat society, where na
nonal boundaries are obsolete,
vhy have a formal government at 
ill? Let the legislators abolish 
i Item selves. Let natural law prevail. But he knew that the withering 
iway of the state that the Witherrs preached would never come to 
puss. The proof of it was Senator 
Henry Fearon. The ultimate para■ lo'-x: a member of the anti-government party serving in the government himself and fighting to hold 
liis seat at every election. What 
nrice Withering, Senator? 
Fearon praised android indusiriousness at length. Watchman 
( retted. No work was getting done 
while they were up here — he didn’t 
'lure let blocks be hoisted with visMors in the construction zone. And 
lie had schedules to keep. To his 
idief, Krug soon signaled for a descent; the rising wind, it seemed, 
was bothering Quenelle. 
When they came down Watchman led the way over to the master 
ontrol center, inviting them to 
watch him take command of operations. Ffe slipped into the linkup 
scat. As he pushed the computer’s 
• nub-tipped terminal node into the 
mput jack on his left forearm the 
indroid saw Leon Spaulding’s lips 
tighten in a scowl of — what? Contempt, envy, patronizing scorn? 
I or all his skill with humans, 
Watchman could not read such 
dark looks with true precision. 
Ilut then, at the click of contact, 
i he computer impulses came flooding across the interface into his 
brain and he forgot about Spaulding. 
It was like having a thousand 
eyes. He saw everything going on 
at the site and for many kilometers 
around the site. He was in total 
communion with the computer, 
making use of all of its sensors, 
scanners and terminals. Why go 
through the tedious routine of talking to a computer when it was possible to design an android capable 
of becoming part of one? 
The data torrent brought a surge 
of ecstasy. 
Maintenance charts. Work-flow 
syntheses. Labor coordination systems. Refrigeration levels. Powershunt decisions. The tower was a 
tapestry of infinite detail and he 
was the master weaver. Everything 
rushed through him; he approved, 
rejected, altered, canceled. Was 
sex something like this? That tingle 
of aliveness in every nerve, that 
sense of being extended to one’s 
limits, of absorbing an avalanche 
of stimuli? Watchman wished he 
knew. He raised and lowered 
scooprods, requisitioned next 
week’s blocks, ordered filaments 
for the tachyon-beam men, looked 
after tomorrow’s meals, ran a constant stability check on the structure as completed, fed cost data 
to Krug’s financial people, monitored soil temperature in fiftycentimeter gradations to a depth 
of two kilometers, relayed scores 
of telephone messages per second 
and congratulated himself on the
dexterity with which he accomplished everything. No human 
could handle this, he knew, even if 
there were some way for humans 
to jack themselves directly into a 
computer. He had a machine’s 
skills anda human's versatility and 
therefore, except for the fairly serious matter of being unable to reproduce himself, he was in many 
ways superior to both other classes and therefore — 
The red arrow of an alarm cut 
across his consciousness. 
Construction accident. Android 
blood spilling on the frozen 
ground. 
A twitch of his mind gave him 
close focus. A scooprod had failed 
on the northern face, A glass block 
had fallen from the ninety-meter 
level. It lay slightly skewed, one 
end buried about a meter deep in 
the earth, the other slightly above 
ground level. A fissure ran like a 
line of frost through its clear 
depths. Legs stuck out from the 
side closest to the tower. A few 
meters away lay an injured android, writhing desperately. Three 
lift-beetles were scurrying toward 
the scene of the accident; a fourth 
had already arrived and had its 
steel prongs under the massive 
block. 
Watchman unjacked himself. 
He shivered in the first moment of 
the pain of separation from the 
data flow. A wallscreen over his 
head showed the accident vividly. 
Clissa Krug had turned away, 
head against her husband’s breasl 
•^-Manuel looked sickened, his 
father irritated. The other visitors 
seemed more puzzled than disturbed. Watchman found himsell 
peering into Leon Spaulding’s icy 
face. Spaulding was a small, pareddown man, all but fleshless. In the 
curious clarity of his shock Watchman was aware of the widely separated hairs of the ectogene’s stifl 
black mustache. 
“Coordination failure,” Watchman said crisply. “The computer 
seems to have misread a stress 
function and let a block drop.” 
“You were overriding the computer at that moment, weren't 
you?” Spaulding asked. “Let’s put 
the blame where blame belongs.” 
The android would not play 
that game. 
“Excuse me,” he said. “There 
have been injuries and probably fatalities. I must go.” 
He hurried toward the door, 
inexcusable carelessness— " 
Spaulding muttered. 
Watchman went out. As he 
sprinted toward the accident site 
he began to pray. 
II 
N EW YORK,” Krug said. “The 
upper office.” 
He and Spaulding entered the 
transmal cubicle". The lambent 
green transmat field pulsed up 
from the floor aperture, forming a 
curtain dividing the cubicle in two. 
The ectogene set the coordinates. 
The hidden power generators of 
the transmat were linked directly 
to the main generator, spinning 
endlessly on its poles somewhere 
beneath the Atlantic, condensing 
the theta force that made transmat 
travel possible. Krug did not bother to check the coordinates Spaulding had set. He trusted his staff. A 
minor abscissa distortion and the 
atoms of Simeon Krug would be 
scattered irrecoverably to the cold 
winds-Hbut he unhesitatingly 
stepped into the glow of green. 
There was no sensation. Krug 
was destroyed--a stream of tagged 
wavicles was hurled several thousand kilometers to a tuned receiver 
and Krug was reconstituted. The 
transmat field ripped a man’s body 
into subatomic units so swiftly that 
no neural system could possibly 
register the pain and the restoration to life came with equal speed. 
Whole and undamaged, Krug 
emerged — with Spaulding still beside him — in the transmat cubicle 
of his office. 
“Look after Quenelle,” Krug 
said. “She’ll be arriving downstairs. Amuse her. 1 don’t want to 
be disturbed for at least an hour.” 
Spaulding exited. Krug closed 
his eyes. 
The falling of the block had upset him greatly. It was not the first 
accident during the building of the 
tower — it probably would not be 
the last. Lives had been lost today 
— only android lives, true, but lives 
all the same. The waste of life, the 
waste of energy, the waste of time, 
infuriated him. How would the 
lower rise if blocks fell? How 
would he send word across the 
heavens that man existed, that he 
mattered, if there were no tower? 
How would he ask questions that 
had to be asked? 
Krug ached. Krug felt close to 
despair at the immensity of his selfimposed task. 
In time of fatigue or tension he 
became morbidly conscious of the 
presence of his body as a prison engulfing his soul. The folds of bellyflesh, the island of perpetual rigidity at the base of the neck, the tiny 
tremor of the upper left eyelid, the 
slight constant pressure on the 
bladder, the rawness in the throat, 
the bubbling in the kneecap, every 
intimation of mortality rang in 
him like a chime. His body often 
seemed absurd to him, a mere bag 
of meat and bone and blood and 
feces and miscellaneous ropes and 
cords and rags, sagging under 
time’s assault, deteriorating from 
year to year and from hour to 
hour. What was noble about such a 
mound of protoplasm? The preposterousness of fingernails! The idiocy of nostrils! The foolishness of 
elbows! Yet under the armored 
skull ticked the watchful gray 
brain, like a bomb buried in mud. 
Krug scorned his flesh but he felt 
only awe for his brain and for the 
human brain in the abstract. The 
true Krugness of him was in that
soft folded mass of tissue, nowhere 
else — not in the guts, not in the 
groin, not in the chesti— but in the 
mind. The body rotted while its 
owner still wore it. The mind within soared to the farthest galaxies. 
“ Massage, ’\Krug said. 
The timber and lone of his command caused a smoothly vibrating 
table to extrude itself from the 
wall. Three female androids, kept 
constantly on call, entered the 
room. Their supple bodies were 
bare. They were standard gamma 
models, who could have been triplets but for the usual programed 
minor somatotype divergences. 
They had small high-set breasts, 
flat bellies, narrow waists, flaring 
hips, full buttocks. They had hair 
on their heads and they had eyebrows but otherwise they were 
without body hair, which gave 
them a certain sexless look — yet 
the groove of sex was inscribed 
between their legs and Krug, if his 
tastes inclined that way, could part 
those legs and find within them a 
reasonable imitation of passion. 
His tastes had never inclined that 
way. But Krug had deliberately designed an element of sensuality 
into his androids. He had given 
them functional — if sterile — genitals, just as he had given them proper — though needless — navels. He 
wanted his creations to look human — aside from the necessary 
modifications — and to do most 
human things. His androids were 
not robots. He had chosen to cre
ate synthetic humans, not mere 
machines. 
T HE three gammas efficiently 
stripped him and worked him 
over with their cunning fingers. 
Krug lay belly down. Tirelessly 
they plucked at his flesh and toned 
his muscles. He stared across the 
emptiness of his office at the images on the distant wall. 
The room was furnished simply, 
even starkly — a lengthy rectangle 
that contained a desk, a data terminal, a small somber sculpture 
and a dark drape that would, at the 
touch of a repolarizing stud, reveal 
the panorama of New York City 
far below. The lighting, indirect 
and subdued, kept the office in 
eternal twilight. On one wall, 
though, there blazed a pattern in 
brilliant yellow luminescence: 
** 
**** 
* 
** 
***** 
* 
*** 
* 
It was the message from the 
stars. 
Vargas’ observatory had picked 
it up first as a series of faint radio 
pulses at ninety-one hundred megacycles: two quick beats, a pause, 
four beats, a pause, one beat — and 
so on. The pattern was repeated a 
thousand times over a span of two 
days, then halted. A month later it 
showed up at fourteen hundred 
and twenty-one megacycles, the 
twenty-one-centimeter hydrogen 
frequency, for another thousand 
turns. A month after that it came 
in both at half and at double that 
frequency, a thousand of each. 
Still later, Vargas was able to detect it optically, riding in on an intense laser beam at a five thousand-angstrom wavelength. The 
pattern was always the same, clusters of brief bursts of information: 
2 ... 4 ... 1 ... 2 ... 5 .. .1 .. 
3 . 1. Each subcomponent of the 
series was separated from the next 
by an appreciable gap, and there 
was a much larger gap between 
each repetition of the entire group 
of pulse clusters. 
Surely it was some message. To 
Krug, the sequence 2-4- 1-2-5- 1-3- 1 
had become a sacred number, the 
opening symbols of a new kabbala. 
Not only was the pattern emblazoned on his wall but the touch of 
his finger would send the sound of 
the alien signal whispering through 
the room in any of several audible 
frequencies and the sculpture beside his desk was primed to emit 
the sequence in brilliant flashes of 
coherent light. 
The signal obsessed him. His 
universe now revolved about the 
quest to make reply. At night he 
stood beneath the stars, dizzied by 
the cascade of light, and opened 
his arms to the galaxies, saying, / 
am Krug, I am Krug, here I wait. 
speak to me again! He admitted 
no possibility that the signal from 
the stars might be other than a consciously directed communication. 
He had turned all of his considerable assets to answering. 
— But isn’t there any chance 
that the “message” might be some 
natural phenomenon? 
None. The persistence with 
which it arrived in such a variety oj 
media indicates a guiding consciousness behind it. Someone is 
trying to tell us something. 
^•What significance do those 
numbers have? Are they some kind 
of galactic pi? 
We see no obvious mathematical 
relevance. They do not form any 
apparent intelligible arithmetical 
progression. Cryptographers have 
supplied us with at least fifty equally ingenious suggestions, which 
makes all fifty equally suspect. We 
think that the numbers were chosen entirely at random. 
— What good is a message that 
doesn’t have any comprehensible 
content? 
The message is its own content : 
a yodel across the galaxies. 1 1 tells 
us, Look, we are here, we know 
how to transmit, we are capable of 
rational thinking, we seek contact with you! 
— Assuming you’re right, what 
kind of reply do you plan to make? 
I plan to say. Hello, hello, we 
hear you, we detect your message, 
we send greetings, we are intelli( Please turn to page 119) 
SFGRAM_STOP_SILVERBERG
DARWIN IN 
THE FIELDS 
Three poems celebrating 
the Peculiar Talents of 
one Charles Darwin who loitered 
about Outdoors, always in 
hopes that Nature might 
Do Something. 
RAY BRADBURY 
i 
tt 
Old Curious Charlie 
He stood for hours 
Benumbed, 
Astonished 
Amid the flowers; 
Waiting for silence. 
Waiting for motions 
In seas of rye 
Or oceans of weeds — 
The stuff on which true astonishment feeds — 
And the weeds that fed and filled his silo 
With a country spread 
By the pound or kilo. 
Of miracles vast or microscopic. 
For them, by night, was he the topic? 
In conversations of rye and barley. 
Did they stand astonished 
By Curious Charlie? 
Darwin, in the fields, stood still as time 
And waited for the world to no w exhale and now 
Take in a breath of wind from off the yield and swell 
Of sea where fill the clouds with sighs; 
His. eyes knew what they saw but took their time to tell 
This truth to him; he waited on their favor. 
His nose kept worlds far larger than a goodly nose might savor 
And waited for the proper place to fit the flavor in. 
So eye and nose and ear and hand told mouth 
What it must say; 
And after awhile and many and many a day 
His mouth. 
So full of Nature's gifts, it trembled to express. 
Began to move. 
No more a statue in the field, 
A honeybee come home to fill the comb. 
Here Darwin hies. 
Though to ordinary eyes it might appear he plods, 
Victorian statue in a misty lane; 
All that is lies. Listen to the gods: 
'The man flies, I tell you. The man flies!" 
Darwin, wandering home at dawn. 
Met foxes trotting to their lairs, 
Their tattered litters folio wing. 
The first light of the blood-red sun adrip 
among their hairs. 
What must they've thought, 
The man of fox. 
The fox of man found there in dusky lane; 
And which had right-of-way? 
Did he or they move toward or in or 
on away from night ? 
This scan was produced and 
distributed free by the 
Pulpscans Group. If you 
paid for this digital 
document or a compilation 
of this and other digital 
pulps, you got ripped off. 
But you can still have this 
and more than a thousand 
more pulps for free by 
coming over and joining us 
at pulpscans @yahoogroups . com. 
Their probing eyes 
And his 
Put weights to hidden scales 
In mutual assize. 
In simple search all stunned 
And amiable apprize. 
Darwin, the rummage collector, — 
Longing for wisdom to dap in a box, 
Such lore as already learned and put by c 
A billion years back in his blood by the fox. 
Old summer days now gone to flies 
Bestir themselves alert in vixen eyes; 
Some primal cause 
T witches the old man s human-seeming pa ws. 
An ancient sharp surmise is melded here 
And shapes all Dooms 
Which look on Death and know it. 
Darwin all this knows. 
The fox knows he knows. 
But knowing is wise not to show it. 
They stand a moment more upon the uncut lawn; 
Then as if by sign, quit watchfulness; 
Each imitates the other's careless yawn. 
And with no wave save pluming tail of fox and kin 
A way the creatures go to sleep the day. 
Leaving old Charlie there in curious disarray. 
His hair combed this, his wits the other way. 
So off he ambles, walks, and wanders on. 
Leaving an empty meadow, 
A place 
Where strange lives passed. 
And dawn. 
A. BERTRAM CHANDLER 
Can anything be more terrifying 
than realizing all your dreams? 
I 
S LOWLY GRIMES awakened 
from his nightmare. 
It had been so real- too real — 
and the worst part was always the 
deep sense of loss. There was that 
shocking contrast between the 
dreary life that he was living (in 
the dream) and the rich and full 
life that he somehow knew that he 
should be living. There was his wife 
— that drab, unimaginative woman with her irritating mannerisms 
— and that memory of someone 
else, someone he had never met, 
never would meet, someone elegant and slim, someone with 
whom he had far more in common 
than simply the physical side of 
marriage — someone who knew 
books and music and the visual 
arts and yet evinced a deep appreciation of the peculiar psychology 
of the spaceman. 
Slowly GriYnes resumed full 
awareness. 
Slowly he realized that he was 
not in his bedroom in the Base 
Commander’s quarters on Zetland. He listened to the small, 
comforting noises— the irregular 
throbbing of the inertial drive, the 
sobbing of pumps, the soughing of 
the ventilation system, the thin, 
high whine of the Mannschenn 
Drive unit. And he heard the soft, 
steady breathing of the woman in 
the bed with him (that other one 
snored). 
But— ^such was the impression 
his dream had made upon him — 
he had to be sure. All cats are gray 
in the dark. Without too much 
fumbling he found the stud of the 
light switch on his side of the bed. 
His reading lamp came on. Its 
glow was soft, subdued — but it was 
enough to wake Sonya. 
She looked up at him irritably, 
her lean face framed by the auburn hair that somehow retained 
its neatness, its sleekness, even after sleep. 
She demanded sharply, “What 
is it, John?” 
He said, “I’m sorry. Sorry I 
woke you, that is. But I had to be 
sure.” 
Her face and voice immediately 
softened. 
“That dream of yours again?” 
“Yes. The worst part of it is 
knowing that you are somewhere — 
somewhen — but that I shall never 
meet you.” 
“But you did.” She laughed with 
him, not at him. “And that’s your 
bad luck.” 
“My good luck,” he corrected. 
“Our good luck.” 
“I suppose we could have done 
worse,” he admitted. 
G RIMES was awakened again by 
the soft chiming of the alarm. 
From his side of the bed he could 
reach the service hatch in the bulkhead. He opened it, revealing the 
tray with its silver coffee service. 
“The usual?” he asked Sonya, 
who was making a lazy attempt to 
sit up in bed. 
“Yes, John. You should know 
by this time.” 
Grimes poured a cup for his wife 
— black, unsweetened — then one 
for himself. He liked sugar, rather 
too much of it, and cream. 
“I shall be rather sorry when 
this voyage is over,” said Sonya. 
“Jimmy is doing us well. We 
shouldn’t be pampered like this in 
an Alpha Class liner.” 
“After all, I am a commodore,” 
said Grimes smugly. 
“Not in the Survey Service, you 
aren’t,” Sonya told him. 
In that dream, that recurring 
nightmare, I'm still an officer in 
the Federation's Survey Service. 
Hut I've never got past commander. I've passed my days and will 
end my days as commanding officer of an unimportant base on a 
world that somebody had once described as a planetwide lower middle-class suburb. 
“Perhaps not,” Grimes admitted. “But I pile on enough Gees to 
be accorded V.I.P. treatment 
aboard a Survey Service ship.” 
“You do? I was under the impression that it was because of me 
that Jimmy let us have the V.I.P. 
suite.” 
“Not you. You’re a mere commander and on the Reserve List at 
that.” 
“Don’t be so bloody rank conscious — ” 
She took a swipe at him with her 
pillow. Grimes cursed as hot coffee 
splashed on his bare chest. 
Then: “I don’t know what your 
precious Jimmy will think when he 
sees the mess on the sheets.” 
“He’ll not see it — and his laundrobot won’t worry about it. Pour 
yourself some more coffee. I’ll use 
the bathroom while you’re drinking it.” Then, as she slid out of the 
bed; “And go easy on the sugar. 
You’re getting a paunch.” 
I remember the fat and slovenly 
Commander of Zetland Base . 
OMMANDER JAMES FARRELL, captain of Star Pioneer, 
prided himself on running a taut 
ship. Attendance at every meal 
was mandatory for his officers. As 
he and Sonya took their seats at 
the captain’s table, Grimes wondered how Farrell would cope with 
the reluctance of Middle Watch 
keepers aboard merchant vessels 
to appear at breakfast. 
All the Star Pioneer’s officers 
were here, in their places, except 
for those actually on duty. Smartly uniformed messgirls circulated 
among the tables, taking orders, 
bringing dishes. Farrell sat, of 
course, at the head of his own table, Sonya to his right and Grimes 
to his left. At the foot of the table 
was Lieutenant Commander Malleson, the senior engineering officer. There was little to distinguish 
him from his captain but the 
badges of rank. There was little to 
distinguish any of the officers, one 
from the other. All were tall young 
men with close-cropped hair, standardized good looks, each and every one of them a refugee from a 
Survey Service recruiting poster. 
In my young days we had room 
for individuality ... Grimes 
smiled to himself. And where did 
it get me? Oh, you bloody lee, 
that’s where . 
“What’s the joke, John?” asked 
Sonya. “Share it, please.” 
Grimes’ prominent ears reddened. 
“Just a thought, dear.” He was 
saved by a messgirl, who presented 
the menu to him. “Nathia-juice, 
please. Ham and eggs — sunny side 
up — to follow, with just a hint of 
THE RUB 
French fries. And some coffee.” 
“You keep a good table, Jimmy,” Sonya said to Farrell. Then, 
looking at her husband: “Rather 
too good, perhaps.” 
“I’m afraid, Sonya,” Farrell 
told her, “that.our meals from now 
on will be lacking in variety. It 
seems that our Esquelian passengers brought aboard some local 
virus. The biologists in the first 
survey expeditions found nothing 
at all on Esquel in any way dangerous to human life, so perhaps we 
didn’t take the precautions we 
should have when we embarked 
the King and his followers. Even 
so, while they were on board their 
excretory matter was excluded 
from the ship’s closed ecology. But 
after they were disembarked on 
Tallis the plumbing wasn’t properly disinfected — ” 
Not a very suitable topic of conversation for the breakfast table .. 
Grimes sipped his fruit juice. 
“So?” asked Sonya interestedly. 
“So there’s been a plague running its course in the “farm.” Only 
the tissue culture vats have been 
affected, luckily. We could make 
do indefinitely on yeasts and algae 
— but who wants to?” He grinned 
at Grimes, who was lifting a forkload of yolk-coated ham to his 
mouth. “Who wants to?” 
“Not me, Captain,” admitted 
Grimes. 
“Or me, Commodore. The beef’s 
dead — and the pork and the chick
en. The quack says that the lamb’s 
not fit for human consumption. So 
far the mutton seems to be unaffected — but we can’t be sure even 
of that.” 
“You’ll be able to stock up when 
we get to Port Forlorn,” said 
Grimes. 
“That’s a long way off.” Farrell 
looked steadily at Grimes as he 
buttered a piece of toast. “I’ve a 
job for you. Commodore.” 
“A job for me, Commander 
Farrell?” 
“Yes, you, Commodore Grimes. 
By virtue of your rank you represent the Rim Worlds Confederacy 
aboard this vessel. Kinsolving’s 
Planet, although no longer colonized, is one of the Rim Worlds. I 
want to put down there.” 
“Why?” asked Grimes. 
“Correct me if I’m wrong. Commodore, but I understand that the 
original settlers introduced Earthtype flora and fauna, some of 
which have not only survived but 
flourished. I’m not interested in 
the flora, of course— but I’ve heard 
that there are the descendants of 
the original rabbits, pigs, cattle 
and hens running wild there.” 
“No cattle,” Grimes told him. 
“And no hens. Probably the pigs 
did for them before they could become established.” 
“Rabbit’s a good substitute for 
chicken,” said Farrell. 
“Jimmy,” reproved Sonya, “I 
do believe that you like your tummy.” 
“I do, Sonya, I do,” said the 
young man. 
“And so do I,” said Lieutenant 
Commander Malleson, who until 
now had been eating in dedicated 
silence. 
“But I don’t like Kinsolving,” 
grumbled Grimes. “And, in any 
case, we shall have to get permission to land.” 
“You will get it, John,” said 
Sonya firmly. 
L ATER that ship’s morning Farrell discussed the proposed landing on Kinsolving with Grimes and 
Sonya. 
“Frankly,” he told them, “I’m 
glad of an excuse to visit the planet. Not so long ago the Survey Service released a report on the three 
expeditions, starting off with that 
odd wet paint affair — ” 
“That was over a hundred and 
fifty years ago,” said Grimes. 
“Yes. I know. And I know, too, 
that you’ve been twice to Kinsolving — the first time as an observer 
with the Neo-Calvinists, the second time in command of your own 
show.” 
“And both times,” admitted 
Grimes, “I was scared. Badly.” 
“You don’t frighten easily, 
Commodore, as well I know. But 
what actually did happen? The official reports that have been released to the likes of us don’t give 
much away. It was hinted — merely 
hinted — that the Neo-Calvinists 
tried to call up the God of the Old 
Testament and raised the entire 
Greek Pantheon instead. And you, 
sir, attempted to repeat the experiment — and got tangled with a Mephistopheles straight out of Gounod’s Faust.” 
“Cutting extraneous cackle,” 
said Grimes, “that’s just what did 
happen.” 
“What I’m getting at. Commodore, is this. Were your experiences objective or subjective?” 
“During my first visit, Commander, the Neo-Calvinist’s ship, 
Piety, was destroyed, as were her 
pinnaces. Their leaders — the Presbyter, the Rector, the Deaconess 
and thirteen others, men and women — completely vanished. That 
was objective enough for anybody. 
The second time — I vanished.” 
“I can vouch for that,” stated 
Sonya. 
“But you came back. Obviously." 
“More by luck than judgment.” 
Grimes laughed without humor. 
“When you do a deal with the devil it’s as well to read the small 
print.” 
“But at no time was any actual 
physical harm done to anybody.” 
“Some could have been. And we 
don’t know what happened to the 
Neo-Calvinist boss cockies — ” 
“They’re probably being converted to hedonism on Mount 
Olympus,” said Sonya. 
“But we don’t actually know.” 
Farrell grinned. 
“And aren’t those very words a 
THE RUB 
challenge to any officer in the Survey Service? You used to be one of 
us yourself, sir, and Sonya is still 
on our Reserve List. Kinsolving is 
almost directly on the track from 
Tallis to Lorn. I have a perfectly 
valid excuse to make a landing. 
And even in these decadent days 
— ” his smile widened — “my Lords 
Commissioners do not discourage 
initiative and zeal on the part of 
their captains.” 
Grimes grinned back reluctantly. It was becoming evident that 
Farrell possessed depths of character not apparent on first acquaintance. True, he worked by the book 
— and had Grimes done so he 
would have risen to the rank of 
Admiral in the Survey Service — 
but he was also capable of reading 
between lines. A deviation from his 
original cruise pattern — the evacuation of the King and his supporters From Esquel — had brought 
him to within easy reach of Kinsolving and he was making the 
most of the new circumstances. 
Fleetingly Grimes wondered if the 
destruction of the ship’s meat supply had been intentional rather 
than accidental — he dismissed the 
thought. Not even he, Grimes, had 
ever done a thing like that. 
“Later,” said Farrell, “if it’s all 
right with you, sir, we’ll go over 
the official reports and you can fill 
in the gaps. But what makes Kinsolving the way it is?” 
“Your guess is as good as anybody’s, Commander. The atmo
sphere is — odd. Psychologically 
odd, not chemically or physically. 
A terrifying queerness. One senses 
impending doom. Kinsolving was 
settled at the same time as the other Rim Worlds. It’s a far more ecologically desirable piece of real estate than any of them. But the colonists lost heart. Their suicide rate 
rose to an abnormal level. Their 
mental institutions were soon overcrowded. And so on. So they 
pulled out. I’ve heard many theories. One of the latest is that the 
Kinsolving system lies at some intersection of stress lines. Stress 
lines in what? Don’t ask me. But 
the very fabric of the Continuum 
is thin, ragged, and the dividing 
lines between Then and Now, 
Here and There, What Is and 
What Might Be are virtually nonexistent — ” 
“Quite a place,” commented 
Farrell. “But you’re willing to visit 
it a third time, sir?” 
“Yes,” agreed Grimes after a 
long pause. “But I’m not prepared 
to make a third attempt at awakening ancient deities from their 
well-earned rest. In any case, we 
lack the — I suppose you could call 
her the medium. She’s on Lorn 
and even if she were here I doubt 
she’d play.” 
“Good. I’ll adjust trajectory for 
Kinsolving and we’ll send Carlottigrams to our respective lords 
and masters requesting permission to land. I don’t think they’ll 
turn it down.” 
“Unfortunately,” said Grimes. 
But the faint smile that lightened his craggy features belied the 
word. 
F ARRELL cautiously eased 
Star Pioneer down to the sunlit hemisphere of Kinsolving, to a 
position a little to the west of the 
morning terminator. Grimes had 
advised a landing at the site used 
by the Confederacy’s Rim Sword 
and later by his own Faraway 
Quest. The destruction of the NeoCalvinists’ Piety had made the 
spaceport unusable. This landing 
place was hard by the deserted city 
of Enderston, on the shore of the 
Darkling Tarn. It had been the 
sports stadium. 
Conditions were ideal for the 
landing. The sounding rockets, 
fired when the ship was descending through the first tenuous 
fringes of the atmosphere, had revealed a remarkable absence of 
turbulence. The parachute flares 
discharged by them at varying altitudes were falling straight down, 
each trailing its long, unwavering 
streamer of white smoke. 
Grimes and Sonya were in the 
Control Room. 
“There’s Enderston,” the Commodore said, “on the east bank of 
the Weary River. We can’t see 
much from this altitude — everything’s overgrown. That’s the 
Darkling Tarn.” He pointed to the 
amoebalike glimmer of water 
among the dull green that now 
was showing up clearly on the big 
approach screen. “You can’t miss 
it. That oval of paler green is the 
stadium — ” 
The Inertial Drive throbbed 
more loudly as Farrell made minor adjustments. When the stadium was in the exact center of the 
screen it settled down again to its 
almost inaudible muttering. 
At Farrell’s curt order they all 
went to their acceleration chairs, 
strapped themselves in. Grimes, 
with the others, watched the expanding picture on the screen. To 
him the scene was familiar, too 
familiar, even to the minor brush 
fire started by the last of the parachute flares. And as during his 
two previous landings he had the 
feeling that supernatural forces 
were mustering to resist the landing of the ship, to destroy her and 
all aboard her. 
He looked at Farrell. The young 
captain’s face was pale, strained. 
Grimes felt less unhappy. Now 
you begin to know what it's like, 
Jimmy boy. 
She was down at last. 
There was almost no shock at all 
and only an almost inaudible complaint from the ship’s structure, a 
faint sighing of shock absorbers as 
the great mass of the vessel settled 
in the cradle of her tripedal landing gear. 
“Secure main engines,” ordered 
Farrell. 
Telegraph bells jangled sharply. 
The Inertial Drive generators mut
THE RUB 
tered to themselves and were still. 
The silence was intensified by the 
soft soughing of the ventilation 
fans. 
Grimes swiveled in his chair, 
gazed out through the viewport toward the distant mountain peak, 
the black, truncated cone hard 
and sharp against the pale blue 
sky. Sinai, Presbyter Cannon had 
named it. Olympus, Grimes had 
labeled it on his new charts of the 
planetary surface. But neither 
name was apt. On this mountain’s 
summit the Neo-Calvinists had 
attempted to invoke Jehovah— 
and Zeus had answered their call. 
Grimes had tried to invoke the 
the gods of the Greek Pantheon — 
and had been snatched into an 
oddly peopled Limbo by Mephistopheles himself. 
This time on Kinsolving the 
Commodore was going to be cautious. Wild horses — assuming any 
existed on this planet and assuming that they should be possessed 
by such a strange ambition— 
would not be able to drag him up 
to the top of that mountain. 
N onetheless, Grimes did 
revisit the mountaintop, taken 
there by the tamed horsepower of 
Star Pioneer's pinnace rather than 
by wild horses. Nothing happened. 
Nothing could happen unless Clarisse, descendant of the long-dead 
artist-magicians, were there to 
make it happen. There was nothing to see except the view. All 
that remained of the two disastrous experiments was a weathered 
spattering of pigments where the 
witch-girl’s easel had stood. 
Everybody visited the famous 
caves, of course, and stared at and 
photographed the rock paintings, 
the startlingly lifelike depiction of 
beasts and their hunters. The 
paintings were old, old, even 
though some faint hint of their 
original magic still lingered. 
But this was an uneasy world. 
Men and women never walked 
alone, were always conscious of 
something lurking in the greenery, 
in the ruins. Farrell, reluctant as 
he was to break the Survey Service's uniform regulations, issued 
strict orders that everybody ashore 
on any business whatsoever was to 
wear a bright, scarlet jacket over 
his other clothing. This was after 
two hunting parties had opened 
fire upon each other — luckily nobody was killed but four men and 
three women would be in the sick 
bay for days with bullet wounds. 
Grimes said to Farrell, “Don’t 
you think it’s time that we were 
lifting ship. Captain?” 
“Not for a while, Commodore. 
We have to be sure that the new 
tissue cultures will be successful.” 
“That’s just an excuse.” 
“All right, it’s just an excuse.” 
“You’re waiting for something 
to happen.” 
“Yes. Damn it all, Commodore, 
this sensation of brooding menace 
is getting me down, it’s getting all 
of us down. But I want to have 
something definite to report to my 
Lords Commissioners.” 
“Don’t pay too high a price for 
that fourth ring on your sleeve, 
James.” 
“It’s more than promotion that’s 
at stake, sir — although I shall welcome it. I hate being up against an 
enemy I can’t see, can’t touch. I 
want to accomplish something for 
its own sake. I don’t want to slink 
away from here like a dog with his 
tail between his legs.” 
“The original colony did just 
that.” 
“But they — ” Farrell stopped 
abruptly. 
“I’ll finish it for you, James. 
But they were mere civilians. They 
weren’t wearing the Survey Service badge on their caps, Survey 
Service braid on their sleeves or 
shoulders. They weren’t disciplined. And how long do you think 
your ship’s discipline is going to 
stand up to the strain, gold braid 
and brass buttons notwithstanding?” 
“Long enough.” 
Sonya broke in: “This is Jimmy’s show, John. He makes the 
decisions. And I agree with him 
that we should stay on Kinsolving 
until we have something to show 
for our visit.” 
“Thank you, Sonya,” said Farrell. Then: “You must excuse me. 
I have matters to attend to.” 
When the young man had left 
their cabin Sonya spoke softly. 
“You’re getting too old and cautious, John. Or are you sulking because you’re not running things?” 
“I don’t like this world, my dear. 
I’ve reasons not to.” 
“You’re letting it get you down. 
You look as though you hadn’t 
slept for a week.” 
“I haven’t. Not to speak of.” 
“Why didn’t you let me know?” 
“It’s so damned silly. It’s that 
bloody nightmare of mine — you 
know the one. It recurs every time 
I shut my eyes." 
“You should have told me.” 
“I should have.” He got slowly 
to his feet. “Probably some good, 
healthy exercise will make me 
sleep better. A long walk?” 
“I’ll come with you.” 
She fetched the scarlet jackets 
from the wardrobe. Grimes took 
his deadly little Minetti from a 
drawer, put it into one pocket, a 
spare clip of cartridges in the other. Heavier handguns and miniaturized transceivers they would 
collect from the duty officer at the 
airlock. 
Within a few minutes they were 
walking down the ramp to the path 
that had been hacked and burned 
and trodden through the encroaching greenery, the trail that led to 
the ruined city. 
II 
I T WAS early afternoon. The 
sun was still high in the pale sky 
THE RUB 
but the breeze, what there was of it, 
was chilly. And the shadows, surely, were darker here than on any 
other world Grimes had every visited — They seemed to possess a 
life of their own. But that was only 
imagination. 
They walked steadily but carefully, watching where they pul 
their feet, avoiding the vines and 
brambles that seemed deliberately to try to trip them. On either 
side of the rough track tfje vegetation was locked in silent, bitter 
warfare — indigenous trees and 
shrubs, importations from Earth 
and other worlds and parasites 
upon parasites. In spite of the 
overly luxuriant growth the overwhelming impression was of death 
rather than of life. The most readily identifiable scent on the chill 
air was that of decay. 
They came to the outskirts of the 
city, picking their way over tilted 
slabs of concrete, thrust up and 
aside by root and trunk, that had 
once been a road. Once the buildings between which it ran had been 
drably utilitarian — now a madly 
proliferating and destructive ivy 
clothed them in somber, Gothic 
splendor. An abandoned ground 
car, the glass of its headlights by 
some freak of circumstance unobscured, glared at them like a 
crouching, green-furred beast. 
Grimes tried to imagine what 
this place had been like before its 
evacuation. Probably it had been 
very similar to any sizable town on 
Lorn or Faraway, Ultimo or Thule 
’^-architecturally. But one important difference had existed. The 
city had been dominated by an uncanny atmosphere, an omnipresent premonition of — what? Some 
fear of the cold and the dark, of 
ultimate night. Other cities on 
other worlds had their haunted 
houses^-here the very stones had 
been haunted. 
He said, “The sooner young Farre 1 1 lifts ship off this deserted 
graveyard, the better.” 
“At least it’s not raining,” Sonya told him, with an attempt at 
cheerfulness. 
“Thank the odd gods of the Galaxy for one small mercy,” grumbled Grimes. 
“Talking of odd gods—” 
“What about them?” 
“Sally Veerhausen, the biochemist, told me there’s a very odd 
church on a side street that runs 
off the main drag.” 
“Oh?” 
“Yes. It’s to the right — in an alley you turn into just before you 
get to a tall tower with a latticework radio mast still standing on 
top of it.” 
“Is that it there? To the right?” 
“Must be. Shall we investigate?” 
“What is there to investigate?” 
“Nothing, probably. But I seem 
to recall a period when you exhibited a passion for what you referred 
to as freak religions. This could be 
one to add to your collection.” 
“I doubt it.” 
But after a few minutes’ careful 
walking they were turning off the 
main street, making their way 
along an alley between walls overgrown with the ubiquitous ivy that 
had been brought to the world by 
some long-dead, home-sick colonist. 
HE church was there. 
It was a small building, a masonry cube, its angles somehow 
and subtly wrong. And it was different from its neighbors. Perhaps 
the stone, natural or synthetic, 
from which it had been constructed 
possessed some quality, physical 
or chemical, lacking in the building materials in more general use. 
Its dull gray facade was unmarked 
by creeper, lichen or moss. Its 
door, as gray as the walls but of 
metal, was uncorroded. Over the 
plain rectangle of the entrance 
were the embossed letters in some 
black substance — Temple of The 
Principle. 
Grimes snorted almost inaudibly. 
“What Principle?” he demanded. “There have been so 
many.” 
“Perhaps,” said Sonya seriously, “the greatest and most mysterious one of all.” 
“The Golden Way? The greatest, I admit — ” 
“No. Sally got her paws on such 
records as still exist — the vaults in 
the city hall kept their contents 
quite intact — and found out about 
a cult that worshiped, or tried to 
worship, the Uncertainty Principle.” 
“Could have been quite a suitable religion for this world. Inexplicable forces playing hell with 
anything and everything-r-so, if 
you can’t lick ’em, join ’em.” 
“Or get the hell out.” 
“Or get the hell out. But — who 
knows? This freak religion might 
just have worked. Shall we go inside?” 
“Why not?” 
The door opened easily, too easily. They might have been expected. But to think so was absurd. 
The officers from the ship who had 
found this place must have oiled 
the hinges. And had they done 
something about the lighting system, too? The huge, windowless 
room should have been dark but 
was not. The gray, subtly shifting 
twilight was worse than darkness 
would have been. It accented the 
wrongness of the angles where 
wall met wall, ceiling and floor. It 
seemed to concentrate, in a formless blob of pallid luminescence 
over the coffin-shaped altar that 
stood almost in the middle of the 
oddly lopsided hall. Almost in the 
middle. Its positioning was in keeping with the rest of the warped 
geometries of this place. 
“I don’t like it,” said Grimes. “I 
don’t like it at all.” 
“Neither do I,” whispered Sonya. 
Yet neither of them made any 
THE RUB 
attempt to retreat to the comparative light and warmth and sanity 
of the alley outside. 
“What rites did they practice?” 
whispered the Commodore. “What 
prayers did they chant? And to 
what?’’ 
“I’d rather pot find out.” 
But still they did not withdraw. 
Still, hand in hand, they advanced 
slowly towards the black altar, the 
coffin-shaped — coffin-shaped? No. 
Its planes and angles shifted. 
It was more of a cube. 
It was more than a cube. 
Grimes knew suddenly what it 
was. It was a tesseract. And he 
knew, too, that he should never 
have come again to this world. 
Twice he had visited Kinsolving 
and on the second occasion had 
become more deeply involved than 
on the first. Whatever the forces 
were that ruled this planet, he was 
becoming more and more attuned 
to them. 
And this was the third time. 
“John!” he heard Sonya’s distant voice. “John!” 
He tightened the grasp of his 
right hand but the warmth of hers 
was no longer with it. 
“John — ” 
It was no more than a fading 
whisper. 
J ohn—” 
“Grmph — ” He didn’t want to 
wake up. Full awareness would 
mean maximum appreciation of 
his nagging headache. His eyes 
were gummed shut and he had the 
impression that small and noisome 
animals had fought and done other 
things inside his mouth. 
“John!” 
Blast the woman. 
“John!” 
She was shaking him now. 
He flailed out blindly, felt one 
fist connect with something soft, 
heard a startled gasp of pain. 
“Never touch an officer,” he 
enunciated thickly. “’Gainst 
Regulations.” 
“You — you hit me. You brute.” 
“Own fault.” 
“Wake up, damn you — ” 
He forced his eyes open somehow, stared blearily at the plump, 
faded woman in the shabby robe 
who was staring down at him with 
distaste. 
Who are you? he demanded silently. 
The memory of someone slim, 
sleek and elegant persisted in his 
befuddled brain. 
Where am l? Who am I? 
“You’ve got a job to do,” the 
woman told him in a voice that was 
an unpleasant whine. “You’d better get your stinking carcass out of 
that bed and start doing it. I like to 
go on eating, even if you don’t.” 
A starvation diet would do you 
the world of good. 
He said out loud, “Coffee?” 
“Coffee what? Where’s your 
manners?” 
“Coffee, please.” 
She left him then and he rolled 
out of the rumpled bed. He looked 
down with distaste at his sagging 
drinker’s paunch, then got to his 
feet and walked unsteadily to the 
bathroom. He was surprised at the 
weakness he felt, the near nausea, 
the protests of a body allowed to 
degenerate into a state of general 
unfitness. It all seemed wrong. 
Surely he had always taken pride 
in maintaining himself in good 
condition. 
He stood under the shower and 
gradually the mists cleared from 
his brain. In a little while, John 
Grimes, Officer Commanding the 
Zetland Base, would be ready to 
begin his dreary day. 
Nobody quite knew why the Federation maintained a Base on Zetland. Once, a long time ago, the 
planet had been strategically important when it seemed possible 
that the Federation and the expanding Shaara Empire might 
clash, but the Treaty of Danzenorg, respected by both cultures, 
had neatly parceled up the entire 
Galaxy into spheres of influence. 
True, there were other spacefaring 
races who belonged neither to the 
Federation nor to the Empire but 
their planets were many light years 
distant from Zetland and their 
trade routes passed nowhere near 
this world. 
There was a base on Zetland. 
There always had been one — there 
always would be one. The taxpayer has bottomless pockets. There 
were spaceport facilities, of a sort. 
There were repair facilities, also of 
a sort. There was a Carlotli Beacon, which was an absolutely inessential part of the navigational network in this sector of space. And 
there was a relay station. The 
whole setup, such as it was, could 
have been run efficiently by a lieutenant, junior grade, with a handful of petty officers and ratings. 
But a base commander must have 
scrambled egg on the peak of his 
cap. The commander of a base like 
Zetland is almost invariably on the 
way up or the way down. 
John Grimes was not on the way 
up. 
Nonetheless, he did have that 
scrambled egg on the peak of his 
cap. There was also a smear of egg 
yolk at the corner of his mouth 
and a spatter of it on the lapel of 
his jacket. Elis enlisted woman 
driver, waiting for him in the 
ground car outside the base commander’s bungalow, looked at him 
with some distaste — apart from 
anything else, she had been waiting all of twenty minutes — clambered reluctantly out of the vehicle 
— her legs, noted Grimes, were too 
thick and more than a little hairy 
— and threw him a salute that almost, but not quite, qualified as 
dumb insolence. Grimes returned 
it contemptuously. She opened the 
rear door of the car for him. He 
got in, thanking her as an afterthought, sagged into the seat. She 
got back behind the controls, 
clumsily stirred and prodded the 
THE RUB 
machine into reluctant motion. 
The drive to the military spaceport was short. The commander 
thought, as he had thought many 
times before, that he should walk 
to his office rather than ride — 
the exercise would do him good. 
But somehow he never felt up to 
it. He stared unseeingly through 
the dirty windows. The view was 
as it always was — flat fields with 
an occasional low farmhouse, uninteresting machines trudging 
through the dirt on their caterpillar treads, sowing or reaping or 
fertilizing the proteinuts which 
were Zetland’s only export, exported to worlds too povertystricken to send anything worthwhile in exchange. Ahead was the 
base — administration buildings, 
barracks, control tower and the 
lopsided ellipsoid that was the 
Carlotti Beacon, slowly rotating. 
The car rolled over the concrete 
apron, jerked to a halt outside the 
control tower. The girl driver got 
out clumsily, opened the commander’s door. 
Grimes got out, muttered, “’K 
you.” 
She replied sweetly, “It was a 
pleasure, sir.” 
Saucy bitch. 
He did not take the elevator to 
his office on the top level of the 
tower. Thoughts about his lack of 
physical fitness had been nagging 
him all morning. He used the 
stairs, taking them two at a time 
at first. He soon had to abandon 
this practice. By the time that he 
reached his door he was perspiring 
and out of breath and his heart 
was hammering uncomfortably. 
Ensign Mavis Davis, his secretary, rose from her desk as he entered the office. She was tall, plain 
and old for her junior rank. She 
was also highly efficient and was 
one of the few persons on this 
world whom Grimes liked. 
“Good morning. Commander,” 
she greeted him, a little too brightly
“What’s good about it?” he 
scaled his cap in the general direction of its peg, missed as usual. 
“Oh, well, it’s the only one we’ve 
got.” 
She said, holding out a message 
flimsy, “This came in a few minutes ago.” 
“Have we declared war on somebody?” 
She frowned at him. She was too 
essentially good a person to regard 
war as a joking matter. “No. It’s 
from Draconis. She’s making an 
unscheduled call here.” 
A Constellation Class cruiserjust what I need. 
He asked, “When is she due?” 
“Eleven hundred hours this 
morning.” 
“What?” Grimes managed a 
grin. “The fleet’s in port — or almost in port — and not a whore in 
the house washed.” 
“That’s not funny. Commander,” she said reprovingly. 
“Indeed it’s not, Mavis,” he 
agreed. Indeed it wasn’t. He 
thought of the huge cruiser with all 
her spit and polish and thought of 
his own, slovenly, planet-based 
command — with its cracked, peeling paint, dusty surfaces everywhere, equipment working only after a fashion and personnel looking as though they had slept in 
their uniforms — as many of them 
all too probably had. He groaned, 
strode to the robot librarian’s console, switched on. 
“Fleet List,” he said “ Draconis . 
Name of commanding officer.” 
“Yes sir.” The mechanical voice 
was tinny, absolutely unhuman. 
“Captain Francis Delamere, 
O.G.C., D.C.O., F.M.H.” 
Grimes switched off. 
Frank Delamere— a lieutenant 
when I was a two-and-a-half ringer. 
A real space scout without the 
brains to come in out of the rain — 
but a stickler for Regulations. A nd 
now he's a four-ring captain. 
“John.” 
He detected sympathy in the ensign’s voice. 
“Yes, Mavis?” 
She was abruptly businesslike. 
“We haven’t much time — but I 
issued orders in your name to get 
the place cleaned up a bit. The 
ground control approach crew has 
been alerted and the beacons 
should be in position by now.” 
Grimes walked to the wide window. 
“Yes,” he said, looking down at 
the triangle of intensely bright red 
lights that had been set out on the 
gray concrete of the apron, “they 
are. Thank you.” 
“Do you wish to monitor 
G.C.A.?” 
“Please.” 
She touched a switch, and almost immediately there was the 
sound of a crisply efficient voice. 
“ Draconis to Zetland Base. 
E.T.A., surface contact, still 1100 
hours. Is all ready?” 
“All ready, Draconis ,” came 
the reply in crisp accents. 
“Just one small thing, John,” 
said Mavis. She stood very close to 
him and with a dampened tissue 
removed the flecks of egg yolk 
from the corner of his mouth, 
from his uniform. “Now, let them 
all come.” 
“Let them all come,” he echoed. 
D RACONIS was heard long before she was seen, the irregular 
throb of her inertial drive beating 
down from beyond the overcast. 
And suddenly she was below the 
cloud ceiling, a great, gleaming 
spindle, the flaring vanes of her 
landing gear at her stern. Grimes 
wondered if Francis Delamere 
were doing his own pilotagen--very 
often the captains of these big 
ships let their navigating officers 
handle the controls during an approach. He thought smugly that 
this was probably the case now; 
when Delamere had served under 
Grimes he had been no great 
shakes as a ship-handler. 
THE RUB 
Whoever was bringing the cruiser down was making a good job of 
it. Just a touch of lateral thrust to 
compensate for the wind, a, steady 
increase of vertical thrust as altitude diminished, so that what at 
first had seemed an almost uncontrolled free fall was, at the moment 
of ground contact, a downward 
drift as gentle as that of a soap 
bubble. 
She was tall, a shining metallic 
tower, the control room at her 
sharp stem well above the level of 
Grimes’ office. Abruptly her Inertial Drive was silent. 
“Eleven-oh-oh-oh-seven,” announced Mavis Davis. 
Grimes grunted. 
He retrieved his cap from the 
floor, let the ensign, who had found 
a clothes brush somewhere, brush 
its crown and peak. He put it on. 
He said to the girl, “Look after 
the shop. I have to go visiting.” 
He left his office, took the elevator down to ground level. He was 
joined by the base supply officer, 
the base medical officer and the 
base engineering officer. All three, 
he noted, looked reasonably respectable. Grimes in the lead, they 
marched out to the ramp that was 
being extended from Draconis' after airlock. 
It's good to be boarding a ship 
again — even one commanded by a 
man who once was my junior and 
who is now my senior. 
As he climbed the ramp he threw 
back his shoulders and sucked in 
his belly. He returned the salute of 
the junior officer at the airlock 
smartly and then, followed by his 
own officers, strode into the elevator cage. The woman operator 
needed no instructions — in a very 
few seconds the party from the 
base was being ushered into the 
captain’s day room. 
“Ah,” said Delamere. “Commander Grimes, isn’t it?” He had 
changed little over the years. His 
close-cropped hair was touched 
with gray but he was as boyishly 
slim and handsome as ever. The 
four gold rings gleamed bravely 
on each sleeve and the left breast 
of his uniform was gaudy with ribbons. “Welcome aboard, Commander.” 
“Thank you. Captain.” 
Grimes had no intention of addressing the other as “sir.” 
“You’re putting on weight, 
John,” said the Specialist Commander who was one of the group 
of officers behind Delamere. 
“Maggie!” 
“Commander Lazenby,” said 
the captain stiffly, “this touching 
reunion can be deferred until such 
time as the base commander and I 
have discussed business.” 
“Aye, aye, sir,” snapped Margaret Lazenby just a little too crisply
Delamere glared at her. John 
Grimes looked at her wistfully. 
She had not put on weight. She 
had hardly changed since they had 
been shipmates in the Census Ship 
Seeker. Her red hair gleamed under her cap, her figure was as slim 
and trim as ever. 
But she was not the slender, auburn-haired woman who haunted 
his dreams. 
“Commander Grimes,” said 
Delamere. Then, more loudly: 
“Commander Grimes.” 
“Yes, Captain?” 
“Perhaps we can get the introductions over with and then you 
and I can get down to business.” 
“Certainly, Captain. This is 
Lieutenant Commander Dufay, 
the base medical officer. Lieutenant Danby, supplies. Lieutenant 
Roscoe, engineering.” 
Delamere introduced his own 
people and the specialist officers 
went below, leaving the captain to 
conduct business with Grimes. 
“A drink, Commander?” 
“Please, Captain. Gin, if I may.” 
“You may. Sit down, Grimes.” 
Delamere poured the drinks, took 
a' chair facing the other. “Down 
the hatch.” 
“Down the hatch.” 
The captain grinned. 
“Well, Grimes, I don’t seem to 
have caught you with your pants 
down. Frankly, I was rather hoping I would.” 
“What do you mean?” 
“I haven’t forgotten that bad report you put in on me.” 
“It was truthful,” said Grimes. 
“You were a lousy ship-handler.” 
Then: “By the way, who brought 
Draconis in?” 
“None of your business,” 
snapped Delamere, an angry flush 
on his face. After a moment he 
continued. “For your information, 
Grimes, an economy wave is 
sweeping the Service. There is a 
cutting out of dead wood in progress. Certain ships, Draconis 
among them, have been selected 
by our lords and masters to make 
the rounds of bases such as this 
one and to report on them. My last 
call was at Wuggis Three. The 
base commander who was in 
charge is now on the retired list. 
His G.C.A. was in such a state 
that I was obliged to use the commercial spaceport.” 
“How nice for you,” commented 
Grimes. 
The captain ignored this. “I’m 
giving you fair warning, Commander. You’d better dedigitate. 
For the purpose of this exercise a 
state of war is deemed to exist. 
Draconis has limped into your 
base with seventy-five per cent casualties, including all technical officers. These same technical officers 
are, even now, arranging a simulation of extensive damage. The 
Mannschenn Drive, for example, 
will require a new governor and 
will have to have its controls recalibrated. Only one inertial drive 
unit is functional and that is held 
together with spit and string. My 
laser cannon are burned out. My 
yeast, algae and tissue culture vats 
contain only slimy, dead messes 
utterly unfit for human — or even 
THE RUB 
unhuman — consumption.” He 
laughed. “All the parts that have 
been removed from machinery and 
weapons are, of course, securely 
locked in my storerooms, where 
your people won’t be able to get 
their greasy t 'paws on them. You, 
Grimes, starting from scratch, using your people, your workshops, 
will have to bring Draconis back 
to a state of full fighting efficency, 
as soon as possible if not before.” 
“Then I’d better get cracking,” 
said Grimes. 
He rose to his feet, glanced briefly and regretfully at his almost untouched glass. It was good liquor, 
far better than any that could be 
obtained locally — but even now he 
was rather fussy about whom he 
drank with. 
“You’d better,” agreed Delamere. “Oh, you haven’t finished 
your drink, Commander.” 
“Your ship’s in such a sorry, 
simulated state,” Grimes told him, 
“that we’ll make believe that you 
need it yourself.” 
He forgot to salute on his way 
out. 
Ill 
I KNEW something like this 
would happen,” complained 
Marian tearfully. “What shall we 
do, John? What can we do? A 
commander’s pension is not 
much.” 
“Too right — it isn’t.” He looked 
thoughtfully at the half-inch of oily 
gin remaining in his glass, brought 
it to his mouth and swallowed it, 
gagging slightly. He reached for 
the bottle, poured himself another 
generous shot. 
“You drink too much,” flared 
his wife. 
“I do,” he agreed, looking at 
her. She was almost passable when 
alcohol had dimmed the sharp 
edges of his perception. 
He murmured: “ Malt does more 
than Milton can/To justify God's 
ways to Man. .” 
“What?” 
“Housman,” he explained. “A 
poet. Twentieth Century or thereabouts.” 
“Poetry.” she sneered contemptuously. “But what are you doing 
about Captain Delamere? He was 
such a nice young man when he 
was one of your officers, when we 
were all happy at Lindisfarne 
Base.” 
“Yes, Franky was always good 
at sucking up to captains’ and 
commodores’ and admirals' 
wives.” 
“But you must have done something to him, John. Couldn’t you 
apologize?” 
“Like hell,” growled Grimes. 
“Like adjectival, qualified hell.” 
“Don’t swear at me.” 
“I wasn’t swearing at you specifically.” 
“You were thinking it.” 
“All right, I was thinking it." 
He finished his drink, stood up. 
put on his cap. “I’d better get 
down to the ship to see what sort 
of mess my butterfly-brained apes 
lire making of her,” 
“What difference will your being 
there make?” 
“I’m still commander of this 
bloody base.” 
He looked back at her briefly as 
he reached the door, felt a spasm 
of pity. She was such a mess. She 
had let herself go (as he had let 
himself go). Only faint traces remained of the attractive Ensign 
M arian Hall, Supply Branch, 
whom he, on the rebound, had 
married. Physically she no longer 
attracted him. Mentally she was — 
nothing. She read only trash, was 
incapable of intelligent conversation and could never join Grimes 
in his favorite pastime of kicking 
ideas around to see if they yelped. 
He wondered how things would 
have worked out if he and Maggie 
Lazenby had made a go of things. 
Actually to have Maggie here, on 
this world, at this juncture was too 
much. 
He walked to the military spaceport. The night was mild, not unpleasant in spite of the wisps of 
drizzle that drifted over the flat 
landscape. Now and again Zetland’s twin moons appeared briefly in breaks in the clouds but their 
light was faint and pallid in comparison to the glare of the working 
floods around Draconis. 
He tramped slowly up the ramp 
to the airlock, returned the salute 
of the 0.0. D., one of Delamere’s 
men. The elevator was unmanned 
—but, after all, the ship had suffered heavy simulated casualties, 
so ratings could not be spared for 
nonessential duties. He went first 
to the “farm.” The*vats had been 
cleaned out but the stink still lingered. The cruiser’s biochemist 
had carried out his sabotage-under-orders a little too enthusiastically. Grimes exchanged a few 
words with Lieutenant Commander Dufay, in charge of operations 
here, then went down a couple of 
decks to the Inertial Drive Room. 
He looked at the confusion without understanding it. Roscoe and 
his artificers had bits and pieces 
scattered everywhere. It was like a 
mechanical jigsaw puzzle. 
“She'll be right. Commander,” 
said the engineer lieutenant. 
He didn’t seem to be convinced 
by his own words. Grimes certainly 
was not. 
“She’d better be right,” he said. 
Somebody else was using the 
elevator, so he decided to take the 
companionway up to Control^he 
did know more than a little about 
navigational equipment — rather 
than wait. His journey took him 
through officers’ country. He was 
not altogether surprised when he 
was accosted by Commander Lazenby. 
“Hi, John.” 
“Hi, Maggie.” 
“Are you busy?” 
He shrugged. 
“I should be.” 
THE RUB 
“But we haven’t seen each other 
for years. Come into my dogbox 
for a drink and a yarn. It’s all right 
— the boy wonder’s being wined 
and dined by the governor in ZeehanCity.” * 
“He might have told me.” 
“Why should he? In any case, 
he’s on the simulated casualty list. 
He’s probably awarded himself a 
posthumous Grand Galactic 
Cross.” 
“With golden comets.” 
“And a platinum spiral nebula.” She laughed. “Come in, John. 
Take the weight off your feet.” The 
door to her day cabin opened for 
her. “This is liberty hall. You can 
spit on the mat and call the cat a 
bastard.” 
“You haven’t changed, Maggie,” he said ruefully, looking at 
her. “I wish—” 
She finished it for him. “You 
wish that you’d married me instead 
of that little commissioned grocer’s clerk. But you were always 
rather scared of me, John, weren’t 
you? You were afraid that you, a 
spacehound pure and simple, 
wouldn’t be able to cope with me, 
a qualified ethologist. But as an 
ethologist I could have seen to it 
that things worked out for us.” 
She sat down on her settee, 
crossing her slim, sleek legs. Her 
thin, intelligent face under the red 
hair was serious. He looked at her 
wistfully. 
He murmured— and it was as 
much a question as a statement, 
“It’s too late now.” 
“Yes. It’s too late. You’ve 
changed too much. You did the 
wrong thing, John. You should 
have resigned after that court martial. You could have gone out to 
the Rim Worlds to make a fresh 
start.” 
“I wanted to, Maggie. But Marian — she's incurably Terran. She 
made it quite plain that she’d not 
go out to live among the horrid, 
rough colonials. As far as she’s 
concerned, everywhere there’s a 
Survey Service base there’s a little 
bit of old Earth, with society neatly stratified. Mrs. Commander is 
just a cut above Mrs. Lieutenant 
Commander — and so on down.” 
He fumbled for his pipe, filled and 
lit it. “She had the idea, too, that 
My Lords Commissioners would 
one day forgive me and that she’d 
finish up as Mrs. Admiral 
Grimes.” 
“My heart fair bleeds for you 
both,” she said dryly. “But mix us 
drinks, John. You’ll find the 
wherewithal in that locker.” 
“For you?” 
“The same as always. BVG, with 
just a touch of lime.” 
There was a hologram over the 
grog locker, a little, brightly glowing window on to another, happier 
world. It was a beach scene — golden sand, creamy surf, blue sea and 
sky and the golden-brown bodies 
of the naked men and women. 
Grimes asked, “Do you still 
spend your leaves on Areadia?” 
“I do. It’s the only possible planet for an ethologist who takes the 
back to nature slogan seriously.” 
“You look happy enough in this 
hologram.” Grimes inspected the 
three-dimensional picture more 
closely. “Who is that with you?” 
“Peter Cowley. He’s a senior 
biochemist with Trans-Galactic 
Clippers.” 
“No, Not him. The woman?” 
She got up to come to stand beside him. “Oh, that’s Sonya Verrill. Yet another of the commanders with whom the Survey Service 
is infested. She’s Intelligence. Do 
you know her?” 
Grimes stared at the nude woman. She was like Maggie Lazenby 
in many ways— ^her figure, her coloring, her facial features, could almost have been those of Maggie’s 
sister. He looked more closely. 
There should be a mole on her left 
hip. There was. 
“Do you know her?” asked Maggie again. 
“Yes — no — ” 
“Make up your mind.” 
I don't know her. / have never 
met her. But / have dreamed about 
her. I thought it was Maggie in my 
dreams, a somehow different Maggie — but she hasn't a mole anywhere on her body. 
He said, “No, I don’t know her. 
But she is like you, isn’t she?” 
“I can’t see any resemblance. 
You know, she was almost going to 
call here. She’s sculling around 
this neck of space in one of those 
little, fully automated armed 
yachts. Some hush-hush Intelligence deal. But when she heard 
that this was one of the boy wonder’s ports of call she decided to 
play by herself somewhere.” 
“Has he met her?” asked 
Grimes, feeling absurdly jealous. 
“Yes. They do not, repeat not, 
like each other.” 
“Then there must be some gdCd 
in her,” said Grimes with a quite 
irrational surge of relief. 
“Never mind her. What about 
me? I’m thirsty.” 
“All right, all right,” said 
Grimes, mixing the drinks. 
W HEN he reached home Marian was waiting up for him. 
“You’ve been drinking,” she 
accused him. 
“And so, to coin a phrase, 
what?” 
“I don’t mind that so much. But 
you’ve been with that — bitch, that 
Maggie Lazenby.” 
“I had a couple of drinks with 
her, that was all.” 
“Don’t lie to me.” 
“I’m not lying.” 
No, he wasn’t lying. Maggie, in 
her woman’s way, had offered him 
more than a drink but he had 
turned it down. Even now he was 
not sure why he had done so. Or 
he was sure but would not admit it 
to himself. His reason was too insane. He had been loyal to a woman whom he had never met, whose 
THE RUB 
hologram he had seen for the first 
time in Maggie’s day eabin. 
“After all I’ve done for you — 
and you going sniffing around that 
carroty alleycat. You’re no good, 
you’re just no good. You never 
were, and you never will be — ” 
Grimes brushed past her into 
the living room, the Service severity of which had been marred by 
his wife’s tasteless attempts at interior decoration. 
“Say something, damn you. Say 
something, you waster. Haven’t 
you even the guts to defend yourself?” 
The telephone buzzed urgently. 
Grimes went to it, flipped down 
the switch. The screen came alive 
and the plain, almost ugly face of 
Mavis Davis looked out at him. 
“Commander, there’s an emergency — ” 
“Yes?” 
“A Mayday.” 
“Who?” Grimes demanded. 
“Where?” 
“The armed yacht Grebe. In solar orbit between Zetland and Freiad.” She rattled off coordinates. 
“Meteor swarm. Extensive hull 
and machinery damage. Loss of 
atmosphere. Orbit decaying.” 
“Mavis, send a car for me. At 
once.” 
“Willco, Commander.” 
“And what can you do?” his 
wife sneered. “Captain Delamere’s 
got a cruiser and hundreds of really efficient men and women. What 
have you got?” 
“Out of my way,” he snarled. 
“John, you can’t go. I forbid 
you.” She clung to his sleeve but, 
brutally, he shook her off. She followed him for a little way as he 
strode out of the house, along the 
dark road, then gave up. “John!” 
she called. “John!” 
The lights of the car were ahead, 
approaching rapidly. It passed 
him, turned, braked. Mavis Davis 
was driving. He got in beside her. 
She said, as she restarted the vehicle, “ Husky?” 
Of course, it had to be the base’s 
space tug Husky. Delamere’s cruiser was out of commission and the 
tug at the civilian spaceport was, 
Grimes knew, undergoing annual 
survey. Husky was the only ship 
on Zetland capable of getting upstairs in a hurry. 
And she was Grimes’ toy, his 
pet. In her he could feel the satisfaction of real command, of symbiosis with his ship. She was the 
only piece of equipment on the 
base in absolutely first class condition — Grimes and Mavis, working 
with their own hands, had kept her 
so. She was referred to as “the Old 
Man’s private yacht.” 
“I told Petty Officer Willis to 
warm her up,” said Mavis. 
“Good girl.” 
“Can I come with you?” 
“I’d like you to.” She was a clerical officer, trained as such, but she 
should have been an engineer. She 
possessed the inborn skills, the talents and a keen mathematical 
mind. Often she had accompanied 
Grimes on his short jaunts outside 
i lie atmosphere. “You know the 
lit t le bitch better than anybody 
rise on the base.” 
“Thank you, John.” 
The car screamed on to the 
apron, circled the great, useless, 
floodlit hulk of Draconis. Husky 
was in her own berth, tucked away 
behind the workshops, a dull metal 
ovoid standing in her tripedal 
landing gear like a gray egg in its 
cup. A circle of yellow light 
marked her airlock door. 
As the car stopped Grimes 
heard a noise in the sky. A jet was 
coming in fast. The shriek of its 
exhaust varied in pitch as its turret drive was used first to brake 
and then to ease the aircraft to a 
vertical touchdown. The aircraft 
dammed to the concrete just a few 
feet from the car. 
A man jumped out of the cabin, 
confronted Grimes. It was Delamere, still in his mess dress, 
starched white line, black bow tie, 
tinkling miniatures and all. 
“Is she ready?” he demanded. 
“Yes, Captain. I’ll have her up 
and away as soon as the airlock’s 
sealed.” 
“You aren’t taking her up, 
Grimes. I am.” Delamere grinned 
whitely. “Life’s been a little too 
dull lately.” 
“Like hell you’re taking her up, 
Delamere. This is my base and my 
lug.” 
“And I am your superior officer, 
Grimes. You’d better not forget 
it.” 
“You’re not likely to let me, are 
you? But this is a rescue operation 
—and I know how to handle a 
ship.” 
“Out of my way, you insolent 
bastard!” 
Grimes swung clumsily but with 
all his weight behind the blow. Delamere wasn’t as fit as he looked. 
Grimes’ fist sank deep into his 
midriff, under the black silk cummerbund. The air was expelled 
from the captain’s lungs. He sat 
down hard and abruptly. He 
gasped something about striking a 
superior officer, about mutiny. 
“Willis,” Grimes called to the 
petty officer who had appeared in 
the airlock. “Drag the captain 
clear of the blast area. I’m going to 
use the auxiliary rockets. And keep 
clear yourself.” 
“But, sir— ’ 
“You don’t want to be up with 
me on a charge of mutiny. Get out 
of here and take the captain with 
you. That goes for you too, Mavis.” 
“Like hell it does!” 
Grimes paused briefly. He could 
manage the tug singlehanded but 
with rescue operations involved it 
would be asking for trouble. He 
grabbed Mavis by her bony shoulder. 
“Scream,” he whispered. “I’m 
dragging you aboard by force.” 
She screamed, shrieked, “Let go 
of me — ” 
THE RUB 
From where Delamere sprawled 
the struggle would look convincing 
enough. And then they were in the 
airlock. Grimes hurried up to the 
little control room while Mavis 
went to the^ngines. He plumped 
down into the pilot’s chair and, as 
he strapped himself in, cast an experienced eye over the telltale 
lights. Reaction Drive — ready. Inertial Drive — ready. Mannschenn 
Drive stand by. 
His fingers found the firing 
studs in the arm of -the chair. 
He said into the microphone 
hanging before him, “Secure all. 
Secure all for blast off.” 
Mavis’ voice came in reply. “All 
secure, Captain.” 
“Then— blast.” 
He pressed the button and 
Husky screamed upstairs like a bat 
out of hell. 
T HERE was only one person 
aboard the crippled Grebe , a 
woman. Her voice was faint, almost incoherent. She was in her 
suit, she said. She had suffered a 
broken arm and possibly internal 
injuries. She thought that she 
would be able to ship a new air bottle when the one in use was exhausted. 
“Can you actuate your Carlotti 
transceiver?” demanded Grimes 
urgently. 
“I — I think so.” 
“Try. I’m going to switch to 
Mannschenn Drive. I’ll home on 
your Carlotti.” 
“Manschenn Drive?” asked 
Mavis, who had come up to Control. 
“Yes. I want to be there in minutes, not days — and the Mannschenn Drive’s the only way. I 
know it’s risky, but ” 
It was risky to operate the Drive 
in a planetary system with its tangle of gravitational and magnetic 
fields — but it had to be done 
Grimes jockeyed the f ree-falli ng 
Husky around on her gyroscope, 
lining her up on the faint signals 
from the survivor’s suit radio. He 
started the Drive. There was the 
usual second or so of disorientation in Space and Time — and then, 
astern of them, Zetland assumed 
the appearance of a writhing, convoluted ball of luminous gas and 
ahead and to starboard the sun became an iridescent spiral. Grimes 
paid no attention. He heard the 
faint voice from his own Carlotti 
speaker. 
“Carlotti on.” 
“Can you fix it so that it sends a 
continuous note? Turn up the 
gain.” 
“Willco.” 
A faint, continuous squeal came 
from the speaker. 
Good. Grimes watched the quivering antenna of his Carlotti Direction Finder and Communicator, 
the ellipsoid Mobius Strip that was 
rotating slowly about its long axis 
He restarted the Inertial Drive and 
then, with lateral thrust, usthg the 
antenna as a compass needle, 
headed the tug directly for the distant wreck. He pushed the Inertial 
Drive control to full ahead. The irregular throbbing shook the little 
ship. 
“Mavis,” he said, “see if you 
can coax a few more revs out of 
the bone-shaker.” 
“I’ll try,” she told him, and was 
gone. 
A fresh voice came from the 
speaker. It was Delamere. 
“Grimes. Captain Delamere 
calling ex-Commander Grimes. Do 
you read me?” 
“Loud and clear, Delamere. Get 
off the air. I’m busy.” 
“Grimes, I order you to return 
at once. Ensign Davis, I authorize 
you to use force if necessary to 
overcome the mutineer and to assume command of Husky." 
Grimes watched the antenna. It 
showed a continual drift of the target in a three o'clock direction. The 
wreck was in orbit, of course. He 
would have to allow for that. He 
did so, applying just the right 
amount of lateral thrust. 
“Grimes. Ensign Davis. Do you 
hear me?” 
Damn the man. So far the antenna was keeping lined up on the 
signal from the disabled Grebe — 
hut with the base transmitting at 
full power it might topple at any 
second. 
“Grimes here. I can’t give any 
orders but I can appeal to those of 
you in the Carlotti Room. This is a 
rescue operation. I’m homing on 
Grebe's Carlotti Beacon. There’s a 
woman out there, in the wreck, and 
she can’t last much longer. Please 
gel off the air and stay off." 
He was never to know what happened, but he thought he heard 
the sound of a scuffle. 
He thought he heard a voice — 
Maggie’s voice— whisper, “Pull 
the fuse — ” 
He transferred his attention to 
the spherical lank of the mass 
proximity indicator. Yes, there it 
was, a liny, glowing spark, barely 
visible. It was drifting fast toward 
the center of the globe. Too fast? 
Not really. For a collision to occur, two vessels must occupy the 
same space at the same time and 
as long as Husky’s Mannschenn 
Drive was operating she was in a 
Time of her own. But speaking of 
Time — he didn’t want to waste 
any. 
“Mavis, when I put her on full 
astern I want full astern. No half 
measures.” 
“You’ll get it,” she assured him. 
The spark was brighter now, 
crossing one concentric ring after 
another. Grimes adjusted the scale 
of the indicator, pushing the target 
back to the outermost circle. Still 
it drove in. Grimes adjusted the 
scale again and again. Target 
spark merged with the bead of luminosity that represented Husky. 
For a microsecond there was an 
uncanny sensation of merging — 
not of ships, but of two personalities. 
i 
( 
t 
i 
c 
c 
c 
* 
THE RUB 
“Manschenn Drive — off,” 
snapped Grimes, executing his 
own order. “Inertial Drive — full 
astern!” 
The ship shuddered, striving to 
tear herself apart. Colors sagged 
down the spectrum as the everprecessing gyroscopes of the 
Mannschenn Drive were braked to 
a halt — but outside the viewports 
the stars, vibrating madly, still 
looked as they had while the Drive 
was in operation. 
“Stop all,” muttered Grimes, 
jerking the lever to its central position. 
And there, scant feet away, rotating slowly about some cockeyed 
axis, was the torn, buckled hull of 
the space yacht Grebe. 
M AVIS DAVIS came up to 
Control while Grimes was putting on his suit. She was bleeding 
slightly from an abrasion on her 
forehead. Like many another plain 
woman she was beautiful in conditions of emotional and physical 
stress. Before she lowered the helmet on to his shoulders she kissed 
him. The contact was brief but 
surprisingly warm. 
Grimes wished that it could 
have been longer. 
She said, “Goodbye. It’s been 
nice knowing you, John.” 
“What the hell’s this. Mavis?” 
She grinned lopsidedly. “I have 
my fey moments — especially when 
somebody is playing silly buggers 
with Mannschenn Drive — ” 
Then she was securing the helmet and further speech was impossible. 
Grimes collected what tools he 
would require on his way down to 
the airloJ- When the outer door 
opened he found that he could almost step across to Grebe. He 
pushed himself away from his own 
little ship, made contact with the 
hull of the other with the magnetic 
soles of his boots and palms of his 
gloves. He clambered over her like 
a clumsy, four-legged spider. He 
soon discovered that it would be 
impossible to open Grebe's airlock door. But it didn’t matter. A 
few feet away from it was a hole 
large enough for him to crawl 
through. 
He said into his helmet microphone, “I’m here.” 
The faint voice that replied at 
long last held an oddly familiar 
astringent quality. “And about 
time.” 
“Where are you?” 
“In the control room.” 
Grimes made his way forward, 
using cutting torch and crowbar 
when he had to. When he found 
her she was in the pilot’s chair, 
held there by the seat belt. Moving 
feebly, she contrived to swivel to 
look at him. Husky’s floods were 
on and glaring through the viewports but her face, inside the helmet, was in shadow. 
She said, “I hate to have to admit it — but you’re right, John.” 
“What do you mean?” 
“What you always say when you 
deliver yourself of one of your 
diatribes against automation. 
‘Never put yourself at the mercy 
of a single fuse.’ My meteor shield 
might as well have not been there 
and by the time the alarm sounded 
it was too late to do anything — ” 
“Sonya, I’ve got to get you out 
of here. Aboard Husky." 
He fumbled with the strap that 
held her. 
“Too " late.” She coughed and 
the sound of it, telling of fluidfilled lungs, terrified him. “Too — 
late, f hung on as long — as I could. 
Start — Mannschenn Drive. Should 
be some -power — in batteries — ” 
“Sonya! I’m getting you out of 
here — ” 
“No. No — start — Drive—” 
But he persisted in trying to unstrap her. Summoning her last reserves of strength she pushed him 
away. He lost contact with the 
deck, drifted away from her. He 
clutched at something — a lever? 
It moved in his hand. 
He did not hear the Drive starting — there was no air in the ship to 
carry the sound. But he felt the 
vibration as rotors stirred into life, 
was aware that the harsh light of 
Husky's floods had deepened from 
white to a sullen red. Around him, 
around Sonya, the Universe lost 
its substance. But he was solid still, 
as she was, and her hand was firm 
in his. 
And . 
S HE was saying, “We found each 
other again. We found each 
other again ” 
Grimes looked at her, stared at 
her for a long time, dreadfully 
afraid that she would vanish. He 
held her hand tightly. Then, but 
cautiously, he stared around him 
at the temple. It seemed to have 
lost its alien magic. It was just a 
large, featureless room with the 
dimensions of a cube. On the 
floor, annoyingly off center, was a 
block of black stone in the shape 
of a coffin. 
He said, “That dream ... If it 
was a dream . .” 
She said, “There is a fourth-rate 
Survey Service base on Zetland—** 
He said, “The last I heard of 
Delamere he’d been kicked upstairs to become a deskbound 
Commodore — ” 
She said, “Damn your silly 
dream. Forget about it." 
“I'll try,” he promised. And 
then, unbidden, familiar words 
formed themselves in his mind. 
He said them aloud: “To sleep, 
perchance to dream . ay, there's 
the rub — ” 
“What’s the rub, John?” 
He gazed at her. 
“What is the dream? That or 
this?” 
“What does it matter?” she 
asked practically. “We just make 
the best of what we’ve got.” Then, 
as they walked out of the drab 
temple, “Damo! My ribs are still 
hurting!” ^ 
THE RUB 
StfMPOll :L ^f'NQ>WWE5 ACROSS 
THEQOIE-TORWSNCEOF FAT SOLAR 
SfWCE IIKEIHE GREAT RED PHALLIC 
TEAtPLEOF BROlHER/HeROUR^-. 
WHI7EVSHU5 AwWTSINTHEOISP^NCL 
bXL 
•• i. 
A 
SteSUHPOT VEERS INlO/A Stow? 
TUMBLING VENOSLAN POAROR&lT 
rrauovos itseufto fall above. 
VENUS | NTHE/MftHG DANCE. Of 
UNIVERSAL ATTRACTION.... 
MOGEpJWERFAClOBj' 15 GtwT DOWN' 
ANDTHECREVOS OF SCREWS, UZAROS, 
RUSIES AND PAPAPHERNAUA STAND 
DOWN FROM SUMPCiTS MAIDEN 
VOYAGE ACROSS ftANOAR? SPACE, . 
'-:-vvx 
X?.?' 
• 4 ". 
The Universal Baseball Association, Inc.-J. Henry Waugh, Prop. 
Robert Coover 
© 
T he name oj the game is life — 
death, God, sex and vengeance!" This quote from Book 
Week appears on the Signet edition of a marvelously wrought 
book called The Universal Baseball Association, Inc.-J. Henry 
Waugh, Prop, by Robert Coover. 
It’s Signet book T3890, 75c. (By 
the time you read this, you may 
have to order it by mail from New 
American Library, the publishers. 
Information on how to do this is 
available in every Signet, Mentor, 
and NAL book; the price is cover 
price plus 10c plus applicable 
sales taxes. In rare cases it’s worth 
the trouble, and this is one of 
those cases). 
Anyway. The name of the game 
is life and all those other things. 
Under a blurb like that, you’d expect no less a title than Lincoln's 
Doctor's Dog. But the title Coover 
gives you is entirely accurate. The 
book is about J. Henry Waugh’s 
relationship to the full-scale major 
baseball league he operates in his 
mind, aided by chance. (Chance 
as modified by whimsy and by an 
inability to let chance operate with 
complete freedom when the big 
chips are down). Thus, very quickly you do get the idea that it’s a 
book about God. There’s also 
death and sex. And the overt central problem gets to be whether it 
is or isn’t about vengeance. 
But let’s look at it through our 
eyes, which are not always overt. 
Is it about a science-fiction theme? 
Yes, it is. It does not bear the 
standard trappings of science fiction — whereas, for instance, Ted 
Sturgeon’s “Microcosmic God” 
does — but it answers excellently to 
the needs of the sf mind-bent. In 
fact, this book — which baffled a 
succession of book reviewers in its 
original edition, and apparently 
didn’t do too well in the market — 
may find its natural and most appreciative audience among us. 
You don’t have to be a baseball 
fan. J. Henry Waugh, for instance, is not a baseball fan. He is 
a middle-aged bachelor bookkeeper who is a games fan. Like so 
many others before him, he is attracted not to the action on the 
diamond but to the statistics of accomplishment. Like a youngster 
relentlessly banging a tennis ball 
against a wall, playing pitcher 
against himself, counting a onebounce catch as a single or a complete miss as a home run, Henry 
sits in his kitchen, rolling dice and 
consulting the complex of charts 
he he has evolved over the years. 
He’s a grown man with appropriate training, so his rules are 
more elaborate than one-bounceis-a-single. Henry throws three 
dice whose various possible falls 
not only ordain an event in his 
mind but predetermine the general nature of the next fall, and 
sometimes the exact nature of the 
past. I-or example, a third successive roll of three ones, read out on 
the supplementary lixlraordinary 
Occurrences chart, means: Batter 
fatally struck by bean ball. When 
it happens when Damon Rutherford, phenomenal young pitcher, 
radiating class in every lineament 
and motion, dies in the dust on 
Damon Rutherford Day before a 
stricken throng including his father, Former Ace Brock Rutherford 
— it is an event no different in 
essence from those created by 
Sturgeon’s protagonist when he 
sent the sky crushing down on his 
Neoterics. But it happens not to a 
few impersonal creatures scuttling 
about anonymously under an impermeable dome but to the finest, 
most gallant, most accomplished, 
most sexually potent figure in the 
U.B.A. and in Henry’s mind. 
Henry’s mind is a disquietingly 
familiar placeman alien landscape 
whose every feature is drawn from 
recognizable dreams. On the surface, Henry is a bathetic figure — 
the isolated craftsman-bachelor 
driven by time’s passage into the 
blind alley of the only creativity 
available to him. Instead of sawing out a thousand birdhouses in a 
basement workshop, or creating 
the most elaborate miniature train 
layout in his neighborhood ... or 
building up a complete mint collection of Weird Tales . Henry 
not only creates his baseball game, 
with its elaborate but rational 
rules that anyone with the pa
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 
tience might follow, he also creates 
the supportive paraphernalia. 
He spends “winters” between 
seasons in writing up the individual histories of the clubs in his 
league, and in evolving background events, such as the time 
Long Lew Lydell raped old Fennimore McCaffree’s spinster daughter in the Knickerbocker dugout in 
front of five thousand wide-eyed 
spectators. (It worked out alF right 
— Lew made an honest woman of 
Fanny, being forced to marry her 
because McCaffree’s Legalist 
Party couldn’t have stood the 
scandal otherwise). 
As you can see, almost from the 
beginning the U.B.A.’s now extensive history has been playing itself 
out in a universe not quite like 
this one. Such features of the 
landscape as an unhindered public 
rape, and a baseball league whose 
official actions are affected by several' political parties contending 
within h, are not overtly identical 
with the real world. But any objective view of this situation is constantly being obscured by Coover’s skill at forcing the reader to 
suspend his judgment and see 
Henry deal with the real world in 
terms of the imaginary one. 
For Henry is not going the trite 
route. For a very long while he is 
able to go out socializing with bartenders and B-girls while firmly 
encased in the matrix of the 
U.B.A.’s history rather than his 
own. The isolation that might 
make him a schizoid recluse is the 
very same freedom from contradictory stimuli that might enable 
him to go on to the end of his days 
with his private creation, harming 
no one grievously, and helping 
himself to survive beyond meremortality. In his apartment full of 
U.B.A. statistics, chronicles, and 
memories, he is building up a coherent body of work with its own 
total validity. It’s all there. 
“Into the Book went the whole 
U.B.A., everything from statistics 
to journalistic dispatches, from 
seasonal analyses to general baseball theory. Style varied from the 
extreme economy of factual data 
to the overblown idiom of the 
sportswriter, from the scientific 
objectivity of the theoreticians to 
the literary speculations of essayists and anecdotalists. There were 
tape-recorded dialogues, player 
contributions, election coverage, 
obituaries, satires, prophecies, 
scandals.” 
In other words, it was Henry’s 
creativity that gave Damon Rutherford a name, a parentage and a 
manifest destiny. But it was the 
dice, and Henry’s game rules, that 
made him a prominent figure in 
the U.B.A. So prominent, in fact, 
that he deserved a D^mon Rutherford Day. It was the dic^ that 
killed him as he came to bat in 
Henry’s mind. But it was Henry’s 
creativity, endowing him with his 
peculiar grace and poise, his overt 
( Please turn to page 1 54 ) 
R EALLY, in spite of the circumstances, the creature was too 
funny, thought Damals. It was almost impossible not to laugh. And 
at that moment one of the four 
watchers sniggered audibly. Another pressed a button on the arm 
of his chair. 
The gesture * extinguished the 
film and at the same time swept 
back the covers from the hyperbola 
of transparent material forming 
two thirds of the wall. Outside it 
was evening and a grove of trees 
similar to those in the film filtered 
a patchwork of starlight onto the 
sleek richness of the estate. 
The one who had cut off the film 
turned round with some asperity. 
“Really Ziel! There isn’t room 
for humor in the situation — even, 
I should have thought, for one not 
so closely affected as myself.” 
Damals, the psychologist, found 
himself apologizing for Ziel, the 
biologist — more or less automatically as befitted a fellow scientist 
but rather reluctantly. During dinner Ziel had shown himself a brash 
clumsy career-maker. 
Damals found himself saying, 
“I think you can see. Senator, that 
the results are clownishly funny, if 
one can distinguish the humor 
from the tragedy and feel both at 
the same time — as I suppose most 
scientists can.” 
Senator Enedee, nearly two feet 
taller than Damals, looked down 
at him mildly and said, “Of course, 
I am too strained. We all rely on 
your skill and patience. Your 
patience-"” 
“ — is, if anything, excessive,” 
said the fourth person, a smile on 
his dark grizzled face. He was the 
smallest of the four and seemed 
the most restive. 
“Don’t say that, Rampo.” Damals turned to him with something 
of the awkwardness they had just 
seen on the screen, “Patience is a 
quality our civilization lacks. 
There is no help for that, 1 suppose, 
in general. But in some specialized 
fields — how much we need it.” 
Ziel, who had not yet spoken, 
said, “I have sufficient impatience 
to want to get down to business. 
We have not yet been told officially why we are here. But it is obvious enough. Senator Enedee has 
collected the Principal of the Institute of Mutational Psychiatry, 
the Colonial Ministry’s senior anthropological adviser and a biologist who, though not up to the 
same standard, at least has the 
advantage of being available in 
this planetary system. You show 
us a film of a being whom I take 
to be your nephew Tontor, a barely viable mutation.” 
“An unviable mutation” said the 
senator gloomily. 
“The main point, Ziel,” the 
Damals pul in, seeing that it was 
about to be made anyway, “is that 
you have just seen Tontor as he is 
after two years of educational 
therapy at my Institution.” 
“Ah—” 
Ziel’s heavy modesty had made 
little impression on the other two 
scientists. His professional status 
was, if anything, higher than theirs 
and not only because of the enormous importance of biology in 
their culture. His positive and 
rather overbearing manner was 
probably a reflection of the pushfulness that had carried him to 
one of the key power posts not subject to election. Damals could see 
by various slight signs that Rampo 
did not like Ziel any more than he 
did. What the senator’s feelings 
were was not so apparent — either 
he was better at concealing his 
sentiments or the fact that he was 
not a scientist made him less 
jealous. 
“It can be stated definitely,” 
continued Damals, who knew the 
value of a positive statement, “that 
no further significant improvement is possible.” 
The senator poured out four 
drinks, giving the last to Ziel as he 
said, “I imagine, knowing your 
efficiency, that you checked on 
Tontor’s record before you arrived 
here this evening. Is there anything 
for me in it?” 
“No. You must realize that at 
■birth he really was quite unviable. 
Emergency biological and surgical work was carried out at once, 
as usual. I have checked the reports and they are unexceptionable. Further tests were taken and 
adjustments made at various suitable ages in infancy and adoles
cence — one of them by Zoroz, 
who, as you know, is now senior 
biological adviser in the Arb galaxy. There were all perfectly done. 
Tontor is now as good as biology 
— and apparently as psychology — 
can make him.” 
“I didn’t really expect anything 
more,” said the senator. “Indeed, 
I took the opportunity of your 
visit to the system to get you to do 
me the favor of dining with me for 
more general reasons.” 
“For a galactic senator to be 
honored by the visit of a simple 
biologist — that’s the wrong way 
around, your excellency.” 
“Everyone knows that a biologist ranks most highly these days.” 
This time Damals could interpret quite easily the look that went 
with the senator’s remark — presumably he had realized that subtlety was lost on Ziel. 
Ziel went on: “The more general 
reasons, no doubt, are to obtain 
my opinion on a possible revision 
of the Biological Laws. But surely 
you are not going to tell me that 
the unfortunate case ■•of your 
nephew has changed your altitude 
to the public good?” 
This question had been in the 
minds of both Damals and Rampo, 
but they had scarcely expected to 
hear it stated so bluntly. Damals, 
who had formed a good opinion 
of the senator, awaited his answer. 
S HOWING no signs of annoyance, the politician said slowly, 
NO PLANET LIKE HOME 
“Well, I suppose my sister’s feelings — as she has finally realized 
that nothing more can probably be 
done — have made the question 
more vivid to me. But the question 
is by no means only a matter of my 
personal interests. You must know 
that tragedies such as Tontor have 
become increasingly common in 
the last generation. And you may 
also know that a group of reasonably responsible politicians is considering making an issue of the 
public discontent. The advantages 
cannot outweigh the misery caused 
by the present laws — or such is 
their idea. Unless some way of 
modifying the effects of the laws 
can be found the laws themselves 
will have to be altered. What is 
your view?” 
For the first time Ziel showed an 
emotion other than self-satisfaction but, he succeeded in controlling himself. 
He finished his drink and said 
in a rather formal voice, “The 
government’s policy in this matter, 
at any rate, is quite unpolitical. It 
takes the advice of its biological 
advisers, which may be said to be 
unanimous on the point.” 
“May be said to be?” 
“No— for practical purposes we 
are unanimous. We have considered a few alternatives on minor 
points only. But perhaps it would 
be best if I gave you a brief analysis of the whole position. Then we 
can decide.” 
Ziel, now back at his most self
satisfied, wailed while the senator 
poured out another round of 
drinks. 
“As you know,” Ziel said, “we 
are the only race in the universe, as 
far as is known, whose blood contains — and whose metabolism 
needs — radioactive salts on a 
large scale. This peculiarity has always resulted in a mass of mutations. At some point in the recent 
past a dominant mutation arose 
whose characteristic was a large 
increase in the use and conservation of these salts. This development in turn has led to such an increase in mutation that absolutely 
pure breeding may now be said to 
have vanished. Of every thousand 
mutations about one is favorable, 
four more combine favorable 
and unfavorable characteristics 
and one is about even. A further 
forty are unfavorable, though not 
impossibly so. Another hundred 
are naturally lethal but reclaimable 
by modern techniques - the rest 
are absolutely lethal. Even with the 
assistance of the most advanced 
methods we cannot produce more 
than a few normal fertile sperms 
from any one male. The same sort 
of limitation applies to our females. Without allowing for accidents this means that the continuity — and in particular the progress — of the race, depend on salvaging every possible viable case in 
the hope that perhaps a mental — 
or nervous — advantage has accompanied the physical disadvantage. 
no 
If this had not been done we 
should probably have regressed 
considerably even in the last hundred years.” 
“That is quite correct,” said 
Damals. 
Ziel, who clearly did not require 
such confirmation, finished his 
speech more abruptly than he had 
perhaps intended: “Tontor is a 
biological triumph. I havejust seen 
photographs of him at birth. His 
present physique must represent 
weeks of successful work by several specialists. The psychologists 
have not been so successful?” 
“No”, said Damals. “Of course, 
the slowness of his nervous reactions is one obstacle. Unfortunately the surgeons couldn’t speed that 
up.” 
Rampo, no expert, had said 
nothing. But the quick movement 
of his eyes from speaker to speaker 
gave some indication of his real 
talkativeness. He now started to 
open his mouth but at that moment 
the biologist took a brisk, efficient 
look at his timepiece and got up. 
“Well, Senator, 1 must be off. 
I’ll go over and have a check of 
Tontor myself, though I can hold 
out little hope that I’ll find anything. His condition is pretty final. 
And I’ll have a report sent you — 
it should clear up any ideas you 
may have about revising the laws. 
Goodbye.” 
I N THE balcony, as the three 
men watched the glow of Ziel’s 
jet fade into the cloudy south, the 
tall politician asked slowly, “How 
right is he?” 
Damals looked sideways at 
him. It was difficult to tell how 
badly the senator really took all 
this. For a moment Damals was 
tempted to take some of the edge 
off the crude positiveness of Ziel’s 
case. But he would really be raising false hopes, he supposed. 
So he said, “If anything, he understated the case. The biologists 
are struggling along with such a 
bare margin that mutational progress is infinitesimal. Every mutation that can be made to live must 
be.” 
The senator took the pronouncement with the easy strength 
that had made him a famous figure 
in a dozen galaxies. 
“Well, anyhow, I’m glad in a 
way Ziel isn’t as successful at solving problems as he is at everything 
else. And now I’ll get out a bottle 
I keep for guests who are guests 
and not bio-politicians.” 
A little machine slid silently 
across the balcony. Its taps poured 
into three great tankards. 
“It’s curious to think that physicists, if it weren’t for our special 
problems, might have been our important scientists. They’re much 
more successful in their way,” said 
Rampo. “Look at that wine-robot 
— far more efficient than lots of 
mutations.” 
“Well, that was another possibility thqt had occured to me,” 
NO PLANET LIKE HOME 
said the senator. “Could robots be 
built — with a protoplasmic outer 
cover — at Tontor’s level to be 
companions to him, as you might 
say. I seem to have read something 
about such developments." 
“The technique has been quite 
well worked ouf,” said Damals, 
“but it’s not really practicable. I 
say nothing of the cost, which is 
considerable. There is another 
problem. Look at your wine robot. 
It has at most some twenty actions 
to perform. And even so it is fairly 
bulky. A humanoid robot cannot 
carry its reflex interpreters. They 
fill a fair-sized room. What happens in the ones they build is that 
the robot is beamed to a hidden 
reflex interpreter, usually under 
the floor. It needs about a million 
beams— so their range cannot be 
allowed to be more than about 
fifteen yards. If you could buy a 
spare planet and a staff of forty or 
fifty first-class physicists and psychologists you might do it— but 
even then results would be far from 
satisfactory. The robots can be 
made quick and efficient, which 
Tontor is not — but I doubt they 
could be given even a tenth of Tontor’s actual I.Q., which is not 
really lower than ours by a factor 
of more than ten or twenty.” 
“Well, everything seems to be 
against us, doesn’t it? ” said Enedee. 
He was now drinking his sixth 
glass. The scientists were on their 
second, but there was no notice
able difference in the behavior of 
the three. 
“I hope Rampo won’t mind my 
asking if you expected a contribution from him. Or is he here, as he 
well deserves to be, only for his 
good company?” 
“As a wine-taster, probably,” 
Rampo said, “I’m chairman of 
the Zovol wine society, as you 
probably didn’t know — I’ll be able 
to report back favorably, especially 
on the second bottle. Kon Eightysix, I think?” 
“Yes — well, that’s the sort of 
reason you were asked for. That 
society. You have fingers in all 
sorts of pies — you’ve been around 
some odd galaxies. You might 
have some notions we hadn’t heard 
of on the Tontor problem- though 
of course it isn't only a Tontor 
problem. It must affect millions of 
parents.” 
“Well, Senator, I’ve no real 
ideas as you’ve noticed —but I 
think it’s just possible I might get 
some if I did a spot of research in 
various libraries. If you could get 
me and Damals — I’d like his aid 
— a week or so’s leave and find 
us a good craft. I’ll do my best.” 
“Your abrupt production of full 
marching orders reminds me of 
Ziel,” said Damals. “But I know 
it’s due to the opposite reason — 
laziness, not ambitious efficiency. 
Still, as long as you don’t promise 
anything I agree to associate myself with this somewhat doubtful 
venture.” 
R AMPO sat at the control board 
as the little ship lifted in an unwinding spiral from Zorn’s surface, past its satellite and that curious little body — the satellite’s 
satellite. Picking up speed, the 
craft edged out vertically away 
from the direction of the galactic 
center. 
“Look at all those stinking 
stars,” said Damals, who was beginning to feel agreeably irresponsible at this unaccompanied and 
probably pointless trip. His and 
Rampo’s friendship dated from 
student years. 
“Yes, but think of all the stinking galaxies” said Rampo, “and 
how few of us there are to run them 
really — and little squirts like Ziel 
near the top.” 
“If you ask me,” Damals said 
feelingly as his stomach took the 
uncomfortable lurch into the second transfinite, “the physicists are 
to blame. If we were all in a few 
galaxies — or better still, systems — 
we’d be quite enough. It was this 
sickening nondimensional drive 
that did it. No time at all.” 
“Allowing for acceleration and 
this and that,” qualified Rampo. 
“Yes — and allowing for power, 
which means allowing for money, 
which means that an impatient professor can hardly go more than a 
dozen or so galaxies away in his 
mangy little runabout. Not but 
what this — ” he looked at the 
nameplate — “ Polambi , isn’t good. 
Where are we going?” 
Rampo paused to focus the 
pseudovision screen. On it a couple 
of white whirls zipped past. 
“Paran.” 
Damals was so surprised that he 
dropped the breakfast capsule he 
was opening. 
“What sort of ship is this, anyhow?” 
“The senator’s own Administration Emergency Z-two. It would get 
clear to Roudabon itself in half a 
day. How do we rate it? He wrote 
out a chit of political emergency 
and it released itself. I imagine 
there’s more in the political crisis 
about mutational viability than 
meets the eye — we’re a very paternal race. Do you know that I’ve 
been on dozens of planets where 
they’d think nothing of killing off 
Ton tor?” 
Damals was shocked out of his 
preoccupation with their destination. 
“No!” 
“Yes.” 
“I seem to remember reading 
something of the kind, now I come 
to think of it, in protopsychology, 
when I was a student.” 
“Yes — and your unscientific 
memory was naturally pulled out 
from under it.” 
“Only the most insensitive students were chosen for anthropology, I remember.” 
“It’s due to field anthropology 
that I can pilot this crate — and 
we’re going to Paran and not some 
hick library like Sof. There are 
NO PLANET LIKE HOME 
parks of the old Z-ones for field 
anthropologists in every big sector, 
though how they manage it on the 
schockingly mean little budget I 
don’t know,” said Rampo, watching the light patches which were 
now flicking past the screen almost as fast as his amazingly quick 
nervous system could follow them 
— about six hundred a second. 
“Now in the galaxy which has 
just edged off the screen — eightnine-nine Lambadan —I had an experience with which I will now pass 
away a weary watch in relating, 
among the natives of Gam, a planet in Gambonnen.” 
Damals reached for the nearest 
bottle and, placing it to his mouth, 
closed his eyes demonstratively. f 
He said, “I will think of Paran, 
meanwhile— where we spent the 
happiest days of our youth. I begin 
to doubt that this trip is going to be 
as pointless as I suspected,” 
P ARAN, in Galaxy 84 Purince, 
like most really habitable planets, circles a sun of a dazzling blue. 
The weather at the city of Paran 
has been described ad nauseum as 
perpetual spring but in reality the 
true spring is the best season. 
Young folk from all over the universe who can blackmail, dupe or 
persuade anyone to finance their 
fares, come there to the ancient 
university or, without the formality of enrolling themselves, for 
something more vaguely defined as 
“study.” Rampo and Damals had 
been on Paran many years before 
for two short semesters, for it is 
mainly as a center of the less rigorous sciences that the ancient city 
has its renown. 
The library is one of the few 
score entitled to an electronic copy 
of every publication in the universe. Its underground files stretch 
under more than half the land 
surface of the globe to a depth of 
several miles. 
Rampo settled the Polambi at a 
little port away from the great river 
island where bookships were pulling in every few hours. He switched on the parking field, tuned it to 
a ' permit-tester, signed and 
thumbed it, opened the hatch and 
rolled out the ladder. 
The air of Paran poured in at a 
very slightly higher pressure and 
mixed its superior oxygen and radon content with the ship’s air. 
“It's really too young for us.” 
“Nonsense. You’ll adjust only 
too quickly to a second childhood,” said Damals, going down 
the steps. 
It was late afternoon. 
“I thought we’d go to the library, book a couple of rooms and 
place a few orders,” said Rampo. 
“It’s too late to do any serious 
work today. Besides — " 
Besides, there are a lot of things 
to do in Paran in the evening, particularly for academic people like 
Damals and Rampo, even though 
the latter was still abie to revert 
occasionally to the more wander
ing and exciting life of his subordinates, the field anthropologists. 
Each other’s company and the 
ambience of Paran made the two 
friends feel considerably younger 
and more active and neither required professional advice on the 
anthropology or psychology of 
Paran night-life. After the sun set 
in a blue-purple splendor to the 
east they abandoned the riverfront cafe’s and took to a cellar 
dive of the student quarter called 
the Crazy Galaxy, whose sign 
showed a number of stars in various undignified postures. As Damals and Rampo descended the 
narrow stone stairs into a surprisingly well decorated cylindrical 
room with alcoves, the manager 
stepped up, bowing. 
“An alcove, excellencies — ” 
They sat down in the alcove. Its 
one-way vision opened to the floor 
where some sort of entertainment 
was now going on. 
Damals said, “That’s what 
comes of being dressed too well. 
One forgets how one looked a hundred years ago. The trouble is that 
we haven’t the scrip to pay for 
much of that ‘excellency’ stuff.” 
Rampo produced from his pocket a roll of notes larger than any 
Damals had seen before in his life 
— except on one occasion on Volomba when he had suddenly been 
called upon to attend a brilliant 
but unbalanced credit director 
whose room was actually knee 
deep in currency. 
“What’s that from?” 
Rampo said airily, “An advance 
on the expense account. 1 have 
signaled for two bottles of Zomonon goldwater to start off.” 
“I suppose those two so-called 
dancers are in the fashion from 
some god-knows-where galaxy 
that has come in since our times”, 
said Damals. “They remind me of 
an emergency case I once dealt 
with in free fall on an intrasystem 
liner in — ” 
Rampo interrupted with: “This 
will make you less clinical, for 
God’s sake.” Two cups of glittering liquid slid onto the table. 
“Soon you'll be more like a case 
than a psychologist, I hope.” 
“I’ve never had this before. It’s 
wonderful.” 
After an hour they left and went 
to the Swan Room, thence to the 
Blue Nova, the Obolologo, the 
Zipetizap and the Thrust Field. 
Only the Obolologo was as it had 
been in their time. The rest struck 
them as tourist-ridden, though 
probably most of the tourists were 
ex-students like themselves. 
I n the streets the air was soft and 
warm and the sky as calm as it had 
been a hundred years before. 
Later they went back to the 
Crazy Galaxy. Downstairs everything had changed. The narrow 
dark cylinder had opened up into 
a flickering sphere and all the alcoves had disappeared, leaving 
their tables in the middle of the en( Please turn to page 155) 
NO PLANET LIKE HOME 
KINDERGARTEN 
JAMES E. GUNN 
. asks a simple 
question. Have 
you done your 
homework today? 
First day — 
Teacher told my parent that I 
am the slowest youngster in my 
class, but today I made a star in 
the third quadrant of kindergarten. 
Teacher was surprised. Teacher 
tried to hide it and said the solar 
phoenix reaction is artistic, but is 
it practical? 
I don’t care. I think it's pretty. 
a 
Q 
O 0 
o O 
o 
o 
o 
Second day — 
Today I made planets: four big 
ones, two middle-sized ones, and 
three little ones. Teacher laughed 
and said why did I make so many 
when all but three were too hot or 
too cold to support life and the big 
ones were too massive and poisonous for any use at all. 
Teacher doesn’t understand. 
There is more to creation than 
mere usefulness. 
The rings around the sixth planet are beautiful. 
Third day 
Today I created life. I begin to 
understand why my people place 
creation above all else. 
I have heard the philosophers 
discussing the purpose of existence, 
but I thought it was merely age. 
Before today joy was enough: to 
have fun with the other kids, to 
speed through endless space, to explode some unstable star into a 
nova, to flee before the outrage of 
some adult— this would fill eternity. 
Now I know better. Life must 
have a function. 
Teacher was right: only two of 
the middle-sized planets and one 
of the little ones were suitable for 
life. I made life for all three, but 
only on the third planet from the 
sun was it really successful. 
I have given it only one function: survive! 
Fourth day — 
The third planet has absorbed all 
my interest. The soupy seas are 
churning with life. 
Today I introduced a second 
function: multiply! 
The forms developing in the seas 
are increasingly complex. 
The kids are calling me to come 
and play, but I’m not going. 
This is more fun. 
Fifth day 
Time after lime I stranded seacreatures on the land and kept 
them alive long past the lime when 
they should have died. At last I 
succeeded. Some of them have 
adapted. 
I was right. The sea is definitely 
an inhibiting factor. 
The success of the land-creatures is pleasing. 
Sixth day — 
Everything I did before today 
was nothing. Today I created intelligence. 
I added a third function: know! 
Out of a minor primate has developed a fabulous creature. It has 
two legs and walks upright and 
looks around it with curious eyes. 
It has weak hands and an insignificant brain, but it is conquering all 
things. Most of all, it is conquering 
its environment. 
It has even begun speculating 
Seventh day — 
Today there is no school. 
After the pangs and labors of 
creation, it is fun to play again. It 
is like escaping the gravitational 
field of a while dwarf and regaining the dissipated coma. 
Teacher talked to my parent 
again today. Teacher said I had 
developed remarkably in the last 
few days but my creation was 
hopelessly warped and inconsistent. Moreover, it was potentially 
dangerous. 
Teacher said it would have to 
be destroyed. 
My parent objected, saying that 
the solar phoenix reaction in the 
sun would lead the dangerous life 
form on the third planet to develop 
a thermonuclear reaction of its 
own. With the functions I had 
given that life form, the problem 
would take care of itself. 
It wasn’t my parent’s responsibility Teacher said, and Teacher 
couldn't take the chance. 
I didn't hear who won the argument. I drifted away, feeling funny. 
I don’t care, really. I'm tired of 
the old thing anyway. I’ll make a 
better one. 
But it was the first thing I ever 
made, and you can’t help feeling a 
kind of sentimental attachment. 
If anyone sees a great comet 
plunging toward the sun, it isn’t 
me. 
Eighth day - 
TOWER OF GLASS 
( Continued from page 67)
SFGRAM_START_SILVERBERG
gent, we are human beings, we 
wish no longer to be alone in the 
cosmos. 
— In what language will you tell 
them this? 
In the language of random numbers. And then, in not-so-random 
numbers. Hello, hello, 3.14159, did 
you hear that, 3.14159, the ratio of 
diameter to circumference? 
— And how will you say this to 
them? Lasers? Radio waves? 
Too slow, too slow. I cannot 
wait for electromagnetic radiations to go forth and come back. 
We will talk to the stars wrth tachyon-beams and / will tell the starfolk about Simeon Krug. 
K RUG trembled on the table. 
The android masseuses clawed 
his flesh, pounded him, drove 
knuckles into his massive muscles. 
Were they trying to tap the mystic 
rRimbers into his bones? 2-4-1, 
2-5-1, 3-1? Where was the missing 
2? Even if it had been sent, what 
would the sequence mean, 2-4-1, 
2-5-1, 2-3-1? Nothing significant. 
Random. Random. Meaningless 
clusters of raw information. Nothing more than numbers arrayed in 
an abstract pattern and yet they 
carried the most important message the universe ever had seen: 
We are here. 
We are here. 
We call out to you. 
And Krug would answer. He 
shivered with pleasure at the 
thought of his tower completes! 
and the tachyon-beams pouring 
out into the galaxy. Krug would 
reply, Krug the rapacious, Krug 
the insensitive moneyman, Krug 
the dollar-hungry boor, Krug the 
mere industrialist, Krug the fat 
peasant, Krug the ignorant, Krug 
the coarse. I! Me! I! Krug! Krug! 
“Out,” he snapped to the andriods. “Finished!” 
The girls sctirried away, rushing 
for the door in a tangle of lithe 
naked bodies. Krug rose, slowly 
resumed his garments, walked 
across the room to run his hands 
over the pattern of yellow lights. 
“Messages?” he asked. “Visitors?” 
The head and shoulders of Leon 
Spaulding appeared in midair, 
glistening against the invisible 
webwork backdrop of a sodiumvapor projector. 
“Dr. Vargas is here,” the ectogene said. “He’s waiting in the 
planetarium. Will you see him?” 
“Natuarally. I’ll go up. And 
Quenelle?” 
“She went to the lake house in 
Uganda. She’ll wait for you 
there.” 
“And my son?” 
“Paying his inspection call on 
the Duluth plant. Do you have instructions for him?” 
“No,” Krug said. “He knows 
what he’s doing. I’ll go to Vargas 
now.” 
The image of Spaulding winked
THE TOWER OF GLASS 
out. Krug entered his liftshaft and 
rose swiftly to the domed planetarium on the highest level of the 
building. Under its coppered roof 
the slight figure of Niccolo Vargas 
paced intently. To his left was a 
display case hiding eight kilograms of proteoids from Alpha 
Centauri V; to his right, a squat 
cryostat in the frosty depths of 
which could dimly be seen twenty 
liters of fluid drawn from Pluto’s 
methane sea. 
Vargas was an intense, fairskinned little man for whom Krug 
entertained a respect bordering on 
awe: a man who had spent evn-y 
day of his adult life searching for 
civilizations in the stars and who 
had mastered all aspects of the 
problems of interstellar communications. Vargas’ specialty had left 
its imprint on his features. Fifteen 
years earlier, incautiously exposing himself to the beam of a neutron telescope in a moment of intolerable excitement, Vargas had 
baked the left side of his face beyond hope of tectogenetic repair. 
They had regrown his ruined eye 
but they had not been able to do 
much about the decalcification of 
the underlying bony structure except to shore it up with berylliumfiber matting, and so part of Vargas’ skull and cheek now had a 
slumped, shriveled look. Deformities such as that were unusual in 
an era of easy cosmetic surgery — 
Vargas, however, had no apparent 
interest in undergoing further fa
cial reconstruction — however easy. 
Vargas smiled his lopsided smile 
as Krug entered. 
“The tower is magnificent,” he 
said. 
“Will be,” Krug corrected. 
“No. No. Already magnificent. 
A wondrous torso. The sleekness 
of it, Krug, the bulk, the upward 
thrust! Do you know what you are 
building there, my friend? The first 
cathedral of the galactic age. In 
thousands of years to come, long 
after your tower has ceased to 
function as a communications 
center, men will go to it and kneel, 
kiss its smooth skin and bless you 
for having built it. And not only 
men.” 
“I like that enough,” said Krug. 
“A cathedral. I hadn’t seen it that 
way.” Krug caught sight of the 
data cube in Vargas’ right palm. 
“What do you have there?” 
“A gift for you.” 
“A gift?” 
“We have tracked the signals to 
their source,” Vargas said. “I 
thought you would like to see their 
home star.” 
Krug lurched forward. 
“Why did you wait so long to 
tell me? Why didn’t you say something while we were at the tower?” 
“The tower was your show. 
This is mine. Shall I turn on the 
cube?” 
Krug gestured impatiently toward the receptor slot. Vargas 
deftly inserted the cube and activated the scanner. Bluish beams of 
interrogatory light lanced into the 
small crystal lattice, mining for 
the stored bits of information. 
The stars blossomed on the 
planetarium’s ceiling. 
Krug was at home in the galaxy. 
His eyes picked out familiar landmarks: Sirius, Canopus, Vega, Capella, Arcturus, Betelgeuse, Altair, 
Fomalhaut, Deneb, the brightest 
beacons of the heavens, strewn 
spectacularly across the dome 
above him. He sought the near 
stars, those within the dozen-lightyear radius that man’s stellar 
probes had reached in his own lifetime: Epsilon Indi, Ross 154, Lalande 21 185, Barnard’s Star, Wolf 
359, Procyon, 61 Cygni. He 
looked toward Taurus and found 
red Aldebaran glowing in the face 
of the Bull, the Hyades clustered 
far behind and the Pleiades burning in their brilliant shroud. Again 
and again the pattern on the dome 
shifted as focuses narrowed, as distances grew. Krug felt thunder in 
his breast. Vargas had said nothing 
since the planetarium had come to 
life. 
“Well?” Krug demanded at last. 
“What am I supposed to see?” 
“Look toward Aquarius,” said 
Vargas. 
Krug scanned the northern sky. 
He followed the familiar track 
across: Perseus, Cassiopeia, Andromeda, Pegasus, Aquarius. Yes, 
there was the otd Water-Carrier, 
between the Fishes and the Goat. 
Krug struggled to recall the name 
of some major star in Aquarius but 
came up with nothing. 
“So?” he asked. 
“Watch. We sharpen the image 
now.” 
K RUG braced himself as the 
heavens rushed toward him. He 
could no longer make out the patterns of the constellations — the 
sky was tumbling and all order was 
lost. When the motion ceased he 
found himself confronted by a 
single segment of the galactic 
sphere, blown up to occupy the 
whole of the dome. Directly above 
him was the image of a fiery ring, 
dark at the core, rimmed by an irregular halo of luminous gas. A 
point of light glimmered at the nucleus of the ring. 
Vargas said, “This is the planetary nebula NGC Seven-two-ninethree in Aquarius.” 
“And?” 
“It is the source of our signals.” 
“How certain is this?” 
“Absolutely,” the astronomer 
said. “We have parallax observations, a whole series of optical and 
spectral triangulations, several 
confirming occultalions and much 
more. We suspected NGC Seventwo-nine-three as the source from 
the beginning but the final data 
was processed only this morning. 
Now we are sure.” 
Dry-throated, Krug asked, 
“How distant?” 
“About three hundred light
years.”
“Not bad. Not bad. Beyond the 
reach of our probes, beyond the 
reach of efficient radio contact. 
But no problem for the tachyonbeam. My tower is justified.” 
“And there still is hope of communicating with the senders of the 
signals,” Varga's said. “What we 
all feared — that the signals came 
from some place like Andromeda, 
that the messages had begun their 
journey toward us a million years 
ago or more 
“No chance of that now.” 
“No. No chance.” 
“Tell me about this place,” Krug 
said. “A planetary nebula — what 
kind of thing is that? How can a 
nebula be a planet?” 
“Neither a planet nor a nebula,” 
said Vargas, beginning to pace 
again. “An unusual body. An extraordinary body.” He tapped the 
case of Centaurine proteoids. The 
quasi-living creatures, irritated, 
began to flow and twine. Vargas 
said, “This ring that you see is a 
shell, a bubble of gas, surrounding 
an O-type star. The stars of this 
spectral class are blue giants, hot, 
unstable, remaining on the main 
sequence only a few million years. 
Late in their life-cycle some of 
them undergo a catastrophic upheaval comparable to a nova — they 
hurl forth the outer layers of their 
structure, forming a gaseous shell 
of great size. The diameter of the 
planetary nebula you see is about 
one-point-three light-years and it 
is growing at a rate of perhaps fif
teen kilometers a second — and 
that the central sun is tossing out 
so much hard radiation that the 
shell is fluoresetng?” 
“Yes.” 
“And you also w»nt me to believe that there’s an intelligent race 
inside that furnace sending us 
messages?” 
Vargas said, “There can be no 
doubt about where the signals are 
coming from.” 
IMPOSSIBLE!” Krug roared.
“Impossible!” He hammered 
his fists against his hips. “A blue 
giant — only a couple of million 
years old to begin with. How do 
you evolve life at all* let alone an 
intelligent race? Then some kind 
of solar blowup — how does anything survive that? And the hafd 
radiation? Tell me. Tell me. You 
want me to design a system that’s 
a good bet not to have life, I give 
you this goddamned planetary 
maJsu la! But how signals? From 
what?” 
“We have considered these factors,” Vargas said softly. 
Quivering, Krug asked, “Then 
the signals are natural phenomena 
after all? Impulses radiated by the 
atoms of your filthy nebula itself?” 
“We still believe the signals have 
an intelligent origin.” 
The paradox baffled Krug. He 
retreated, sweating, confused. He 
was only an amateur astronomer 
— he had read plenty, had stuffed 
himself with technical tapes and 
knowledge-enhancing drugs; he 
knew red giants from white 
dwarfs; he could draw the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram; he could 
look at the sky and point out Alpha 
Crucis and Spica but all of it was 
data of an external kind, decorating the outer walls of his soul. He 
was not at home in it as Vargas 
was. He lacked a sense of the inwardness of the facts. He could 
not easily move beyond the bounds 
of the given data. Thus his awe of 
Vargas. Thus his discomfort now. 
“Go on,” Krug muttered. “Tell 
me what. Tell me how.” 
Vargas said, “There are several 
possibilities. All speculative, all 
guesses, you understand? The first 
and most obvious is that the signalsenders of NGC Seven-two-ninethree arrived there after the blowup, \vhen things were quiet again. 
Say, within the last ten thousand 
years. Colonists from a deeper 
part of the galaxy — explorers — 
refugees —exiles— whatever, recent 
exiles.” 
“And the hard radiation,” Krug 
said. “Even after things were quiet 
again, there’d still be radiation 
from that murderous blue sun.” 
“Obviously they would thrive 
on it. We need sunlight for our 
life-processes why not imagine a 
race that drinks its energy a little 
higher up the spectrum?” 
Krug shook his head. “Okay, 
you make up races, I play advocatus diaboli. They eat hard radia
tion, you say. What about the 
genetic effects? What kind of stable civilization can they build With 
a mutation rate that high?” 
“A race adapted to high radiation levels would probably have a 
genetic structure that isn’t as vulnerable to bombardment as ours. 
It would absorb all kinds of hard 
particles without mutating.” 
“Maybe. Maybe not.” After a 
moment Krug said, “Okay, so they 
came from someplace else and settled your planetary nebula when it 
was safe. Why don’t we have sig. nals from the someplace else, loo? 
Where’s the home system? Exiles, 
colonists -from where?” 
“Maybe the home system is so 
far away that the signals won’t 
reach us for thousands of years,” 
Vargas suggested. “Or perhaps the 
home system doesn’t send out signals. Or — ” 
“You have too many answers,” 
Krug muttered. “I (ton’t like the 
idea.” 
“That brings us to the other possibility,” said Vargas. “That the 
signal-sending species is native to 
NGC Seven-two-nine-three." 
“How? The blowup 
“Maybe the blowup didn’t bother them. This race might thrive on 
hard radiation Mutation may be a 
way of life for them. We’re talking 
about aliens, my friend. If they’re 
truly alien we can’t comprehend 
any of the parameters. So look — 
speculate along with me. We have a 
planet of a blue star, a planet that's
far away from its sun but nevertheless is roasted by fantastically 
strong radiation. The sea is a broth 
of chemicals constantly boiling. A 
broth of mutations. Life is 
spawned a million years after the 
cooling of the surface. Things happen fast on such a world. Another 
million years and there’s complex 
multi-celled life. A million more to 
mammal-equivalents. A million 
more to a galactic-level civilization. 
Change, fierce, unending change.” 
I WANT to believe you,” Krug 
said darkly. “I want to. But I 
can’t.” 
“Radiation-eaters,” Vargus 
went on. “Clever, adaptable, accepting the necessity, even the desirability, of constant violent genetic change. Their star expands 
— very well, they adapt to the increase in radiation. They find a 
way to protect themselves. Now 
they live inside a planetary nebula 
with a fluorescent sky around 
them. Somehow they delect the existence of the rest of the galaxy. 
They send messages to us. Yes? 
Yes?” 
Krug clutched Vargas, pulled 
him close, shook him. “I want to 
believe!” 
“Then believe. 1 believe.” 
“It’s only a theory. A wild theory.” 
“It accounts for the data we 
have,” said Vargas. “Do you know 
the Italian proverb: Se non e vero, 
e ben trovatol ‘Even if it isn’t true, 
it’s well invented.’ The hypothesis 
will do until we have a better one. 
It answers the facts better than the 
theory of a natural cause for a 
complex repetitive signal coming 
to us in several media.” 
Turning away, releasing the little man, Krug stabbed at the activator as though he no longer could 
bear the image on the dome, as 
though he felt the furious radiation 
of that alien sun raising deadly 
blisters on his own skin. In his long 
dreams he had seen something entirely different. He had imagined 
a planet of a yellow sun, somewhere, eighty, ninety light-years 
away, a gentle sun much like the 
one under which he had been born. 
He had dreamed of a world of 
lakes and rivers and grassy fields, 
of sweet air tinged perhaps with 
ozone, of purple-leaved trees and 
glossy green insects, of elegant 
slender beings with sloping shoulders and many-fingered hands, 
quietly talking as they moved 
through the groves and vales of 
their paradise, probing the mysteries of the cosmos, speculating 
on the existence of other civilizations, at last sending their message to the universe. He had seen 
them opening their arms to the 
first visitors from Earth, saying. 
Welcome, brothers, welcome — we 
knew you had to be there. All of 
that was destroyed now. In the eye 
of his mind Krug saw a hellish blue 
sun spitting demonic fires into the 
void, saw a blackened and sizzling 
planet on which scaly armored 
monstrosities slithered in pools of 
quicksilver under a sullen sky of 
white flame, saw a band of horrors gathering around a nightmarish machine to send an incomprehensible message across the 
gulf of space. 
And these are our brothers? It 
is all spoiled , Krug thought bitterly. 
“How can we go to them?” he 
asked. “How can we embrace 
them? Vargas, I have a ship almost 
ready, a ship for the stars, a ship to 
carry a sleeping man for centuries. 
How can I send it to such a place?” 
“Your reaction surprises me. 
Such distress I did not expect.” 
“Such a star I did not expect.” 
“Would you have been happier 
if I told you that the signals were 
after all mere natural pulses?” 
“No. No.” 
“Then rejoice in these strange 
brothers and forget the strangeness. Think only of the brotherhood.” 
Vargas’ words sank in. Krug 
found strength. His innate optimism carried him surging out of 
bleakness. The astronomer was 
right. However strange those beings might be, however bizarre 
their world — always assuming the 
truth of Vargas’ hypothesis — they 
were civilized, scientific, outwardlooking. Our brothers. If space 
folded upon itself tomorrow and 
Earth and its sun and all its neighbor worlds were engulfed and 
thrust into oblivion, intelligence 
would not perish from the universe, for they were there. 
“Yes,” Krug said. “I rejoice in 
them. When my tower is done I 
send them my hellos.” 
Two and a half centuries had 
passed since man first had broken 
free of his native planet. In one 
great dynamic sweep the spaceward drive had carried human explorers from Luna to Pluto, to the 
edge of the solar system and beyond and nowhere had they found 
trace of intelligent life. Lichens, 
bacteria, primitive low-phylum 
crawlers, yes, but nothing more. 
Disappointment was the fate of 
those archeologists who had 
hatched fantasies of reconstructing the cultural sequences of Mars 
from artifacts found in the desert. 
There were no artifacts. And when 
the star probes had begun to go 
forth, making their decades-long 
reconnaissances of the nearest solar systems, they had returned 
with — nothing. Within a sphere 
a dozen light-years in diameter, 
there evidently had never existed 
any life form more complex than 
the Centaurine proteoids, to which 
only an amoeba need feel inferior. 
Krug had been a young man 
when the first st^f probes returned. 
It had displeased him to see his 
fellow Earthmen constructing 
philosophies around the failures to 
find intelligent life in the nearby 
solar systems. What were they saying, these apostles of the New Geo
centricism? Krug smiled grimly. 
We are the chosen ones! 
We are the only children of God! 
On this world and no other did 
the Lord Jashion His people! 
To us jails the universe as our divine heritage! 
Krug saw the seeds of paranoia 
in that kind of thinking. 
HE HAD never thought much
about God. But it seemed to
him that men were asking too 
much of the universe when they insisted that on and only on this 
small planet of one small sun had 
the miracle of intelligence been 
permitted to emerge. Billions upon 
billions of suns existed, worlds 
without end. How could intelligence not have evolved again and 
again and again across the infinite 
sea of galaxies? 
And it struck him as megalomania to elevate the tentative findings of a sketchy search through a 
dozen light-years into an absolute 
statement of dogma. Was man 
really alone? How could you 
know? Krug was basically a rational man. He maintained perspective on all things. He felt that 
mankind’s continued sanity depended on an awakening from this 
dream of uniqueness, for the 
dream was sure to end. And if the 
awakening came later rather than 
sooner the impact might be shattering. 
“When will the tower be ready?” 
Vargas asked. 
“Year after next. Next year, if 
we have luck, maybe. You saw this 
morning — unlimited budget.” 
Krug frowned. He felt suddenly 
uneasy. “Give me the truth. Even 
you, you spend all your life listening to the stars, you think Krug’s a 
little crazy?” 
“Absolutely not.” 
“Sure you do. They all do. My 
boy Manuel, he thinks I ought to 
be locked up but he’s afraid to say 
it. Spauldrng out there — him, too. 
Everybody, maybe even Thor 
Watchman — and he’s building the 
damned thing. They want to know 
what’s in it for me. Why do I throw 
billions of dollars into a tower of 
glass. You, too, Vargas!” 
The twisted face grew even more 
taut. “I have nothing but sympathy 
for this project. You injure me 
with these suspicions. Don't you 
think making contact with an extrasolar civilization is as important to me as it is to you?” 
“Ought to be important to you. 
Your field— your study. Me? Businessman. Maker of androids. 
Owner of land. Capitalist, exploiter, maybe a little bit of a chemist, 
know something about genetics, 
yes, but no astronomer, no scientist. It’s a little crazy, eh, Vargas, 
for me to care about a thing like 
this? Squandering of assets. Nonproductive investment. What kind 
of dividends do I get from NGC 
Seven-two-nine-three, huh? You 
tell me. You tell me.” 
Nervously Vargas said, “Per
haps we ought to go downstairs. 
The excitement — ” 
Krug slapped his chest. “I’ve 
just turned sixty. I got a hundred 
years to live — more, maybe. Maybe two hundred, who knows? 
Don’t worry about me. But you 
can admit it. You know it’s crazy 
for an ignoramus like me to get so 
interested in something like this.” 
Krug shook his head vehemently. 
“I myself know it’s crazy. I have 
to explain me to me all the time. I 
just tell you, this is something has 
to be done and I do it — this tower. 
This hello to the stars. I was growing up, they kept telling us. We’re 
all alone, We’re all alone, We’re 
all alone. 1 didn’t believe it. 
Couldn’t. Made the billions — now 
I’ll spend the billions, get everybody straight in the head about the 
universe. You found the signals. 
I’ll answer them. Numbers back 
for numbers. And then pictures. I 
know how to do it. One and zero, 
one and zero, one and zero, black 
and white, black and white, keep 
the. bits going and they make a 
picture. You just fill in the boxes 
on your chart. This is what we 
look like. This is water molecule. 
This is our solar system. This is — ” 
Krug halted, panting, hoarse, taking note for the first time of the 
shock and fear on the astronomer’s face. In a more peaceful 
tone he said to Vargas, “I’m sorry. 
I shouldn’t shout. Sometimes I 
run off at the mouth.” 
“It’s all right. You have the fire 
of enthusiasm. Better to get carried away sometimes than never to 
come alive at all.” 
Krug said, “You know what 
started it? This planetary nebula 
you threw at me. Upset me, I tell 
you why. I had a dream I’d go to 
the place the signals were coming 
from. Me, Krug, in my ship, under deepsleep, sailing a hundred, 
even two hundred light-years, ambassador from Earth, a trip nobody 
ever took before. Now you tell 
me what a hell world the signals 
come from. Fluorescent sky. Qtype sun. A blue-light furnace. My 
trip's off, eh? Got me worked up, 
the surprise of it — but don’t worry. 
I adapt. I absorb good stiff jolts. 
Knocks me to a higher energy 
state, is all.” Impulsively he gathered Vargas to him in a fierce bearhug. “Thank you for your signals. 
Thank you for your planetary nebula. Thank you a million, you 
hear, Vargas?” Krug stepped back. 
“Now we go downstairs. You need 
money for the laboratory? Talk to 
Spaulding. He knows it’s carte 
blanche for you any time any 
size money.” 
Vargas left, talking to Spaulding. Alone in his office, Krug 
found himself ablaze with surplus 
vitality, his mind flooded with a 
vision of NGC 7293. Indeed he 
resonated at a higher energy state 
— his skin itself was a fiery jacket 
for him. 
“Going out,” he grunted.
He set the transmat coordinates 
for his Uganda retreat and stepped 
through. A moment later he was 
seven thousand miles to the east, 
standing on his onyx veranda, 
looking down at the reedy lake 
beside his lodge. To the left, a few 
hundred meters out, a quartet of 
hippos floated, nothing showing 
but pink nostrils and huge gray 
backs. To the right he saw his mistress Quenelle, lolling bare in the 
shallows. Krug stripped. Rhinoheavy, impala-eager, he pounded 
down the sloping shore to join her 
in the water. 
Ill 
IT TOOK Watchman only a couple of minutes to run to the accident site but by then the lift beetles
had moved the fallen block and the 
bodies of the victims were exposed. 
A crowd had gathered, all betas. 
The gammas lacked authority and 
motivation for interrupting their 
work programs even for something 
like this. Seeing an alpha approach, 
the betas faded back, ' hovering 
on the edge of the scene in uneasy conflict. They did not know 
whether to return to work or to remain and offer assistance to the 
alpha and, thus caught unprogramed, they stood by, wearing 
the dismal expressions of android 
bewilderment. 
Watchman quickly surveyed the 
situation. Three androids — two 
betas and a gamma — had been 
crushed by the glass block. The 
betas were beyond easy recognition. It was going to be a chore 
just to peel their bodies out of the 
permafrost. The gamma beside 
them had almost avoided being 
killed but his luck had not quite 
been good enough. He was intact 
only below the waist. His had 
been the legs Watchman had seen 
sticking out from under the block. 
Two other androids had been 
struck by the falling scooprod. One 
of them, a gamma, had taken a fatal blow on the skull and was lying in a sprawl a dozen meters 
away. The other, a beta, had apparently received a glancing but 
devastating swipe in the back from 
a corner of the rod’s grip tread — 
he was alive but seriously injured 
and plainly in great agony. 
Watchman selected four of the 
beta onlookers and ordered them 
to transport the dead ones to the 
control center for identification 
and disposal. He sent two other 
betas off to get a stretcher for the 
injured one. While they were gone 
he walked over to the surviving android and looked down, peering 
into gray eyes yellow-rimmed with 
pain. 
“Can you talk?” Watchman 
asked. 
“Yes.” A foggy whisper. “I 
can’t move anything below my 
middle. I’m turning cold. I’m 
starting to freeze from the middle 
down. Am I going to die?” 
“Probably,” Watchman said. He 
He ran his hand along the beta’s 
back until he found the lumbar 
neural center. With a quick jab he 
shorted it. A sigh of relief came 
from the twisted figure on the 
ground. 
“Better?” the alpha said. 
“Much better, Alpha Watchman.” 
“Give me your name, beta.” 
“Caliban Driller.” 
“What were you doing when the 
block fell, Caliban?” 
“Getting ready to go off shift. 
I’m a maintenance foreman. I 
walked past here. They all started 
to shout. 1 felt the air hot as the 
block came down. I jumped. And 
then I was on the ground with my 
back split open. How soon will I 
die?” 
“Within an hour or less. The 
coldness will rise until it gets to 
your brain and that will be the 
end. But take comfort: Krug saw 
you as you fell. Krug will guard 
you. You will rest in the bosom of 
Krug.” 
“Krug be -praised,” CalibanDriller murmured. 
The stretcher-bearers were approaching. When they were still 
fifty meters away a gong sounded, 
marking the end of the shift. Instantly every android who was not 
actually hoisting a block rushed 
toward the transmat banks. Three 
lines of workers began to vanish 
into the transmats, heading for 
their homes in the android compounds of five continents. In the 
same moment the next shift began 
to emerge from the inbound transmats, coming out of leisure periods spent in the recreation zones 
of South America and India. At 
the sound of the gong Watchman’s 
two stretcher-bearers made as if 
to drop the stretcher and rush for 
the transmats. He barked at them 
and, sheepishly, they hustled toward him. 
“Pick up Caliban Driller,” he 
commanded, “and carry him carefully to the chapel. When you’re 
done with that you can go off shift 
and claim credit for the time.” 
Amid the confusion of the 
changing shift the two betas loaded 
the injured android on the stretcher and made their way with him to 
one of the dozens of extrusion 
domes on the northern perimeter 
of the construction site. The domes 
served many uses — some were 
storage depots for material, several were kitchens or washrooms, 
three housed the power cores that 
fed the transmat banks and the refrigeration tapes. One was a firstaid station for androids injured 
on the job and one, in the heart of 
the irregular clutter of gray plasticmounds, was the chapel. 
At all times two or three offduty androids lounged in front of 
that dome, seemingly idle, actually 
functioning as casual sentries who 
would prevent any womb-born one 
from entering. Sometimes journalists or guests of Krug came wandering this way. The sentries had
various deft techniques for leading them away from the chapel 
without actually provoking the forbidden clash of wills between android and human. The chapel was 
not open to anyone born of men 
and woman. Its very existence was 
unknown to any but androids. 
T HOR WATCHMAN reached 
it just as the stretcher-bearers 
were setting Caliban Driller down 
before the altar. Going in, he made 
the proper genuflection, dropping 
quickly to one knee and extending his arms, palms upward. The 
altar, resting in a purple bath of 
nutrient fluids, was a pink rectangular block of flesh that had been 
synthesized precisely as androids 
themselves were synthesized. 
Though alive, it was scarcely sentient, nor was it capable of sustaining its life unaided. It was fed from 
beneath by constant injections of 
metabolase that permitted it to 
survive. To the rear of the altar 
was a full-sized hologram of Simeon Krug, facing forward. The 
walls of the chapel were decorated 
with the triplets of the RNA genetic code, inscribed in infinite reduplication from floor to summit: 
AAA AAG AAC AAU 
AGA AGG AGC AGU 
ACA ACG ACC ACU 
AUA AUG AUC AUU 
GAA GAG GAC GAU 
GGA GGG GGC GGU 
GCA GCG GCC GCU 
C,UA GUG GUC GUU 
CAA CAG CAC CAU 
CGA CGG CGC CGU 
CCA CCG CCC CCU 
CUA CUG CUC CUU 
UAA UAG UAC UAU 
UGA UGG UGC UGU 
UCA UCG UCC UCU 
UUA UUG'UUC UUU 
“Put him on the altar,” Watchman said. “Then go out.” 
The stretcher-bearers obeyed. 
When he was alone with the dying beta Watchman said, “I am a 
Preserver and I am qualified to be 
your guide on your journey to 
Krug. Repeat-after me as clearly as 
you can: Krug brings us into the 
world and to Krug we return." 
"Krug brings us into the world 
and to Krug we return. " 
"Krug is our creator and our 
protector and our deliverer." 
"Krug is our creator and our 
protector and our deliverer." 
"Krug, we beseech Thee to lead 
us toward the light." 
"Krug, we beseech Thee to lead 
us toward the light." 
"And to lijt the Children of the 
Vat to the level of the Children of 
the Womb." 
"And to lift the Children of the 
Vat to the level of the Children of 
the Womb." 
"And to lead us to our rightful 
place — " 
"And to lead us to our rightful 
place — ** 
“ — beside our brothers and sisters of the flesh." 
" — beside our brothers and sisters of the flesh." 
"Krug our maker, Krug our 
preserver, Krug our master, receive me back into the Vat." 
"Krug our maker, Krug our 
preserver, Krug our master, receive me back into the Vat." 
" And grant redemption to those 
who come after me — ” 
" And grant redemption to those 
who come after me — ” 
"In that day when Womb and 
Vat and Vat and Womb are one. " 
"In that day when Womb and 
Vat and Vat and Womb are one. " 
"Praise be to Krug. " 
" Praise be to Krug. ” 
"Glory be to Krug." 
"Glory be to Krug." 
"AAA AAG AAC AAV be to 
Krug." 
"AAA AAG AAC AAV be to 
Krug." 
"AGA AGG AGC AGV be to 
Krug." 
"AGA AGG AGC — ” Caliban Driller faltered. “The chill is 
in my breast,” he murmured. “I 
can’t — I can’t — ” 
“Finish the sequence. Krug 
awaits you.” 
“ — A GV be to Krug." 
"AC A ACG ACC ACV be to 
Krug." 
The beta’s fingertips dug into 
the yielding flesh of the altar. The 
tone of his skin had deepened in 
the past few minutes from crimson 
to something close to violet. His 
eyeballs rolled. His lips curled 
back. His breath came noisily. 
“Krug awaits you,” Watchman 
said fiercely. “Do the sequence!” 
“Can’t — speak — can’t — breathe 
“Listen to me, then. Just listen. 
Make the codons in your mind as 
1 say them. AUA AUG AUC 
AUU be to Krug. GAA GAG 
GAC GAU be to Krug. GGA 
GGG — ” 
Desperately Watchman went 
down the rows of the genetic ritual 
as he kneeled next to the altar. 
With each group of codons he rotated his body in the prescribed 
double helix, the proper motion 
for the last rites. Caliban Driller’s 
life ebbed swiftly. Toward the end. 
Watchman pulled a tie-line from 
his tunic, jacked one end into the 
input in his forearm and the other 
into Driller’s. He pumped energy 
into the shattered beta to keep him 
going until all the "RNA triplets 
had been named. Then, only then, 
when he was certain that he had 
sent Caliban Driller’s soul to Krug, 
did Watchman unjack, arise, murmur a brief prayer on his own behalf. He summoned a team of gammas to haul the body away for 
disposal. 
TENSE, drained, yet jubilant
over the redemption of Caliban 
Driller, he left the chapel and 
headed back toward the control 
center. Halfway there his way was 
blocked by a figure of his own 
height — another alpha. That 
seemed strange. Watchman’s shift 
would not be over for some hours 
yet — when it was, the alpha Euclid 
Planner was scheduled to arrive 
and relieve him. But this alpha was 
not Planner. He was altogether unfamiliar to Watchman. 
The stranger said, “Watchman, 
may I have some time? I am Siegfried Fileclerk of the Android 
Equality Party. Of course you 
know of the constitutional amendment that we propose to have our 
friends introduce in the next Congress. It has been suggested that in 
view of your close association with 
Simeon Krug you might be helpful 
to us in our desire to gain access 
to Krug for the purpose of obtaining his endorsement for — ” 
Watchman cut in, “Surely you 
must be familiar with my position 
concerning involvements in political matters.” 
“Yes, but at this time the cause 
of android equality — ” 
“Can be served in many ways. I 
have no wish to exploit my connection with Krug for political purposes.” 
“The constitutional amendment ” 
“Pointless. Pointless. Friend 
Fileclerk, do you sec that building 
yonder? It is our chapel. I recommend you visit it and cleanse your 
soul of false values.” 
“I am not in communion with 
your church,” said Siegfried Fileclerk.
“And I am not a member of 
your political party,” Thor Watchman said. “Excuse me. I have responsibilities in the control center.” 
“Perhaps I could speak with you 
when your shift has ended.” 
“You would then be intruding 
upon my time of resting,” Watchman said. 
He walked briskly away. It was 
necessary for him to employ one 
of the neural rituals of tranquility 
to ease the anger and irritation 
surging within him. 
Android Equality Party, he 
thought disdainfully. Fools! Bunglers! Idiots! 
IV 
ANUEL KRUG had had a 
busy day. 
0800, Calijornia. Awakening, at 
his home on the Mendocino coast. 
The turbulent Pacific almost at 
his front door; a thousand-hectare 
redwood forest as his garden; Clissa beside him in bed, cat-soft, catshy. His mind fogged from last 
night’s Spectrum Group party in 
Taiwan, where he had let himself 
drink too much of Nick Ssu-ma’s 
millet-and-ginger liqueur. His beta 
houseman’s image on the floating 
screen, urgently whispering, “Sir, 
sir, please get up. Your father expects you at the tower.” Clissa 
cuddling closer against him. Manuel blinking, struggling to cut 
through the web of fleece swad
dling his brain. “Sir? Pardon, but 
you left irrevocable instructions 
that you were to be awakened!” A 
forty-cycle note rumbling out of 
the floor; a fifteen-megacycle cone 
of sound slicing down out of the 
ceiling; himself impaled between 
the two, unable to escape back into 
sleep. Crescendo, Wakefulness, reluctant, grudging. Then a surprise; 
Clissa stirring, trembling, taking 
his hand, putting it over one of her 
little cool breasts. His fingertips 
converging on the nipple and finding it still soft. As expected. A 
bold overture from the child-woman — but flesh weak if spirit willing. 
They had been married two years 
and despite all his earnest and 
skillful efforts he had not succeeded yet in fully arousing her senses. 
“Manuel — ” she whispered. 
“Manuel — touch me all over — ” 
He felt cruel, turning her off. 
“Later,” he said, as the terrible 
spikes of sound met in his brain. 
“We have to get up now. The patriarch is waiting for us. We’re going to the tower today.” 
Clissa pouted. They tumbled 
from bed. Instantly the damnable 
sonics ceased. They showered, 
breakfasted, dressed. 
“Are you sure you really want 
me to come?” she asked. 
He said, “My father made a 
point of inviting you. He thinks it’s 
high time you saw the tower. Don’t 
you want to go?” 
“I’m afraid I’ll do something 
foolish, say something naive. I feel 
so awfully young when I’m around 
him.” 
“You are awfully young. Anyway, he’s fond of you. Just pretend 
you’re terribly terribly fascinated 
by his tower and he’ll forgive you 
for anything silly you might say.” 
“And the other people — Senator 
Fearon, the scientist and whoever 
else — Manuel, 1 feel embarrassed 
already.” 
“Clissa — ” 
“All right. All right.” 
“And remember — the tower is 
going to strike you as the most 
marvelous enterprise of humanity 
since the Taj Mahal. Tell him that 
after you’ve seen it. Not in so 
many words. Get the idea across 
your own way.” 
“He’s really serious about the 
tower, isn’t he?” she asked. “He 
actually expects to talk to people 
in the stars.” 
“He does.” 
“How much will it cost?” 
“Billions,” Manuel said. 
“He’s draining our heritage to 
build that thing. He’s spending 
everything.” 
“Not quite everything. We’ll 
never hurt for cash. Anyway, he 
made the money — let him spend 
it.” 
“But on an obsession — a fantasy — ” 
“Stop it, Clissa. It isn’t our business.” 
“Tell me this at least. Suppose 
your father died tomorrow and 
you took charge of everything. 
What would happen to the tower?” 
Manuel set up the coordinates 
for their transmat jump to New 
York. 
“I’d halt work on it the day after tomorrow,” he said. “But I’ll 
gut you if you ever let him know 
that. Get in, now. Let’s go.” 
1140, New York. Midmorning 
already and he had been awake 
only forty hurried minutes after 
arising at eight. That was one of 
the little troubles of the transmat 
society — you kept dropping whole 
segments of time into hidden pockets if you jumped from west to 
east. 
Naturally there were compensating benefits when you went the 
other way. In the summer of ’16, 
on the day before his wedding, 
Manuel and some of his friends 
of the Spectrum Group had raced 
the dawn westward around the 
world. They began at 0600 on a 
Saturday in the Amboseli Game 
Preserve, with the sun coming up 
back of Kilimanjaro, and off they 
went to Kinshasa, Accra, Rio, 
Caracas, Veracruz, Albuquerque, 
Los Angeles, Honolulu, Auckland, Brisbane, Singapore, Pnompenh, Calcutta, Mecca. No visas 
were needed in the transmat 
world, no passports; such things 
were too obviously absurd with 
instantaneous travel available. The 
sun plodded along, as always, at a 
feeble thousand miles an hcflir 
the leaping travelers had no such
handicap. Although they paused 
fifteen minutes here, twenty minutes there, enjoying a cocktail or 
nipping a floater, buying small 
souvenirs, touring famous monuments of antiquity, yet they constantly gained time, pressing farther and farther backward into the 
previous night, outstripping the 
sun as they sped about the globe, 
striding into Friday evening. Of 
course, they lost all they had 
gained when they crossed the dateline and were dumped into Saturday afternoon. But they nibbled 
away the loss by continuing westward. And when they came around 
to Kilimanjaro again it was not 
yet eleven on the same Saturday 
morning from which they had departed, but they had circled the 
world and had lived a Friday and a 
half. 
You could do such things with a 
transmat. You could also, by timing your jumps with care, see two 
dozen sunsets in a single day, or 
spend all your life under the blaze 
of eternal noon. Nevertheless, arriving in New York at 1 140 from 
California, Manuel resented having had to surrender this segment 
of morning to the transmat. 
HIS father greeted him formally
in his office with a pressure of 
palms and hugged Clissa with 
somewhat more warmth. Leon 
Spaulding hovered uneasily to one 
side. Quenelle stood by the window, back to everyone, studying 
the city. Manuel did not get along 
with her. He generally disliked his 
father’s mistresses. The old man 
picked the same type every time: 
full lips, full breasts, jutting buttocks, fiery eyes, heavy hips. Peasant stock. 
Krug said, “We’re waiting for 
Senator Fearon, Tom Buckleman, 
and Dr. Vargas. Thor will take us 
on the grand tour of the tower. 
What are you doing afterward, 
Manuel?” 
“I hadn’t thought — ” 
“Go to Duluth. I want you to 
know something about the plant 
operations there. Leon, notify Duluth — my son arrives for an inspection trip early this afternoon.” 
Spaulding went off. Manuel 
shrugged. 
“As you wish, father.” 
“Time to extend your responsibilities, boy. To develop your 
management capacities. Some day 
you be boss of all this, eh? Someday when they say Krug — they 
will mean you.” 
“I’ll try to live up to the trust 
you’ve placed in me,” Manuel 
said. 
He knew he wasn’t fooling the 
old man with his glibness. And the 
old man’s show of paternal pride 
wasn't fooling him. Manuel was 
aware of his father’s intense contempt for him. He could see himself through his father’s eyes — a 
wastrel, a perpetual playboy. 
Against that he held his own image 
of himself: sensitive, compassion
ate, too refined to brawl in the 
commercial arena. Then he tumbled through that image to another 
view of Manuel Krug, perhaps 
more genuine: hollow, earnest, 
idealistic, futile, incompetent. 
Which was the real Manuel? He 
didn’t know. He understood less 
and less about himself as he grew 
older. 
Senator Fearon stepped from 
the transmat. 
Krug said, “Henry, y^u know 
my son Manuel — the future Krug 
of Krug, he is, the heir apparent — ” 
“It’s been many years,” Fearon 
said. “Manuel, how are you?” 
Manuel touched the politician’s 
cool palm. He managed an amiable smile. 
“We met five years ago in Macao,” he said gracefully. “You 
were passing through, en route to 
Ulan Bator.” 
“Of course. Of course. What a 
splendid memory — Krug, this is 
a fine boy here.” 
“You wail,” Krug said. “When 
I step down he’ll show you how 
a real empire-builder operates. 
Manuel coughed and looked 
away, embarrassed. Some compulsive sense of dynastic need 
forced old Krug to pretend that 
his only child was a fit heir to the 
constellation of enterprises he had 
founded or absorbed. Thus the 
constant show of concern for 
Manuel’s “training,” and thus the 
abrasive, repetitive public insistence that Manuel would some 
day succeed to control. 
Manuel had no wish to take 
command of his father’s empire. 
Nor did he see that he was capable 
of it. He was only now outgrowing 
his playboy phase, groping his way 
out of frivolity ' the way others 
might grope their way out of 
atheism. He was looking for a vehicle of purpose, for a vessel to 
contain his formless ambitions and 
abilities. Some day, perhaps, he 
might find one. But he doubted 
that Krug Enterprises would be 
that vehicle. 
The old man knew that as well 
as Manuel did. Inwardly he 
scorned his son’s hollowness and 
sometimes the scorn showed 
through. Yet he never ceased pretending that he prized his son’s 
judgment, shrewdness, and potential administrative skills. In front 
of Thor Watchman, in front of 
Leon Spaulding, in front of anyone who would listen, Krug went 
on and on about the virtues of the 
heir apparent. Self-deluding hypocrisy, Manuel thought. 
He's trying to hoax himself into 
believing what he knows damned 
well won’t ever be true. And it 
won’t work. It can't work. He’ll 
always have more real faith in his 
android friend Thor than he will 
in his own son. For good reason, 
too. Why not prefer a gifted android to a worthless child ? He 
made us both, didn't he? 
Let him give the companies to 
Thor Watchman, Manuel thought.
The other members of the party 
were arriving. Krug shepherded 
everyone toward the transmat 
banks. 
“To the tower,” he cried. “To 
the tower!” 
1110, the tower. He had regained 
the better part of an hour out of 
his lost morning, anyway, through 
this jump of one time-zone westward from New York. But he 
could have done without the trip. 
Bad enough to caper in the chill 
Arctic autumn, forcing himself to 
admire his father’s absurd tower — 
the Pyramid of Krug, Manuel 
liked to £all it privately — but then 
there had been the business of the 
falling block, the crushing of the 
androids. A nasty incident. 
Clissa had gone to the edge of 
hysteria. 
“Don’t look,” Manuel told her, 
folding his arms about her as the 
wallscreen in the control center 
showed the scene of the lifting of 
the block from the corpses. To 
Spaulding he said, “Sedative. 
Fast.” 
The ectogene found him a tube 
of something. Manuel jammed the 
snout against Clissa’s arm and activated it. The drug leaped through 
her skin in a soft ultrasonic spurt. 
“Were they killed?” she asked, 
head still averted. 
“It looks that way. Possibly one 
survived. The others never knew 
what hit them.” 
“The poor people.” 
“Not people,” Leon Spaulding 
said. “Androids. Only androids.” 
Clissa lifted her head. “Androids 
are people!" she blazed. “I don’t 
ever want to hear something like 
that again! Don’t they have names, 
dreams, personalities — ” 
“Clissa,” Maryjel said gently. 
“ — ambitions?’* she said. “Of 
course they’re people. A bunch of 
people just died under that block. 
How could you, you in particular, 
make such a remark about — ” 
“Clissa!” Manuel said, anguished. 
Spaulding was rigid, eyes glassy 
with rage. The ectogene seemed to 
tremble on the verge of an angry 
retort but his fierce discipline saw 
him past the moment. 
“I’m sorry,” Clissa murmured, 
looking at the floor. “I didn’t 
mean to get personal, Leon. I I 
- oh, God, Manuel, why did any 
of this have to happen?” 
She began to sob again. Manuel 
signaled for another sedative tube 
but his father shook his head and 
came forward, taking her from 
him. 
Krug cradled the girl in his immense arms, half crushing her 
against his huge chest. 
“Easy,” he said, hugging her. 
“Easy, easy, easy. It was a terrible 
thing, yes. But they didn’t suffer. 
They died clean. Thor will look 
after the hurt ones. He’ll shut off 
their pain centers and make them 
feel better. Poor Clissa, poor, poor, 
poor, poor Clissa— ‘you’ve never 
seen anyone die before, have you? 
It’s awful when it’s so sudden, I 
know. I know.” He comforted her 
tenderly, stroking her long silken 
hair, patting her, kissing her moist 
cheeks. Manuel watched in astonishment. He had never seen his 
father so gentle before in his life. 
But of course Clissa was something special to the old man — the 
instrument of dynastic succession. 
She was supposed to be the steadying influence that would guide 
Manuel to an acceptance of his 
responsibilities and she also was 
charged with the task of perpetuating the name of Krug. A paradox, 
there: Krug treated his daughterin-law as though she were as fragile 
as an ancient porcelain doll — yet 
he expected a stream of sons shortly to begin flowing from her loins. 
To his guests Krug now said, 
“Too bad we end the tour this way. 
But at least we saw everything before it happened. Senator, gentlemen, I’m grateful that you came 
to see my tower. I trust you come 
again when it's a little more finished. Now we go, eh?” 
Clissa seemed calmer. It troubled Manuel that not he but his 
father had been the one to soothe 
her. 
Reaching out to take her, he 
said, “I think Clissa and I will 
head back to California. A couple 
of hours together on the beach and 
she’ll be steadier. We^-” 
“You are expected this afternoon in Duluth,” said Krug. 
“I—” 
“Send for household androids 
to fetch her,” he said. “You go to 
the plant.” Turning away from 
Manuel, Krug nodded to his departing guests and said to Leon 
Spaulding, “New York. The Upper office.” 
1138, the tower. Nearly everyone was gone, now: Krug, Spaulding, Quenelle and Vargas back to 
New York, Fearon and Buckleman to Geneva, Maledetto to Los 
Angeles, Thor Watchman down to 
see about the injured androids. 
Two of Manuel’s household betas 
had arrived to lake Clissa back to 
Mendocino. Just before she 
stepped into the transmat with 
them, Manuel embraced her lightly, kissing her cheek. 
“When will you come?" she 
asked. 
“Early this evening, I guess. We 
have a dale in Hong Kong, I think. 
I’ll get back in lime to dress for 
dinner.” 
“Not sooner?” 
“I have Duluth to do. The android plant.” 
“Get out of it.” 
“I can’t. You heard him tell me 
to go. Anyway, the old man’s 
right — it’s about time I saw it.” 
“What a bore.” 
“I have to. Sleep well, Clissa. 
Wake up with this ugly thing that 
happened here left far behind. Shall 
I program an erasure wire for 
you?”
“You know I hate having my 
memory tampered with, Manuel.” 
“Yes. I’m sorry. You’d better 
go, now.” 
“I love you,” she said. 
“1 love you,” he told her. 
He nodded to the androids. 
They took her £rms and led her 
into the transmat. 
HE WAS alone, except for a
couple of anknown betas who 
had arrived to take charge of the 
control center in Watchman’s absence. He walked coolly past them 
into Watchman’s private office at 
the rear of the dome, pushed the 
door shut and nudged the input of 
the telephone. The screen lit up. 
Manuel tapped out the cell numbers of a scrambler code and the 
screen responded with the abstract 
pattern that told him his privacy 
was guaranteed. Then he punched 
the number of Lilith Meson, alpha, 
in the android quarter of Stockholm. 
Lilith’s image glowed on the 
screen— an elegantly constructed 
woman with lustrous blue-black 
hair, a high-bridged nose, platinum 
eyes. Her smile dazzled. 
“Manuel? Where are you calling 
from?” she asked. 
“The tower. I’m going to be 
late.” 
“Very late?” 
“Two or three hours.” 
“I’ll shrivel. I’ll fade.” 
“I can’t help it, Lilith. His 
majesty commands me to visit the 
Duluth android plant. I must go.” 
“Even though I’ve rearranged a 
week’s shifts to be with you tonight?” 
“I can’t tell him that,” Manuel 
said. “Look, it’s only a few hours. 
Will you forgive me?” 
“What else can I do? But how 
dull to have to go sniffing in vats 
when you could be — ” 
“It’s known as noblesse oblige. 
Anyway, I’ve become a little curious about the android facts of life 
since you and I— since we — Do 
you know, I’ve never been inside 
one of the plants?” 
“Never?” 
“Never. Wasn’t ever interested. 
Still not interested, except in one 
special angle of it. This is my 
chance to find out what sort of 
things are under that lovely scarlet 
skin of yours. Here’s my chance 
to see how Krug Synthetics makes 
Liliths by the batch.” 
“Are you sure you really want 
to know?” she asked, dropping her 
voice into cello range. 
“I want to know all there is to 
know about you,” Manuel said 
earnestly. “For better, for worse. 
So forgive me for coming late, 
will you? I’ll be taking a Lilith lesson in Duluth. And I love you.” 
“I love you,” said Alpha Lilith 
Meson to the son of Simeon Krug. 
1158, Duluth. The main Earthside plant of Krug Synthetics, Ltd. 
- there were four others on as 
many continents and several off
world plants — occupied a sleek 
building nearly a kilometer long 
and flanking the shore of Lake 
Superior. Within that building, 
operating virtually as independent 
provinces, were the laboratories 
that formed the stations of the way 
in the creation of synthetic life. 
Manuel now toured those stations of the way like a visiting proconsul weighing the work of the 
underlings. He rode in a plush 
bubblecar as seductively comfortable as a womb. It glided along 
a fluid track that ran the length of 
the building, high above the operations floor. Beside him in the car 
was the factory’s human supervisor, a neat, crisp fortyish man 
named Nolan Bompensiero, who, 
although he was one of the key 
men in the Krug domain, sat tense 
and rigid, in obvious fear of Manuel’s displeasure. He did not suspect how resentful Manuel was of 
this assignment, how bored he was, 
how little he cared to brandish 
power by making trouble for his 
father's employees. Manuel had 
only Lilith on his mind. 
This is the place where Lilith was 
horn. This is the way Lilith was 
born. 
At each section of the factory an 
alpha — the section supervisorentered the car, riding with Manuel and Bompensiero to the end of 
his own zone of responsibility. 
Most of the work at the plant was 
under the direction of alphas. The 
entire giant installation employed 
only a half-dozen humans. Each 
alpha looked as tense as Bompensiero himself. An inspection of the 
plant by an authentic Krug was 
evidently an unusual and disturbing event to them. 
M ANUEL passed first through 
the rooms where the high-energy nucleotides constituting 
DNA, the basic building block of 
life, were synthesized. He gave 
half-hearted attention to Bompensiero’s quick, nervous spiel, tuning 
in only on an occasional phrase. 
“--water, ammonia, methane, 
hydrogen cyanide and other chemicals we use an electrical discharge to stimulate the formation 
of complex organic compounds 
the addition of phosphorus 
“ — a simple process, almost 
primitive,, don’t you think? It follows the line of the classic Miller 
experiment of nineteen filly-two 
- medieval science, right down 
there on the floor • 
“ — the DNA determines the 
structure of the proteins in the 
cell. The typical living cell requires 
hundreds of proteins, most of 
them acting as enzymes, biological 
catalysts — 
- “ — a typical protein is a molecular chain containing about twohundred amino acid subunits 
linked together in a specific sequence — 
^ the code for each protein is 
carried by a single gene, which in 
turn is a particular region on the
linear DNA molecule— all of this 
of course you must know. Forgive 
me for restating such elementary 
material. I only wish to — ” 
“Of course,” Manuel said. 
“ — and here, in these vats, we 
make the nucleotides and join 
them into dinucleotides and string 
them together to form' DNA, the 
nucleic acid that determines the 
composition of — ” 
Lilith, from those vats? Lilith, 
from that slinking brew of chemicals? 
The car drifted smoothly forward. An alpha supervisor departed. Another alpha, bowing 
stiffly, smiling fixedly, entered. 
Bompensiero said, “We design 
the DNA templates, the blueprints 
for the life form we wish to create 
•“-but then the task is to make the 
living matter self-replicating, since 
surely we cannot build an android 
cell by cel! ourselves. We must 
reach what we call the takeoff 
stage. But naturally you know 
that the DNA is not directly involved in protein synthesis, that 
another nucleic acid acts as an intermediary — RNA, which can be 
coded to carry the genetic messages laid down in the DNA—* 
“ — four bases or chemical subunits, arranged in varying combinations, form the code — adenine, 
guanine, uracil, cytosine — 
“ — in these vats — you can almost imagine the chains forming — 
the RNA transmits the DNA instructions — protein synthesis is 
conducted by cellular particles 
called ribosomes, which are about 
half protein and half RNA — adenine, guanine, uracil, cytosine — 
the code for each protein is carried by a single gene and the code, 
inscribed on messenger-RNA, 
takes the form of a series of triplets of the four RNA bases — you 
follow?” 
“Yes, certainly,” said Manuel, 
seeing Lilith swimming in the vats. 
“As here. Adenine, adenine, cytosine. Cytosine, cytosine, guanine. Uracil, uracil, guanine. 
AAC, CCG, UUG — it’s almost 
liturgical, isn’t it, Mr. Krug? We 
have sixty-four combinations of 
RNA bases with which we can 
specify the twenty amino acids 
quite an adequate vocabulary for 
the purpose! 1 could chant the 
whole list for you as we travel this 
hall. AAA, AAG, AAC, AAU. 
AGA, AGG, AGC, AGU. Then 
AGA ” 
The alpha who was traveling 
with them at the moment coughed 
loudly and clutched his waist, 
grimacing. 
“Yes?” Bompensiero said. 
“A sudden spasm,” said the alpha. “A digestive difficulty. Pardon me.” 
Bompensiero returned his attention to Manuel. 
“W'ell, no need to run down all 
the sequences. And so we put together the proteins, you see, building up living molecules in precisely 
the way it happens in nature, except 
that in nature the process is triggered by the fusion of the sexual 
gametes, whereas we synthesize 
the genetic building blocks. We 
follow the human genetic pattern, 
naturally, since we want a humanlooking end product — but if we 
wished we could synthesize pigs, 
toads, horses, Centaurine proteoids, any form of life we chose. 
We pick our code, we arrange our 
RNA and presto! The pattern of 
our final product emerges precisely 
as desired.” 
“Of course,” said the alpha, “we 
don’t follow the human genetic 
code in every respect.” 
Bompensiero nodded eagerly. 
“My friend here brings up a vital 
point. In the earliest days of android synthesis your father decided that, for obvious sociological 
reasons, androids must be instantly identifiable as synthetic creations. Thus we introduce certain 
mandatory genetic modifications. 
The red skin, the absence of body 
hair, the distinctive epidermal texture, are all designed mainly -for 
identification purposes. Then there 
are the modifications programed 
for greater bodily efficiency. If we 
can play the role of gods, why not 
do it to the best effect?” 
“Why not?” Manuel said. 
“Away with the appendix, then. 
Rearrange the bony structure of 
the back and pelvis to eliminate all 
the troubles that our faulty construction causes. Sharpen the senses. Program for optimum fat-ver
sus-muscle balance, for physical 
esthetics, for endurance, for speed, 
for reflexes. Why make ugly androids? Why make sluggish ones? 
Why make clumsy ones?” 
“Would you say,” Manuel asked 
casually, “that androids are superior to ordinary human beings?" 
Bompensiero looked uneasy. 
He hesitated as if trying to weigh 
his response for all possible political impacts, not knowing where 
Manuel might stand on the vexed 
question of android civil rights. 
At length he said, “I think 
there’s no doubt about their physical superiority. We’ve programed 
them from the moment of conception to be strong, handsome, 
healthy. To some extent we’ve 
been doing that with humans for 
the past couple of generations, 
too, but we don’t have the same 
degree of control or at least wc 
haven’t tried to obtain the same tie 
gree of control on account of 
humanistic objections, the opposition of the Witherers and so forth. 
However, when you consider that 
androids are sterile, that the intelligence of most of them is quite 
low, that even the alphas have demonstrated — pardon me, my friend 
— relatively little creative ability-” 
Y ES,” Manuel said. “Certainly.” He pointed toward the 
distant floor. “What’s going on 
right down there?” 
“Those are the replication vats,”
said Bompensiero. “The chains of 
basic nucleic matter undergo division and extension there. Each 
vat contains what amounts to a 
soup of newly conceived zygotes at 
the takeoff stage, produced by our 
build-up procedures of protein synthesis instead of By the sexual process of the union of natural gametes. Do I make myself clear?” 
“Quite,” said Manuel, staring in 
fascination at the quiescent pink 
fluid in the great circular tanks. He 
imagined he could see tiny specks 
of living matter in them — an illusion, he knew. 
Their car rolled silently onward. 
“These are the nursery chambers, Bompensiero said, when 
they had entered the next section 
and were looking down on rows 
of shining metal vaults linked by 
an intricate webwork of pipes. 
“Essentially, they’re artificial 
wombs, each one enclosing a dozen embryos in a solution of nutrients. We produce alphas, betas 
and gammas here in Duluth a 
full android range. The qualitative 
differences between the three levels 
are built into them during the original process of synthesis but we 
also supply different nutritional 
values. These are the alpha chambers, just below to our left. To the 
right are the betas. And the next 
room, coming up — entirely gammas.” 
“What’s your distribution 
curve?” 
“One alpha to a hundred betas 
to a thousand gammas. Your father worked out the ratios in the 
beginning and they’ve never been 
altered. The distribution precisely 
fits human needs.” 
“My father is a man of great 
foresight,” said Manuel vaguely. 
He wondered what the world 
would have been like today if the 
Krug cartel had not given it androids. Perhaps not very different. 
Instead of a small, culturally homogenous human elite served by 
computers, mechanical robots and 
hordes of obliging androids there 
might be a small, culturally homogenous human elite served only by 
computers and mechanical robots. 
Either way, twenty-third-century 
man would be living a life of ease. 
Certain determining trends had 
established themselves in the past 
few hundred years, long before the 
first clumsy android had staggered 
from its vat. Primarily, starting 
late in the twentieth century, there 
had been the vast reduction in human population. War and general 
anarchy had accounted for hundreds of millions of civilians in 
Asia and Africa; famine had swept 
those continents and South America and the Near East as well. In the 
developed nations, social pressures 
and the advent of foolproof contraception had produced the same 
effects. A checking of the rate of 
population growth had been followed, within two generations, by 
an absolute and cascading decline 
in actual population. 
The erosion and almost total 
disappearance of the proletariat 
was one historically unprecedented 
outcome of this. Since the population decline had been accompanied 
by the replacement of men by machines in nearly all forms of menial 
labor and some not so menial, 
those who had no skills to contribute to the new society were discouraged from reproducing. Unwanted, dispirited, displaced, the 
uneducated and the ineducable 
dwindled in number from generation to generation. This Darwinian 
process was aided, at first subtly, 
then openly, by well-meaning officials who saw to it that the blessings of contraception were denied 
to no citizen. By the time the 
masses were a minority, genetic 
laws reinforced the trend. Those 
who had proven themselves unfit 
might not reproduce at all; those 
who merely came up to norms 
might have two children per couple 
but no more; only those who exceeded norms could add to the 
world’s human stock. In this way 
population remained stable. In this 
way the clever inherited the earth. 
The reshaping of society was 
worldwide. The advent of transmat 
travel had turned the globe into a 
village and the people of that village spoke the same language — 
English — and thought the same 
thoughts. Culturally and genetically they tended toward mongrelization. Quaint pockets of the pure 
past were maintained here and 
there as tourist attractions but by 
the end of the twenty-first century 
there were few differences in appearance, attitudes or culture 
among the citizens of Karachi, 
Cairo, Minneapolis, Athens, Ad 
dis Ababa, Rangoon, Peking, Canberra and Novosibirsk. The trails 
mat also made a national boundaries absurd and old concepts of 
sovereignty melted. 
But this colossal social upheaval, 
bringing with it universal leisure, 
grace and comfort, had also 
brought an immense and permanent labor shortage. Computerdirected robots had proved themselves inadequate to many tasks. 
Robots made excellent streetsweepers and factory workers but 
they were less useful as valets, baby-sitters, chefs and gardeners. 
Build belter robots, some said; but 
others dreamed of synthetic humans to look after their needs. The 
technique did not seem impossible. 
Ectogenesis — the artificial nurturing of embryos outside the womb, 
the hatching of babies from stored 
ova and sperm — had long been a 
reality, chiefly as a convenience for 
women who did not wish to have 
their genes go down to oblivion 
but who wanted to avoid the risks 
and burdens of pregnancy. Ectogenes, born of man and woman at 
one femove, were too thoroughly 
human in origin to be suitable as 
tools — but why not carry the process to the next step and manufacture androids?
Krug had done that. He had offered the world synthetic humans 
— far more versatile than robots — 
who were longlived, capable, complex in personality and totally subservient to human needs. They 
looked human ■(except for the 
carefully programed differences), 
they were as intelligent as humans 
(at least in the uppermost of their 
three quality levels) and they could 
be trained in any desired way But 
they were purchased, not hired, 
and by general consent they were 
regarded by law as property, not 
persons. They were slaves, in short. 
Finding robots unsatisfactory as 
servants, seeing no ready supply of 
human servants at hand, Krug had 
invented a new kind of slave. Manuel sometimes thought it might 
have been simpler to make do with 
robots. Robots were things that 
could be thought of as things and 
treated as things. Androids were 
things that looked uncomfortably 
like people and they might not 
acquiesce in their status of thinghood forever. 
PPHE car glided through room 
* after room of nursery chambers, silent, darkened, empty but 
for a few android monitors. Each 
fledgling android spent the first 
two years of its life sealed in such 
a chamber, Bompensiero pointed 
out, and the rooms through which 
they were passing contained successive batches ranging in age from 
a few weeks to more than twenty 
months. In some rooms the chambers were open -squads of beta 
technicians were preparing them to 
receive new infusions of takeofflevel zygotes. 
“In this room,” said Bompensiero many rooms later, “we have 
a group of matured androids ready 
to be ‘born.’ Do you wish to descend to the floor area and observe 
the decanting at close range?” 
Manuel nodded. 
Bompensiero touched a switch. 
Their car rolled serenely off its 
track and down a ramp. At the 
bottom they dismounted. Manuel 
saw an army of gammas clustered 
around one of the nursery chambers. 
“The chamber has been drained 
of nutrient fluids. For some twenty minutes now the androids within have been breathing air for the 
first time in their lives. The hatches 
of the chamber now are being 
opened. Here, come close, Mr. 
Krug, come close.” 
The chamber was uncovered. 
Manuel peered in. 
He saw a dozen full-grown androids, six male, six female, 
sprawled limply on the metal floor. 
Their jaws were slack, their eyes 
were blank, their arms and legs 
moved feebly. They seemed helpless, vacant, vulnerable. 
Lilith, Lilith! 
Bompensiero at his elbow whispered, “In the two years between 
takeoff and decanting the android 
reaches full physical maturity — a 
process that takes humans thirteen 
to fifteen years. This is another of 
the genetic modifications introduced by your father in the interests of economy. We produce no 
infant androids here.” 
Manuel said, “Didn’t 1 hear 
somewhere that we turn out a line 
of android babies to be raised as 
surrogates by human women who 
can’t — ” 
“Please,” Bompensiero said 
sharply. “We don’t discuss— ” He 
cut himself sort, as if remembering 
whom he had just reprimanded, 
and said in a more moderate way, 
“I know very little about what you 
mention. We have no such operations in this plant.” 
Gammas were lifting the dozen 
newborn androids from the nursery chamber and carrying them to 
gaping machines that seemed part 
wheelchair, part suit of armor. 
The males were lean and muscular, 
the females high-breasted and slim. 
But there was something hideous 
about their mindlessness. Totally 
passive, utterly soul-empty, the 
moist, naked androids offered no 
response as they were sealed one 
by one into these metallic receptacles. Only their faces remained 
visible, looking out without expression through transparent visors. 
Bompensiero explained, “They 
don’t have the use of their muscles 
yet. They don’t know how to 
stand, to walk, to do anything. 
These training devices will stimu
late muscular development. A 
month inside one and an android 
can handle itself physically. Now, 
if we return to our car 
“These androids I’ve just 
seen,” Manuel said. “They're 
gammas, of course 1 ?” 
“Alphas.” 
Manuel was stunned. “But they 
seemed so so ” He faltered. 
“Moronic.” 
“They are newly born,” said 
Bompensiero. “Should they come 
out of the nurseries ready to run 
computers?” 
They returned to the car. 
Lilith! 
Manuel saw young androids 
taking their first shambling steps, 
tumbling and laughing and getting 
to their feet and doing it better 
the second lime. He visited a classroom where the subject being 
taught was bowel control He 
watched slumbering betas under 
going personality imprints a soul 
was being etched into each unformed mind. He donned a helmet 
and listened to a language tape. 
The education of an android, he 
was told, lasted one year for a 
gamma, two for a beta, four for an 
alpha. The maximum, then, was 
six years from conception to full 
adulthood. He had never full appreciated the swiftness of it all before. Somehow the new knowledge 
made androids seem infinitely less 
human to him. Suave, authoritative, commanding Thor Watchman was something like nine or
ten years old, Manuel realized. 
And the lovely Lilith Meson was — 
what? Seven? Eight? 
Manuel felt a sudden powerful 
urge to escape from this place. 
“We have a group of betas just 
about to leave the factory,” said 
Bompensiero. “Th*ey are undergoing their final checkout today, 
with tests in linguistic precision, 
coordination, motor response, 
metabolic adjustment, and so on. 
Perhaps you would care to inspect 
them yourself and personally — ” 
“No,” Manuel said. “It’s been 
fascinating. But I’ve taken up too 
much of yoirr time already and I 
have an appointment elsewhere, so 
I really must — ” 
Bompensiero did not looked 
grieved to be rid of him. 
“As .you wish,” he said oblingingly. “But of course, we remain 
at your service whenever you 
choose to visit us again and — ” 
“Where is the transmat cubicle, 
please?” 
2241, Stockholm. Jumping westward to Europe, Manuel lost the 
rest of the day. Dark, icy evening 
had descended in Stockholm. The 
stars were sharp and a sleety wind 
ruffled the waters of M'alaren. To 
foil any possibility of his being 
traced he had jumped to the public 
transmat cubicle in the lobby of the 
wondrous old Grand Hotel. Now, 
shivering outside he walked briskly 
through the autumnal gloom to 
another cubicle outside the gray 
bulk of the Royal Opera, put his 
thumb to the chargeplate and 
bought a jump to Stockholm’s Baltic side, emerging in the mellow, 
venerable residential district of 
Ostermalm. This was the android 
quarter now. He hurried down 
Birger Jarlsgaten to the oncesplendid nineteenth-century apartment building where Lilith lived. 
Pausing outside, he looked about 
carefully, saw that the streets were 
empty and darted into the building. A robot in the lobby scanned 
him and asked his purpose in a flat, 
froglike voice. 
“Visiting Lilith Meson, alpha,” 
Manuel said. 
The robot raised no objection. 
Manuel had his choice of getting 
to her flat by liftshaft, or by stairs. 
He took the stairs. Musty smells 
pursued him and shadows danced 
alongside him all the way to the 
fifth floor. 
T ILITH greeted him in a sump^tuous, clinging, floor-length 
high-spectrum gown. Since it was 
nothing more than a monomolecular film, it left no contour of her 
body concealed. She drifted forward, arms outstretched, lips 
parted, breasts heaving, whispering 
his name. He reached for her. 
He saw her as a speck drifting 
in a vat. 
He saw her as a mass of replicating nucleotides. 
He saw her naked and wet and 
vacant-eyed, shambling out of her 
nursery chamber. 
He saw her as a thing, manufactured by men. 
Thing, Thing. Thing. Thing. 
Thing. Thing. Thing. 
Lilith. 
He had known her for five 
months. They had been lovers for 
three. Thor Watchman had introduced them. She was on the Krug 
staff. 
Her body pressed close to his.He brought up his hand and cupped 
one of her breasts. It felt warm and 
real and firm through the monomolecular gown and, as he drew 
his thumb across the tip of her nipple, it hardened and rose in excitement. Real. Real. 
Thing. 
He kissed her. His tongue 
slipped between her lips. He tasted 
the taste of chemicals. Adenine, 
guanine, cytosine, uracil. He 
smelled the smell of the vats. 
Thing. Thing. Beautiful thing. 
Thing in woman’s shape. Well 
named, Lilith. Thing. 
She drew away from him and 
said, “You went to the factory?” 
“Yes.” 
“And you learned more about 
androids than you wanted to 
know?” 
“What does that mean?” 
“When you held me just then 1 
felt a wall coming down between 
us.” 
“No, Lilith.” 
“You see me through different 
eyes now. You can’t help remembering what I really am.” 
“That is absolutely not true,” 
Manuel said. “I love you, Lilith. 
What you are is no news to me. 
And makes no difference at all. 1 
love you. 1 love you.” 
“Would you like a drink?” she 
asked. “A weed? A floater? You’re 
all worked up.” 
“Nothing,” he said. “It’s been a 
long day. I haven’t even had lunch 
yet and I think I’ve been going for 
forty hours. Let’s just relax, Lilith. 
No weeds. No floaters.” He unsnapped his clothing and she helped 
him out of it. Then she pirouetted 
before a doppler — there was a brief 
rising burst of sound and her gown 
disappeared. Her skin was light 
red, except for the dark brown of 
her nipples. Her breasts were full, 
her waist was narrow, her hips 
flared with the impossible promise 
of fertility. Her beauty was inhumanly flawless. Manuel nibbled 
his upper lip and fought the dryness in his throat. 
She said sadly, “I could feel the 
change in you the moment you 
touched me. Your touch is different. There was — fear? — in it. Disgust?” 
“No.” 
“Until tonight I was something 
exotic to you — but human, like a 
Bushman would be, an Eskimo. 
You didn’t keep me in a separate 
category outside the human race. 
Now you keep telling yourself that 
you’ve fallen in love with a mess of
chemicals. You think you may be 
doing something sick by having an 
affair with me.” 
“Lilith, I beg of you to stop it. 
This is all in your mind.” 
“Is it?” 
“I came here, I kissed you. I 
told you I loved you. I’m waiting 
to go to bed with you. Maybe 
you’re projecting some guilts of 
your own on me when you say — ” 
“Manuel, what would you have 
said a year ago about a man who 
admitted he’d been to bed with an 
android?” 
“Plenty of men I know have 
been — ” 
“What would you say about 
him? What kind of words would 
you use? What would you think of 
him?” 
“I’ve never considered such 
things. They simply haven’t concerned me, ever.” 
“You’re evading. Remember, 
we promised that we wouldn’t 
play any of the little lie-games people play. Yes? You can’t deny that 
at most social levels sex between 
humans and androids is regarded 
as a perversion.. Maybe the only 
perversion that’s left in the world. 
Am I right? Will you answer me?” 
“A LL right.” His eyes met hers. 
**He had never known a woman with eyes that color. Slowly he 
said, “Most men regard it as, well, 
cheap, foul, to sleep with androids. 
I’ve heard it compared to masturbation. To doing it with a rubber 
doll. When I heard such remarks, 
I thought they were ugly, stupid 
expressions of anti-android prejudice — and I obviously didn’t have 
such attitudes myself or I never 
could have fallen in love with you.” 
Something in his mind sang mockingly, Remember the vats ! Remember the vats ! His gaze wavered and moved off center — he 
stared intently at her cheekbone. 
Grimly he said, “Before the whole 
universe I swear, Lilith, that I 
never felt there was anything 
shameful or dirty about loving an 
android and I insist that despite 
what you’ve claimed to detect in 
me since my visit to the factory, I 
don’t have any such feelings even 
now. And to prove it — ” 
He gathered her to him. His 
hand swept down her satiny skin 
from her breasts to her belly to her 
loins. Her thighs parted and his 
fingers found her once more as 
fleeceless as an infant’s — and suddenly he trembled at the alien texture he felt there, and found himself unmanned by it, though it had 
never troubled him before. So 
smooth. So terribly smooth. He 
looked down at her, at her bareness. Bare, yes, but not because 
she had been shaven. She was like 
a child there. Like — like an android. He saw vats again. He saw 
moist crimson alphas whose faces 
were without expression. He told 
himself sternly that to love an android was no sin. He began to caress her and she responded as a 
woman would respond, with lubrication, with little ragged bursts of 
breath, with a tightening of her 
thighs against his hand. He kissed 
her breasts and clutched her to 
him. It seemed then that the blazing image of his father hovered like 
a pillar of fire in the air before him. 
Old devil, did artificer! How clever 
to design such a product! A product. It walks. It talks. It seduces. 
It gasps in passion. It grows tumescent in the labia minora, this 
product. And what am I? A product too, hey? A hodgepodge of 
chemicals stamped out from much 
the same sort df blueprint - mulatis mutandis, of course. Adenine. 
Guanine. Cytosine. Uracil. Born 
in a vat, hatched in a womb 
where’s the difference? We are one 
flesh. We are different races but we 
are one flesh. 
His desire for her returned in a 
dizzying surge and he pivoted, 
topped her, drove himself deep 
within her. Her heels hammered 
ecstatically on his calves. The valley of her sex throbbed, clasping 
him in authentic frenzy. They 
rocked and climbed and soared. 
When it was over, when they 
had both come down, she said, 
“That was disgustingly bitchy of 
me.’’ 
“What was?” 
“The scene I made. When I was 
trying to tell you what I thought 
was in your mind.” 
“Forget it, Lilith.” 
“You were right, though. I sup
pose I was projecting my own misgivings. Maybe I feel guilty about 
being the mistress of a human. 
Maybe I want you to think of me 
as something made of rubber. 
Somewhere inside me that’s 
probably how I think of myself.” 
“No.” 
“We can’t help it. We breathe 
it in all the time. We’re reminded 
a thousand times a day that we 
aren’t real.” 
“You’re as real as anyone I’ve 
ever known. More real than 
some.” More real than Clissa, he 
did not add. “I’ve never seen you 
clutched like this before, Lilith. 
What’s happening?” 
“Your factory trip,” she said. 
“Until today I was always sure 
that you were different. That you 
hadn’t ever spent one second worrying about how or where I was 
born, or whether there might he 
something wrong about what we 
have going. But 1 was afraid that 
once you saw the factory, saw the 
whole process in clinical detail, 
you might change — and then, when 
you came in tonight there was 
something about you, something 
chilly that I knew hadn’t been part 
of you before — ” She shrugged. 
“Maybe I imagined it. I’m sure I 
imagined it. You aren’t like the 
others, Manuel. You’re a Krug. 
You’re like a king. You don’t have 
to build up your status by putting 
other people down. You don’t 
divide the world into people and 
androids. You never did. And a
single peek into the vats couldn’t 
change that.” 
“Of course it couldn’t,” he said 
in the earnest voice in which he 
did his lying. “Androids are people and people are people and I’ve 
never thought otherwise and I never will think otherwise. And you’re 
beautiful. And I love you very 
much. And anyone who believes 
that androids are some kind of 
lesser breed is a vicious madman.” 
“You support full civic equality 
for androids?” 
“Certainly.” 
“You mean alpha androids, 
don’t you?” she said mischievously
“I — well—” 
“All androids ought to be equal 
to humans. But alphas ought to 
be more equal thap others.” 
“You bitch. Are you playing 
games again?” 
“I’m sticking up for alpha prerogatives. Can’t a downtrodden 
ethnic group establish its own internal class distinctions? Oh, I 
love you, Manuel. Don’t take me 
seriously all the time.” 
“I can’t help it. I’m not really 
very clever and I don’t know when 
you’re joking.” He kissed the tips 
of her breasts. “I have to go now.” 
“You just got here!” 
“I’m sorry. I really am.” 
“You came late, we wasted half 
our time in that dumb argument— 
stay another hour, Manuel!” 
“I have a wife wailing in California,” he said. “The real world 
intervenes from time to time.” 
“When will I see you again?” 
“Soon. Soon. Soon.” 
“Day after tomorrow?” 
“I don’t think so. But soon. I’ll 
call first.” 
He slipped on his clothes. Her 
words crackled in his mind. 
You aren't like the others, Manuel . you don’t divide the world 
into people and androids. 
Was it true? Could it be true? 
He had lied to her. He was festering with prejudices and his visit to 
Duluth had opened a box of poisons in his mind. But perhaps he 
could transcend such things by an 
act of will. He wondered if he 
might have found his vocation tonight. What would they say if the 
son of Simeon Krug were to embrace the explosive cause of android equality? Manuel the wastrel, the idler, the playboy, transformed into Manuel the crusader? 
He toyed with the notion. Perhaps. 
Perhaps. It offered an agreeable 
opportunity to shake off the stigma of shallowness. A cause, a 
cause, a cause! A cause at last! 
Perhaps. Lilith followed him to the 
door and they kissed again. His 
hands stroked her sleekness and he 
closed his eyes. To his dismay, the 
room of the vats glowed against 
his lids and Nolan Bompensiero 
cavorted in his brain, piously explaining how newly decanted androids were taught the art of controlling their anal sphincters. 
Manuel pulled free of Lilith, in 
pain, “Soon,” he said. “I’ll call.” 
He left. 
1644, California. He stepped 
from the transmat cubicle into the 
slate-floored atrium of his home. 
The afternoon sun was edging out 
over the Pacific. Three of his androids came to him, bearing a 
change of clothes, a freshener tablet, a newspaper. 
“Where’s Mrs. Krug?” he 
asked. “Still asleep?” 
“By the shore,” a beta valet told 
him. 
Manuel changed quickly, took 
the freshener and went out to the 
beach. Clissa was wading in the 
surf. Three long-legged beach 
birds ran in giddy circles around 
her and she was calling to them, 
laughing, clapping her hands. He 
was almost upon her before she 
noticed him. After Lilith’s voluptuousness she seemed almost wickedly immature — narrow hips, flat 
boyish buttocks, the breasts of a 
twelve-year-old. The dark hairy 
triangle at the base of her belly 
seemed incongruous, improper. 
I take children for my wives and 
plastic women for my mistresses. 
“Clissa?” he called. 
She swung about. 
“Oh! You scared me!” 
“Having some fun in the ocean? 
Isn’t it too cold for you?” 
“It's never too cold for me. You 
know that, Manuel. Did you have 
a good time at the android plant?” 
“It was interesting," he said. 
“What about you? Feeling better 
now, I see.” 
“Belter? Was I sick?” 
He I ooked at her strangely. 
“This morning — when we were at 
the tower—you were, well, upset — ” 
“Oh, that! I’d almost forgotten. 
God, it was terrible, wasn’t it? Do 
you have the time, Manuel?” 
“Sixteen-forty-eight, give or 
take a minute.” 
“I’d better get dressed soon, 
then. We’ve got that early dinner 
party in Hong Kong.” 
He admired her ability to slough 
off traumas. 
He said. "Bight non it's still 
morning in Hong Kong. I here's 
no hurry." 
“Well, then, do you want to 
take a swim with me? The water’s 
not as cold as you think. Or — ” 
She paused. “You haven’t kissed 
me hello, yet.” 
“Hello,” he said. 
“Hello. I love you.” 
“I love you,” he said. Kissing 
her was like kissing alabaster. The 
taste of Lilith was still on his lips. 
Which is the passionate, vital 
woman, he wondered, and which 
the cold, artificial thing? Holding 
his wife, he felt no sensation at all. 
He released her. She tugged at his 
wrist, pulling him with her into 
the syrf. They swam a while and 
he came out chilled and shivering. 
At twilight they had cocktails together in the atrium. “You seem so
distant,” she told him. “It’s all this 
transmat jumping. It taRes more 
out of you than the doctors know. 
For the party that night she wore 
a unique treasure, a necklace of 
pear-shaped soot-hued glassy 
beads. A Krug Enterprises drone 
probe, cruising 7.5 light-years 
from Earth, had scooped those 
driblets of matter from the fringes 
of the ashen, dying Volker’s Star. 
Krug had given them to her as a 
wedding present. What other 
woman wore a necklace made up 
of chunks of a dark star? But miracles were taken for granted in 
Clissa’s social set. None of their 
dinner companions appeared to 
notice the necklace. Manuel and 
Clissa stayed at the party well past 
midnight, Hong Kong time, so 
that when they returned to Mendocino the California morning 
was already far advanced. Programing eight hours of sleep for 
themselves, they sealed the bedroom. Manuel had lost track of 
the sequence of time but he suspected that he had been awake for 
more than twenty-four consecutive 
hours. 
Sometimes transmat life gets to 
be too much to cope with . 
He brought down the curtain on 
the day. 
TO BE CONTINUED
SFGRAM_STOP_SILVERBERG
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 
superiority to ordinary mortals, 
that made it such a tragedy when 
the dice killed him according to 
Henry’s rules. 
There are a lot of interesting 
things about this book. For one, 
of course, it does convey a convincing approximation of how a 
God might be infinitely creative 
and yet not in direct control of 
his creation, omnipotent and yet 
prey to events, omniscient and 
nevertheless blind to the future. 
The expedient that Henry finally comes to, in his desperate effort to rescue himself, is what finally makes this book iifSistinguishable from most of the fantasy 
and science fiction being written 
( Continued from page 106) 
today. It is a terrifying one — and 
I doubt if you’ll ever hear me so 
characterising a piece of fiction 
again, since I never have before. 
It’s not merely frightening in concept, or descriptive of frightening 
events, which are things many 
good stories can be. No, this appalingly thorough and awesomely 
deft book constitutes an expert attack on things that you and I really suspect may be fragile; sex and 
death are the least of them, as you 
ought to find out. For you and me, 
old friend, this is not a book about 
such familiar deep-thinks as life, 
or God, or vengeance. It is a look 
at the compulsive heart of fantasy, 
an alien stare into science fiction. 
NO PLANET LIKE HOME 
f Continued from page 1 15 ) 
larged room. The floorshow had 
gone and the entertainers were 
mixing with the audience. 
Their earlier munificence now 
produced unordered results and 
two of the most beautiful of the 
dancers were soon sitting beside 
them. The goldwater, followed by 
a cocktail called Mutate Away, 
which seemed to consist largely of 
thorium salts, disappeared faster 
than ever. Conversation thrived. 
After a bit, when the females 
were talking to each other at a 
high rate, Rampo said to Damals, 
“I remember you were telling the 
senator about the quick reactions 
but — ah — other shortcomings in 
humanoid robots. I was just wondering if our little friends here 
could possibly be — ” 
“Oh, there’s a simple way of 
telling. Just look into their eyes.” 
“No, don’t tell me” said Rampo, “I’d rather not know.” 
The evening proceeded. 
H aving omitted to book a room 
anywhere, they found themselves in their own ship next morning. After a light breakfast they 
went around to the central block of 
one of the library skyscrapers. 
Here Rampo look Damals into the 
room he had booked for him. He 
keyed Psychology; unpublished 
documents; bibliography and 
punched the date of five years previously. The lights faded and the 
ip 
ip 
HjgJF 
from A to Lenuria 
This month, the Berkley Travel Service 
offers a variety of trips (all good), from 
that venerable fantastic voyage in itself, THE WORLD OF NULL-A, to a hairraising trek through Old Lemuria with 
the mighty-thawed Valkarthian in 
TH0N60R AND THE DRAGON CITY. Or, 
if you fancy it, a swing through the 
Goober Cluster with RETIEF AND THE 
WARLORDS. 
Return flights not guaranteed. 
THONGOR AND THE DRAGON CITY, 
Lin Carter (XI 799, 600 
RETIEF AND THE WARLORDS. 
Keith laumer (X1800, 600 
THE POWER OF X, Arthur Sellings 
1X1801,600 
THE WORLD OF NULL-A, A. E. Van Vogt 
(X1802, 600 
Next month: Heinlein, Hubbard, Harrison! 
If your newsstand or bookstore is out of 
stock, order any of these (list price plus a 
dime postage) from: 
BERKLEY PUBLISHING CORP. 
200 Madison Avenue, N.Y., N.Y. 10016 
Purchasers of our books havo complvlo fruit 
dom of choice In pricing theso book a for ru 
sale to others. 
NO PLANET LIKE HOME 
descriptive list began to appear on 
the wall screen. 
Rampo said, “Well, enjoy yourself — the amenity machine is here 
and you can order food and drink 
by the alimentation key under your 
right hand. I may be some time. I 
have a hunclvto play which may 
not pan out.” 
Rampo played his hunch for four 
and a half days. 
Damals spent more than three 
quarters of that time in his library 
room and the rest fishing on the 
riverbank and wandering around 
the old squares and the art shops. 
He slept one twenty-eighth of the 
time only. 
In the room he pored avidly over 
eighteen hundred papers of psychological importance that he had 
not yet seen, four papers on the effect of Zomonon goldwater and 
six hundred and twenty-three documents and books on various other 
subjects. 
When Rampo appeared he 
seemed to be wearing both his 
usual superficial airs — of shyness 
and of cockiness — in a rather exaggerated form. 
Damals switched off the paper 
he was viewing — Some Anomalous Cases of G7139 Mutational 
Periodic High Speed Disjection — 
and the jittering figure on the 
screen faded out as light came on. 
“What have you found?” 
“Watch this.” 
Rampo reset the keyboard. 
Once more the room became 
dark and the screen illuminated 
itself. On it appeared the note: 
Barbarian species: subcivilization: 
four-limbed: one-headed upright: 
Galaxy Norosanis 1211, planet 
1237951 / A / 276 / D / 111. This 
faded to a diminished red-yellow 
scene, which presented no difficulty, however, to the highly adaptable vision of the two watchers. 
When the room lit up again 
Damals was weak with iaughter. 
“Yes. Oh, we must see that 
again when we’ve settled the immediate question. Really-^how is 
it possible? A planet of clowns — 
do you. realize our money troubles 
are over? You can copyright that 
with any of the strips. Such solemn 
little pinheads too — rather like 
those wingless birds on Ribil, only 
more so, slow and solemn and 
practically expressionless-!-#^ 
“Well, what do you think?” 
“About Tontor? They’re exactly 
like him — you think a hypnotic 
oblivion treatment and then plant 
him there?” 
“Well, you’re speaking like a 
psychologist. His reactions are 
almost exactly that speed and his 
intelligence is if anything above 
the normal indicated there — but 
physically a few changes will be 
necessary. Did you notice the 
rather peculiar flaps on some of 
the sense organs? There are a few 
other changes too, to be made — 
but nothing, I think, that our surgeons can’t handle.” 
“That’ll be the biologists’ con
tribution to the entirely nonbiological solution of Enedee's problem.” 
“If it works,” said Rampo. “I 
see no reason to suppose it won’t 
but you never know.” 
“But how did you find it? Did 
you know something like this existed?” 
I “Not at all. It was only that I 
:have some conception of the approximate number of possible variations in the general form of intelligenfand semi-intelligent creatures. The precise total must be 
enormous — but it can’t be infinite and we didn’t need exact resemblance. Tontor can be tailored 
to suit to some extent. And the 
number of planets in the universe 
supporting some sort of subcivilization is about ten thousand times 
the number of galaxies, which gives 
a pretty good chance, particularly 
as a clear majority of them are 
four-limbed and one-headed. What 
I did was to set a few thousand 
electronic selectors on to the index 
of species characteristics. 1 had 
them keyed to almost eight hundred physical and psychological 
points. They handle several million 
cards a second, and in three days 
they’d given me thirty good agreements. I chose the final one by 
personal inspection. Not bad, eh?” 
“In fact you mean that this isn’t 
a solution only for Tontor, but for 
the whole problem?” 
“Yes, if it works. In some cases 
we may not find the right sort of 
environment at all but in general 
we should almost always succeed. 
Heaven knows it’s not ideal — but 
I believe the mutations can be happy and the parents will prefer that 
to anything else that can be done” 
“I can foresee a large allotment 
for a nice new department of mutational psycho-anthropology 
which won’t please Ziel, for one,” 
said Damals. 
“No, indeed." 
“But surely even this one you've 
found for Tontor is rather p recur 
ious. How close is the physical resemblance? I should have thought 
no amount of surgery could fix the 
internal organs exactly to duplicate those of the — those things — 
unless you have been even more 
successful than I imagine.” 
“No,” said Rampo. “It’s not 
quite as good as that. I’m afraid.” 
SUBSCRIBE NOW TO THE NEW The Magazine of Alternatives 
NO PLANET LIKE HOME 
“Then what will happen if he has 
an accident or something? That 
scene with the creatures manipulating others with bits of metal — 
I took it that it was some sort of 
primitive doctoring. What will the 
doctors say?” . 
“Yes, they*are doctors in their 
way,” commented Rampo. He 
smiled suddenly: “And I know 
what they’ll say — ” 
A ND twenty years later, when 
the unconscious form of Professor Ralph Macandrew, dragged 
from his smashed car to the Salem Hospital, lay on the operating table, an amazed surgeon answered his colleague’s frantic 
query with exactly the words that 
Rampo had predicted: “I can’t 
understand it — he must be a mutation — ” * 
DISCOVER A LATENT MOSES 
ver and the red spires to black. 
Shivering again, he looked 
around at the landmass, even more 
menacing in its great tumbling 
blackness now that he could no 
longer see it through the Old 
Man’s eyes. Above, the gaunt ebony figures of the alien trees 
clutched at him with rustling obscenity, lurching and grasping in 
the keen wind, occasionally shedding a leprous leaf. 
lie spun the snowboat about to 
face the snowfields and climbed in, 
hauling the sail tight as the craft 
heeled to the wind. He crowded on 
speed to leave the sinister landscape behind. He would be glad to 
be in familiar surroundings again. 
There was nothing for him here. 
A ND so, one week later, the 
small community in the bell 
tower resumed its corporate existence. There was little change. 
Jacko still hunted the snowfields, 
( Continued from page 53) 
Switch and Cockade looted the 
ice tunnels. Shrug, however, slowly 
recovering from being deprived of 
alcohol, found good reason to fear 
for the future and commenced 
construction of a gallery encircling the inside of the spire at a 
level with the snow outside. He 
punched holes in the slates of the 
spire at intervals of the circumference, so that the four members of 
the group, in an emergency, could 
command a 360-degree field of 
fire. Once he had completed this 
project he planned to take Jacko 
on a scouting mission to the next 
village to see if, perhaps, they could 
bring back some women. 
Only the dreamers were gone. 
Paladin lay roughly buried under 
the snow beside the main exit and 
the Old Man rested at peace in the 
foothills, miles away. 
In the times that were to come, 
there would be no place for 
dreamers. if 
[ SPECIAL TO GALAXY & IF READERS... 
THE BEST IN 
SCIENCE FICTION BOOKS... 
worth adding to your library. stones you will treasure . 
available to you at a special 10% discount 
Conveniently obtained from GALAXY Magazine. No searching, no book clubs, 
no commitments. Here are the books of enduring value that you will want to 
own . for hours of science-fiction pleasure, to be read, reread, and discussed 
with your friends. These are the books that have proven themselves . filled with 
all of the features you look for in S-F. .written by the acknowledged masters 
of the art. Just circle your choices below, mail to us, and the books will be in your 
hands shortly, ready to transport you to new, thrilling, imaginative worlds. 
A* ARD 
XML 
FICT ON 
FREE— with every order for 2 or more books . 
AWARD SCIENCE FICTION READER. IKK 
pages, containing stories by such masters of science 
fiction as Arthur C. Clarke, Theodore Sturgeon, 
A. E. van Vogt, Clifford Simak, Poul Anderson, 
Leigh Brackett, John W. Cunipbell, Jr. All of the 
stories belong to the excitingly modern era that 
swept SF to its greatest pinnacle of popidarity, 
8-1 
NONE OUT MAN by Gordon II. Dlekoon. Aliens 
from Moldaug, inhuman stars from the last human 
settlement, are gathering together for war. Old 
world inhabitants are willing to sacrifice the new 
world colonies in order to avert this war. But not 
rugged individualist Cully When, the type of man 
who has pioneered frontiers in all times and all 
places. Set in some future time, this action-filled 
adventure depicts space-age guerrilla warfare and 
age-old human stupidity with excitement and ends 
with an explosive climax. 
253 pp. List Price . $4.95 Discount Price . $4.46 
8-2 
A CASE OF CONSCIENCE by James Bllah. Two 
separate and complete worlds — idyllic Lithia and 
a culture on Earth that has literally gone under 
ground, provides the basis for the story of four 
extraordinary men. There is the priest, dedicated 
ta the glory of God; the scientist working for the 
glory of man; the realist who works only for himself; and the man who is content to ask nothing of 
any world, any man, or any deity. The author presents a compelling moral problem. This book is 
something of a tour de force. 
188 pp. List Price... $4. 50 Discount Price ... $4.05 
8-3 
BUQ JACK BARRON by Norman Sptnrad. Explore 
the edge of tomorrow . who will be chosen for 
immortality? Who will make this ultimate decision 
— the government, free enterprise, or private 
monopoly? A new, highly controversial novel, 
infused with blood and guts, examining the disease 
of power as well as the responsibility. Both praised 
and damned before it was even published, this 
novel deserves your personal attention. 
327 pp. List Price... $5. 95 Discount Price... $5.36 
S-4A 
THE POLLINATORS OF EDEN by John Boyd. From 
the Planet of the Flowers, Dr. Freda Caron’s 
fiance Paul has sent her an exquisite iridescent 
yellow tulip that not only has a plastic memory— 
but can talk. Freda realizes that she must unlock 
the secrets of the flower planet and its strange 
hold on Paul. In this exciting new book, Freda 
must travel from her ultra-rational world-oftomorrow to explore the strange, unearthly flower 
planet. The climax of this shocking and oddly 
beautiful novel is bizarre and delightful. 
212 pp. List Price. .. $5.50 Discount Price ... $4.95 
6-5 
THE MIDWICH CUCKOOS by John Wyndham. For 
an entire day, a small rural village in England 
loses contact with the outside world. Soon after, 
all the women, married or not become pregnant, 
eventually giving birth to remarkable golden-eyed 
children who exhibit a strange kind of sinisterism. 
They are dangerous and Midwich must make the 
ultimate decision — if the children survive, then 
mankind must join the dinosaur among Nature’s 
discards. A gripping account of man’s fight for 
survival. * 
189 pp. List Price... $4*50 Discount Price... $4.05 
8-6 
THE SPACE MERCHANTS by Frederlk Pohl and 
C. M. Kornbluth. Two major advertising agencies 
are fighting for the Venus account — nothing less 
than total control of the Venus economy and markets will do. It is completely unimportant that 
Venus is a harsh, barren, uninhabited planet. 
According to the mentality of Mitchell Courtenay 
of Fowler Schocken Associates, the trick is to persuade colonists to go to Venus, and once there, 
they will have to survive as best they can. One of 
the most savage and devastating attacks on modern consumer society and the advertising agents 
who are its high priests. The Space Merchants is 
uncomfortably prophetic. 
158 pp. List Price... $4. 50 Discount Price... $4 .05 
S-7 
BRAIN WAVE by Poul Anderson. Imagine, some 
mysterious space force that inhibits the world’s 
intelligence. But suddenly, it’s gone and overnight 
the intellect of every living creature is trebled. 
What are the consequences of such instant genius? 
These are the problems confronting Archie Brock, 
former near moron; Peter Corinth, physicist; and 
his no-longer dumb wife. This provocative and 
absorbing book explores the ultimate problem of 
such a situation — in a world free of the difficulties 
that has plagued mankind throughout history, 
what is man to do with his time? 
164 pp. List Price... $4. 50 Discount Price. ..$4.05 
S-BA 
OPUS 100 by Isaac Alimov. An event — a special 
Asimov book .. .America’s foremost science writer, 
takes you on a personalized guided tour of his 
first 99 books. This, his 100th book, is an anthology of works selected by the author himself. It is 
a journey which acquaints the reader with a 
writer considered to be a genius, who delights in 
every aspect of life and has the capacity to make 
any subject he writes about both understandable 
and entertaining. Reviewers customarily greet 
Asimov publications with such adjectives as 
“brilliant,” “engrossing,” “powerful,” and “sparkling.” Opus 100 is no exception. 
318 pp. List Price. ..$5.95 Discount Price... $5. 36 
S-9 
THE PAST THROUGH TOMORROW, Robert A. 
Heinleln’a Future HI glory Stories. Twenty-five years 
ago Robert A. Heinlein began to write stories 
about an imaginary future that is fast becoming a 
reality. Discover, through the pen of the master of 
space-age fiction, about man’s first step on the 
moon; weather control; manufacture of synthetic 
food; interstellar exploration. Now, for the first 
time, in chronological order, are Heinlein’s 21 
compelling stories — all depicting a glimpse of a 
possible tomorrow. 
667 pp. List Price... $6. 95 Discount Price. ..$6.26 
S-10 
THORNS By Robert Sllverberg. Duncan Chalk, 
master pain peddler, skillful and sophisticated, 
lives in a time when reading tragic headlines no 
longer provides the necessary sensations. Into 
Chalk’s sinister hands falls Lona Kelvin, orphaned, 
mother of 100 children, yet without a soul; and 
Minner Burris, starman, whose butchered body 
was put together by aliens, a walking horror. What 
fun to mate these two and watch them wallow in. 
their mutual torment. But somewhere, something 
went wrong. Discover what happens when the puppets begin to pull their own strings in this imaginative, chilling book. 
222 pp. List Price. ..$4.95 Discount Price. ..$4.46 
THE GALAXY BOOK SERVICE 
P.O. Box 3977, Grand Central Post Office, New York, N. Y. 10017 
Please send me the books Please print full name & address 
I have circled. 
S-l S-2 S-3 S-4A S-5 
S-6 S-7 S-8A S-9 S-10 
Name 
Address 
Zip Code 
Serjy, No C.O.D.’s, (Please add 25 C (or postage and handling. N.Y.C. residents please add 6% 
sales tax. N.Y. State residents please add 5% sales tax.) 
10-day satisfaction ... or your money back. FREE copy of AWARD SCIENCE FICTION 
READER with all orders for 2 or more books. G-470 i 
I got sick and tired of 
coughing and wheezing 
and hacking. So I quit. 
I quit smoking cigarettes. 
Which wasn’t easy. I’d been 
a pack-a-day man for 
about 8 years. 
Still, I quit. And, after a 
while, I also quit coughing and 
wheezing and hacking. 
Now, the American Cancer Society 
offers every quitter an I.Q. button. 
To tell everyone you’ve got what 
it takes to say “I quit.” 
And it takes plenty. I know from 
personal experience. 
I know something else. There is one 
thing tougher than quitting cigarettes. 
And that’s not quitting. 
imerican 
["science fiction BOOK CLUB 1 
I Oopt 04-GHX. Garden City N V 11630 . 
Please accept my application for membership In the Sclent J* 
( Fiction Book Club and ru9h the 3 books whose numbers I have 'I 
circled below. Bill me only SI. 00. plus shipping and handling, I 
I for all 3. Then every month, send me the Club'9 free bulleCih.’ "Things to Come”, which describes coming selections. Ffer.'| 
each book I accept, I will pay only $1.49, plus shipping aha I 
( handling, unless I take an extra- r ^—^— — S i 
value selection at a higher price. Clrele the number* j 
I need take only four books with- of the 3 book* you * 
In the coming year and may want: I 
I resign at any time thereafter. 171 goo ggl 1 
I NO-RISK GUARANTEE: If not 605 615 616 I 
| delighted with my Introductory 622 623 624 J 
I package. I may return it In 10 days, 525 027 629 1 
pay nothing, owe nothing, and my ga* I 
membership will be canceled. J I 
■ City 
I If under 18, 
611. Dangerous Visions. Anthology 0 / 
33 original stories 
never before in 
print by Sturgeon, 
Anderson, others. 
Pub. ed. $6.95 
625. Wo rid ' 1 Bed 
Science Fiction 
1*69. By Vonncgut, 
Jr.. Sheckley, Delaney, Knight, Aldiss, and others. 
6*5. Nova, by Samuel R. Delaney. 
Baltic between 
alien worlds - and 
a desperate race to 
the sun. Pub. ed. 
$4,ta 
L parent must sign here. - I 
(Offer good In U.S.A. only) 22-S76 I 
ierplanetar> C 
Ejrth 
Pub. ed U **