galaxy September 1968 LEIBER » ROCKLYNNE « GUNN 
galaxy 
fc^SCIENCE FICTION^ 
September 
1968 
60 c 
FIND THE FACE 
by 
Ross Rocklynne 
NIGHTWINGS 
by 
Robert Silverberg 
i,..- 
THE LISTENERS 
by 
James E. Gunn 
And concluding . 
A SPECTER IS 
i HAUNTING TEXAS 
by 
I Fritz Leiber 
YOUR 
INFORMATION 
For sixteen years 
GALAXY’S most popular feature. Now in 
hardbound book form. 
The first of a seriesupdated and divided 
by subjects into separate books. 
Facts and figrures as 
only WILLY LEY 
can write them. Send 
today. Satisfaction 
guaranteed. 
DOUBLEDAY & COMPANY, INC. (or to your bookstore) 
Dept. 7-GA-3, GARDEN City, N.Y. 11.S31 
Please send me copies of WILLY LEY’S FOR YOUR IN
FORMATION: ON EARTH AND IN THE SKY. I understand that ] 
may return the book(s) within two weeks without cost or obligation if not 
completely satisfied. Otherwise, I’ll be billed just $4.95 per copy, plus 
shipping costs as payment in full. 
NAME 
ADDRESS 
CITY STATE ZIP 
SAVE! Send payment now and we pay postage. Same 2-week 
privilege guaranteed, of course. 
ALL STORIES NEW 
Galaxy Is published In French, German, Italian, Japanese and Spanish. 
The U. S. Edition Is published In 
Braille and Living Tape. 
September, 1968 • Vol. 27, No. 2 
CONTENTS 
NOVEIETTCS 
NIGHTWINGS 7 
by Robert Sllverberg 
THE USTENERS 74 
by James E. Gunn 
FREDEBIK POHL 
Editor 
WILLY LEY 
Science Editor 
JUDY-LYNN BENJAMIN 
Associate Editor 
LESTER DEL DEY 
Managing Eciifor 
ROBERT M. OUINN 
Pabtiaher 
SHORT STORIES 
WHEN I WAS VERY JUNG 56 
by Brian W. Aldiss 
FIND THE FACE 61 
by Ross Rocklynne 
SCRIM 
A SPEaER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 118 
by Fritz Leiber 
NON-FACT ARTICLE 
THE WONDERS WE OWE DeGAULLE . Ill 
by Lise Braun 
SCIENCE DCPARTMCNT 
FOR YOUR INFORAAATION 101 
by Willy Ley 
FEATURES 
EDITORIAL 4 
by Frederlk Pohl 
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 117 
by AIgts Budrys 
GALAXY'S STARS 194 
LAWRENCE LEVINE ASSOC. 
Advertiaini 
MAVIS FISHER 
Circalatioa Director 
GALAXY MAGAZINE Is published 
monthly by Galaxy Publishing 
Corporation. Main offices: 421 
Hudson Street, New York, N.Y. 
10014. 60c per copy Subscription: (12 copied $6.00 in the 
United States, Canada, Mexico, 
South and Central America and 
U. S. Possessions. Elsewhere 
17.00. Second-class postage 
paid at New York, N.Y. and at 
additional mailing offices. Copyright New York 1968 by Galaxy 
Publishing Corporation, Robert 
M. Guinn, President. All rights 
Including translations reserved. 
All material submitted must be 
accompanied by self-addressed 
stamped envelopes. The publisher assumes no responsibility 
for unsolicited material. All 
stories printed In this magazine 
are fiction and any similarity 
between characters and actual 
persons Is coincidental. 
Printed In the U.SA 
By The Guinn Co., Inc. N. T. 
TiUe Reg. U. S. Pat Off. 
Cover by GAOGHAN from FIND THE FACE 
FILM FESTIVAL (II) 
■^ot long ago we raised tKe 
question of why the United 
States couldn’t support, or hadn’t 
decided to try to support, an annual Science Fiction Film Festival, more or less along the lines 
of the Trieste affair which runs 
through the first weeks of July 
every year. 
Turns out a lot of other people 
had been thinking along similar 
lines, and this is in the nature of 
a progress report. 
New York: This winter the 
Museum of Modem Art is planning a special science-fiction 
film program. Details are not 
yet set; but the Museum’s resources in procuring film prints 
are extensive, and with a little 
luck it will be — ^well, maybe not a 
festival, in the sense that it will 
be celebrating the best of the 
newest but certainly a useful retrospective, bringing back the best 
of the old. 
Houston, Texas'. From September 29th to October 13th the 
Houston store, Sakowitz, in conjunction with various local civic. 
cultural and business organizations, will be running a Festival 
of the Future. It isn’t quite clear, 
at this writing, just what form it 
will take; but there appears to 
be a possibility that films will 
be involved, and space-age exhibits, demonstrations and so on, 
some of them in connection with 
Houston’s Manned Space Center, 
are definite. 
Milwaukee, Wisconsin: The 
city campus of the University of 
Wisconsin this year ran a Secondary Universe Conference, 
with lectures by William Tenn, 
Judith Merril, Samuel R. Delany and others; and there seems 
to be hope that it will over the 
course of the next two or three 
years turn into much’ the sort 
of festival we had in mind. 
Well fine! We still think it’s 
a good idea. Presenting science 
fiction in cinematic form offers 
some hard problems to solve, and 
by no means all of the producers have managed to solve them; 
but there’s a solid body of interesting items available, from Me
f 
D*®*^ ^HV^" 
The Wonder 
Worker. 
One Drop 
Neutralizes 
Any Odor 
in a 1,000 
Cu. Ft. Area 
For About 
24 Hours 
The quickest— most thorough— most economical— lasting 
room deodorizer available. 
Send *1.00 
ARMONK RESEARCH CO. 
DRAWER 160 
ARMONK, N.Y. 10504 
Enclosed find $ for bottles of BREEZ 
at the special mail order price. I understand I can return the purchase for 
full refund if I am unsatisfied. 
Name 
Address 
City State Zone 
tropolis and The Ctazy Ray to 
Planet of the Apes and 2001. We 
think an American film festival, 
with' suitable outriders in the 
form of panels, exhibits, lectures 
and workshops, would be interesting in its own right. 
And we even think it might 
help solve some of those problems. 
Opeaking of 2001, we’ve had a 
rather heavy influx of letters 
on Lester dey Key’s review of it, 
mostly disagreeing with his 
views, and mostly rather outspoken about it. 
What del Key liked about the 
film was its tremendously successful technical effects, plus 
some very effective incidents 
and scenes. What he disliked was 
what struck him as a lack of cohesion, plus a ending that was 
allusive and symbolic where he 
thought it should have been explicit and lucid. 
It strikes us that this is the difference between clear-quill “science fiction” and that other related thing which is sometimes 
called “The New Wave” or “The 
New Thing” or “Speculative 
Fiction.” To our way of thinking, science fiction is as inventive a form of literature as any, 
but unlike most the inventiveness 
takes place primarily in the subject matter instead of in the 
treatment. And if the theme is 
mind-stretching enough, symbols 
and allusions are only tolerable 
when the author cannot manage 
to say what He wants to say in 
any other form; in that view, the 
choice of evocative treatment 
over explicit and literal statement is not a triumph but a surrender. 
We wish 2001 Had not surrendered. It Had something to 
say. It really should have said it. 
XJext month we Hope to have 
winners in our “Vietnam 
Contest,” plus a progress rei>ort 
on what happens next. Several 
hundred entries are already in, 
rather more than we expected, 
everything considered. Judging 
them is going to be a bit of a job 
. but we’ll Hope to get it done 
by the deadline. 
Then, of course, comes the interesting part. If you missed the 
June and July issues, try not to 
miss the next few. What we’re 
up to is to try to exploit the lively intelligence of science-fiction 
readers and writers to generate 
possible solutions not only to the 
Vietnam conflict but to other 
similar dilemmas . and convert them, by means of some interesting new problem-solving 
techniques, into actual programs 
that can in fact be carried out. 
A large order? You bet But 
it ought to be fim trying. 
—THE EDITOR 
p. 
B. 
I
SFGRAM_START_SILVERBERG
"Roum is a city built on seven
hills. They say it was a capital of man in one of the earlier 
cycles. I do not know of that, for 
my guild is Watching, not Remembering: but as I had my first 
glimpse of Roxim, coming upon it 
from the south at twilight, I could 
see that in former days it must 
have been of great significance. 
Even now it was a mighty city of 
many thousands of souls. 
Its bony towers stood out 
sharply against the dusk. Lights 
glimmered appealingly. On my 
left hand the sky was ablaze with 
splendor as the sun relinquished 
possession. Streaming bands of 
azure and violet and crimson 
folded and writhed about one another in the nightly dance that 
brings the darkness. To my right 
blackness had already come. I attempted to find the seven hills, 
and failed, and still I knew that 
this was that Roum of majesty 
toward which all roads are bent, 
and I felt awe and deep respect 
for the works of our bygone fathers. 
We rested by the long straight 
road, looking up at Roum. I said, 
“It is a goodly city. We will find 
employment there.” 
Beside me, Avluela fluttered 
her lacy wings. “And food?” she 
asked in her high, fluty voice. 
“And shelter? And wine?” 
“Those too,” I said. “All of 
those.” 
“How long have we been walking, Watcher?” she asked. 
“Two days. Three nights.” 
“If I had been flying it would 
have been more swift.” 
“For you,” I said. “You would 
have left us far behind and never 
seen us again. Is that your desire?” 
She came close to me and rubbed the rough fabric of my sleeve, 
and then she pressed herself at me 
the way a flirting cat might do. 
Her wings unfolded into two 
broad sheets of gossamer through 
which I could still see the sunset 
and the evening lights, blurred, 
distorted, magical. I sensed the 
fragrance of her midnight hair. I 
put my arms to Her and embraced her slender, bo3risH body. 
She said, “You know it is my 
desire to remain with you always. 
Watcher. Always!” 
“Yes, Avluela.” 
“Will we be happy in Roum?” 
“We will be happy,” I said, 
and released her. 
“Shall we go into Roum now?” 
“I think we should wait for 
Gormon,” I said, shaking my 
head. “He’ll be back soon from 
his explorations.” I did not want 
to tell her of my weariness. She 
was only a child, seventeen summers old; what did she know of 
weariness or of age? And I am 
old. Not as old as Roum, but old 
enough. 
“While we wait,” she said, 
“may I fly?” 
“Fly, yes.” 
T squatted beside our cart and 
warmed my hands at the 
throbbing generator while Avluela 
prepared to fly. First she removed her garments, for her wings 
have little strength and she cannot lift such extra baggage. Lith'ely, deftly, she peeled the glassy 
bubbles from her tiny feet, she 
wriggled free of her crimson jacket and of her soft, furry leggings. 
The vanishing light in the west 
sparkled over Her slim form. Like 
all Fliers, she carried no surplus 
body tissue: Her breasts were 
mere bumps, her buttocks flat, 
her thighs so spindly that there 
was a span of inches between 
them when she stood. Could she 
Have weigtied more tKan a quintal? I doubt it. Looking at Her, I 
felt as alwa3Ts gross and eartHbound, a thing of loath'esome 
flesh, and yet I am not a Heavy 
man. 
By the roadside she genuflected, knuckles to the ground, Head 
bowed to knees, as she said whatever ritual it is that the Fliers 
say. Her back was to me. Her 
delicate wings fluttered, filled 
with life, rose about her like a 
cloak whipped up by the breeze. I 
could not comprehend how such 
wings could possibly lift even so 
slight a form as Avluela’s. They 
were not hawk-wings but butterfly-wings, veined and transparent, marked here and there with' 
blotches of pigment, ebony and 
turquoise and scarlet. A sturdy 
ligament joined them to the two 
flat pads of muscle beneath her 
sharp shoulderblades; but vriiat 
she did not have was the massive 
breastbone of a fl5nng creature, 
the bands of corded muscle needed for flight. Oh, I know that the 
Fliers use more than muscle to 
get aloft, that there are mystical 
disciplines in their mystery. Even 
so, I who am of the Watchers 
remain skeptical of the more fantastic guil^. 
Avluela finished her words. She 
rose; she caught the breeze with 
her wings; she ascended several 
feet. There she remained, suspended between earth and sky, 
NIGHTWINGS 
while her wings beat frantically. 
It was not yet night, and Avluela’s wings were merely nightwings. By day she could not fly, 
for the terrible pressure of the 
solar wind would hurl her to the 
ground. Now, midway between 
dusk and dark, it was still not the 
best time for her to go up. I saw 
her thrust toward the east by the 
remnant of light in the sky. Her 
arms as well as Her wings thrashed; her small pointed face was 
grim with concentration; on her 
thin lips were the words of her 
guild. She doubled her body and 
shot it out, head going one way, 
rump the other, and abruptly she 
hovered horizontally, looking 
groundward, her wings thrashing 
against the air. Up, Avluela! Up! 
Up it was, as by will alone she 
conquered the vestige of light that 
still glowed. 
XT^ith pleasure I surveyed Her 
’ ’ naked form against the 
darkness. I could see Her clearly, 
for a Watcher’s eyes are keen. She 
was five times Her own Height in 
the air, now, and Her wings 
spread to their full expanse, so 
that the towers of Roum were in 
partial eclipse for me. She waved. 
I threw Her a kiss and offered 
words of love. Watchers do not 
marry, nor do they engender children, but Avluela was as a daughter to me, and I took pride in her 
flight. We had traveled together 
a year, now, since we Had come 
together in Agupt, and it was as 
thougH I had known Ber all my 
long life. From Her I drew a renewal of strength. I do not know 
wKat it was sHe drew from me. 
Security? Knowledge? A continuity with tKe days Before Ber 
birtH? I Hoped only tBat sBe loved 
me as I loved Ber. 
Now sBe was far aloft. SBe 
wheeled, soared, dived, pirouetted, danced. Her long black Bair 
streamed from Her scalp. Her 
body seemed only an incidental 
appendage to tBose two great 
wings, wHicB glistened and tBroBbed and gleamed in tBe nigHt. Up 
she rose, glorying in Ber freedom 
from gravity, making me feel all 
the more leadenfooted, and like 
some slender rocket sBe sBot abruptly away in tBe direction of 
Roum. I saw tBe soles of Ber feet, 
the tips of Ber wings; tBen I saw 
her no more. 
I sigBed. I thrust my Bands into 
the pits of my arms to keep tfiem 
warm. How is it tfiat I felt a winter chill and the girl Avluela 
could soar joyously Bare tBrougB 
the sky? 
It was now the twelftB of tBe 
twenty Bours, and time once again 
for me to do tBe WafcBing. I 
went to the cart, opened my 
cases, prepared tBe instruments. 
Some of the dial-covers were yellowed and faded; the indicator 
needles had lost tBeir luminous 
10 
coating; sea-stains defaced tfie instrument housings, a relic ©f the 
time that pirates Bad assailed me 
in Earth Ocean. TBe worn and 
cracked levers and nodes responded easily to my touch as I entered the preliminaries. First one 
pra3TS for a pure and perceptive 
mind; tBen one creates the affinity with one’s instruments; then 
one does the actual Watching, 
searching the starry heavens for 
tBe enemies of man. SucB is my 
skill and my craft I grasped 
Bandies and knobs, thrust things 
from my mind, prepared myself 
to become an extension ©f my 
cabinet of devices. 
I was only just past my tHresBold and into tBe first phase of 
Watchfulness when a deep and 
resonant voice said behind me, 
“Well, Watcher, Bow goes it?” 
II 
1 sagged against the cart. There 
Is a physical pain in being 
wrenched so unexpectedly from 
one’s work. For a moment I felt 
claws clutching at my heart. My 
face grew hot; my eyes would not 
focus; the saliva drained from my 
throat. As soon as I could, I took 
the proper protective measures to 
ease tBe metabolic drain and severed myself from my instruments. Hiding my trembling as 
txnicB as possible, I turned 
around. 
Gormon, the other member of 
our little band, Had appeared and 
stood jauntily beside me, grinning, amused at my distress. I 
could not feel angry witfi Him. 
One does not sHow anger at a 
guildless person no matter wHat 
tHe provocation. 
Tightly, witH effort, I said, 
“Did you spend your time re• wardingly?” 
“Very. Where’s Avluela?” 
I pointed heavenward. Gormon 
nodded. 
“What have you found?” 'I 
asked. 
“That this city is definitely 
Roum.” 
“There never was doubt of 
that.” 
“For me there was. But now I 
Have proof.” 
“Yes?” 
“In tHe overpocket. Look!” 
From His txmic he drew his 
overpocket, set it on the pavement beside me, and expanded it 
so that He could insert his Hand 
in its mouth. Grunting a little. He 
began to pull something Heavy 
from tHe pouch', something Heavy, 
of white stone, a long marble 
column, I now saw, fluted, pocked with age. 
“From a temple of Imperial 
Roum!” Gormon exulted. 
“You shouldn’t have taken 
that.” 
“Wait!” He cried, and reached 
into the overpocket once more. 
...J' NIGHTWINGS 
He took from it a Handful of circular metal plaques and scattered them jingling at my feet. 
“Coins! Money! Look at them. 
Watcher! The faces of the Caesars!” 
“Of whom?” 
“The ancient rulers. Don’t you 
know your history of past cycles?” 
I peered at him curiously. “You 
claim to have no guild, Gormon. 
Could it be you are a Rememberer and are concealing it from 
me?” 
“Look at my face. Watcher. 
Could I belong to any guild? 
Would a Changeling be taken?” 
“True enough,” I said, eyeing 
the golden Hue of him, the thick 
waxen skin, the red-pupiled eyes, 
the jagged mouth'. Gormon Had 
been weaned on teratogenetic 
drugs. He was a monster — Handsome in his way, but a monster 
nevertheless, a Changeling, outside the laws and customs of man 
as they are practiced in the Third 
Cycle of civilization. And there 
is no guild of Changelings. 
“There’s more,” Gormon said. 
The overpocket was infinitely capacious; the contents of a world, 
if need be, could be stuffed in its 
shriveled gray maw, and still it 
would be no larger than a man’s 
hand. Gormon took from it bits 
of machinery, reading spools, an 
angular thing of brown metal that 
might Have been an ancient tool, 
three squares of shining glass, five 
slips of paper — paper! — and a 
host of other relics of antiquity. 
“See?” he said. “A fruitful stroll, 
Watcher! And not just random 
booty. Everything recorded, everything labeled, stratum, estimated age, position when in situ. 
Here we Have ten thousand years 
of Roum.” 
“Should you have taken these 
things?” I asked doubtfully. 
“Why not? Who is to miss 
them? Who of this cycle cares for 
the past?” 
“The Rememberers.” 
“They don’t need solid objects 
to help them do their work.” 
“Why do you want these things, 
though?” 
'T'he past interests me, WatcH-*• er. In my guildless way I 
have my scholarly pursuits. Is 
that wrong? May not even a monstrosity seek knowledge?” 
“Certainly, certainly. Seek what 
you wish. Fulfill yourself in your 
own way. This is Roum. At dawn 
we enter. I hope to find employment here.” 
“You may have difficulties.” 
“How so?” 
“There are many Watchers already in Roum, no doubt. There 
will be little need for your services.” 
“I’ll seek the favor of the Prince 
of Roum.” I said. 
“The Prince of Roum is a 
hard and cold and cruel man.” 
“You know of him?” 
Gormon shrugged. “Somewhat.” He began to stuff his artifacts back in the overpocket. 
“Take your chances with' him. 
Watcher. What other choice do 
you have?” 
“None,” I said, and Gormon 
laughed, and I did not. 
He busied himself with' his ransacked loot of the past. I found 
myself deeply depressed by His 
words. He seemed so sure of himself in an uncertain world, this 
guildless one, this mutated monster, this man of inhuman look. 
How could he be so cool, so casual? He lived without concern for 
calamity and mocked those who 
admitted to fear. Gormon had 
been traveling with' us for nine 
days, now, since we had met him 
in the ancient city beneath’ the 
volcano, to the south by the edge 
of the sea. I had not suggested 
that he join us. He Had invited 
himself along, and at Avluela’s 
bidding I accepted. The roads are 
dark and cold at this time of 
year, and dangerous beasts of 
many species abound, and an old 
man journeying with a girl might 
well consider taking with him a 
brawny one like Gormon. Yet 
there were times I wished he Had 
not come ^th' us, and this was 
one. 
Slowly I walked back to my 
equipment. 
Gormoti said, as tKougli first 
realizing it, “Did I interrupt you 
at your Watcfiing?” 
I said mildly, “You did.” 
“Sorry. Go and start again. I’ll 
leave you in peace.” And lie gave 
me His dazzling lopsided smile, so 
full of cKarm tKat it took tHe 
curse off the easy arrogance of His 
words. 
T touched the knobs, made contact witH tHe nodes, monitored tHe dials. But I did not enter 
WatcHfulness, for I remained 
aware of Gormon’s presence and 
fearful tHat He would break into 
my concentration once again at a 
painful moment, despite His 
promise. At length I looked away 
from the apparatus. Gormon 
stood at the far side of tHe road, 
craning his neck for some sight of 
Avluela. The moment I turned to 
Him He became aware of me. 
■“Something wrong, Watcher?” 
“No. The moment’s not propitious for my work. I’ll wait.” 
“Tell me,” He said. “WKen 
Earth’s enemies really do come 
from the stars, will your machines 
let you know it?” 
“I trust they will.” 
“And then?” 
“TKen I notify tHe Defenders.” 
“After wHicH your life’s work 
is over?” 
“Perhaps,” I said. 
“Why a whole guild of you, 
though? Why not one master cenNIGHTWINGS 
ter where the Watch' is kept? 
Why a bunch of itinerant WatcKers drifting endlessly from place 
to place?” 
“THe more vectors of detection,” I said, “the greater the 
chance of early awareness of tHe 
invasion.” 
“Tfien an individual WatcHer 
might well turn His machines on 
and not see anything, with an invader already Here.” 
“It could Happen. Therefore we 
practice redundancy.” 
“You carry it to an extreme, I 
sometimes think.” Gormon laughed. “Do you actually believe an 
invasion is coming?” 
“I do,” I said stiffy. “Else my 
life was a waste.” 
“And why should the star people want Earth? WHat do we 
have here besides the remnants of 
old empires? What would they 
do with miserable Roum? With 
Perris? WitH Jorslem? Rotting 
cities! Idiot princes! Come, 
Watcher, admit it: the invasion’s 
a mytH, and you go through 
meaningless motions three times 
a day. Eh?” 
“It is my craft and my science 
to Watch. It is yours to jeer. 
Each of us to our specialty, Gormon.” 
“Forgive me,” He said with 
mock humility. “Go, then, and 
Watch.” 
“I shall.” 
Angrily I turned back to my 
cabinet of instruments, determined now to ignore any interruption, no matter how brutal. The 
stars were out; I gazed at the 
glowing constellations, and automatically my mind registered tlie 
many worlds. Let us WatcH, I 
thought. Let us keep our vigil despite the mockers. 
I entered the state of full 
Watchfulness. 
I clung to the grips and permitted the surge of power to rush 
through me. I cast my mind to 
the heavens and searched for hostile entities. What ecstasy! What 
incredible splendor! I who had 
never left this small planet roved 
the black spaces of the void, glided from star to burning star, saw 
the planets spinning like tops. 
Faces stared back at me as I 
journeyed, some without eyes, 
some with many eyes, all the 
complexity of the many-peopled 
galaxy accessible to me. I spied 
out possible concentrations of inimical force. I inspected drillinggrounds and military encampments. I sought, as I had sought 
four times daily for all my adult 
life, for the invaders who had 
been promised us, the conquerors who at the end of days were 
destined to seize our tattered 
world. 
I found nothing, and when I 
came up from my trance, sweaty 
and drained, I saw Avluela descending. 
T?eather-light she landed. Qormon called to her, and she 
ran, bare, her little breasts quivering, and he enfolded her smallness in his powerful arms, and 
they embraced, not passionately 
but joyously. When he released 
her she turned to me. 
“Roum,” she gasped. “Roum/” 
“You saw it?” 
“Everything! Thousands of 
people! Lights! Boulevards! A 
market! Broken buildings many 
cycles old! OH, Watcher, How 
wonderful Roum is!” 
“Your flight was a good one, 
then,” I said. 
“A miracle!” 
“Tomorrow we go to dwell in 
Roum.” 
“No, Watcher, tonight, tonight!” She was girlishly eager, 
her face bright with excitement 
“It’s just a short journey more! 
Look, it’s just over there!” 
“We should rest first” I said. 
“We do not want to arrive weary 
in Roum.” 
“We can rest when we get 
there,” Avluela answered. “Come! 
Pack everything! You’ve done 
your Watching, haven’t you?” 
“Yes. Yes.” 
“Then let’s go. To Roum! To 
Roum!” 
I looked in appeal at Gormon. 
Night had come; it was time to 
make camp, to Have our few 
hours of sleep. 
For once Gormon sided vnth 
GALAXY 
me. He said the Avluela, “The 
Watcher’s right. We can all use 
some rest. We’ll go into Roum at 
dawn.” 
Avluela pouted. She looked 
more like a child than ever. Her 
wings drooped; Her underdeveloped body slumped. Petulantly she 
closed her wings until they were 
mere fist-sized humps on her 
back and picked up the garments 
she had scattered on the road. 
She dressed while we made camp. 
I distributed food tablets; we entered our receptacles; I fell into 
troubled sleep and dreamed of 
Avluela limned against the crumbling moon and Gormon flying 
beside her. Two hours before 
dawn I arose and performed my 
first Watch of the new day, while 
they still slept. Then I aroused 
them, and we went onward toward the fabled imperial city, onward toward Roum. 
Ill 
'^he morning’s light was bright 
and harsh, as though this 
were some young world newly 
created. The road was all but 
empty. People do not travel much 
in these latter days unless, like 
me, they are wanderers by habit 
and profession. 
Occasionally we stepped aside 
to let a chariot of some member 
of the guild of Masters go by, 
drawn by a dozen expressionless 
NIGHTWINGS 
neuters harnessed in series. Four 
such vehicles went by in the first 
two hours of the day, each shuttered and sealed to hide the Master’s proud features from the gaze 
of such common folk as we. Several rollerwagons passed us, laden 
with produce, and a number of 
floaters soared overhead. Generally we had the road to ourselves, 
however. 
The enviro;^s of Roum showed 
vestiges of antiquity; isolated columns, the fragments of an aqueduct transporting nothing from 
nowhere to nowhere, the portals 
of a vanished temple. That was 
the oldest Roum we saw, but 
there were accretions of the later 
Roums of subsequent cycles, the 
huts of peasants, the domes of 
power drains, the hulls of dwelling-towers. Infrequently we met 
with the burned-out shell of some 
ancient airship. Gormon examined everything, taking samples 
from time to time. Avluela looked, wide-eyed, saying nothing. We 
walked on, until the walls of the 
city loomed before us. 
They were of a blue glossy 
stone, neatly joined, rising to a 
height of perhaps eight men. €hir 
road pierced the wall through a 
corbelled arch. The gate stood 
open. As we approached the gate 
a figure came toward us, hooded, 
masked, a man of extraordinary 
Height wearing the somber garb' 
of the guild of Pilgrims. One does 
not approach such' a person one’s 
self, but one heeds him if Ke 
beckons. Th'e Pilgrim beckoned. 
THrougK his speaking grill Ke 
said, “WEere from?” 
“TKe soutK. I lived in Agupt a 
while, then crossed Land Bridge 
to Talya,” I replied. 
” Where bound?” 
“Roum, a while.” 
“How goes the Watch?” 
“As customary.” 
“You have a place to stay in 
Roum?” the Pilgrim asked. 
I shook my head. “We trust to 
the kindness of the Will.” 
“The Will is not always kind,” 
said the Pilgrim absently. “Nor 
is there much need of Watchers 
in Roum. Why do you travel with 
a Flier?” 
“For company’s sake. And be
cause she is young and needs protection.” 
“Who is the other one?” 
“He is guildless, a Changeling.” 
“So I can see. But why is he 
with you?” 
“He is strong and I am old, 
and so we travel together. Where 
are you bound. Pilgrim?” 
“Jorslem, Is there another destination for my guild?” 
I conceded the point with a 
shrug. 
The Pilgrim said, “Why do you 
not come to Jorslem with’ me?” 
“My road lies north now, Jorslem is in the south', close by 
Agupt.” 
NIGHTWINGS 
“You have been to Agupt and 
not to Jorslem?” he said, puzzled. 
“Yes. The time was not ready 
for me to see Jorslem.” 
“Come now. We will walk together on the road, Watcher, and 
we will talk of the old times and 
of the times to come, and I will 
assist you in your Watching and 
you will assist me in my communions with the Will. Is it 
agreed?” 
Tt was a temptation. Before my 
eyes flashed the image of 
Jorslem the Golden, its holy 
buildings and shrines, its place of 
renewal where the old are made 
young, its spires, its tabernacles. 
Even though I am a man set in 
his ways, I was willing at the moment to abandon Roum and go 
with the Pilgrim to Jorslem. 
I said, “And my companions — ” 
“Leave them. It is forbidden for 
me to travel with the guildless, 
and I do not wish to travel wtfi 
a female. You and I, Watcher, 
will go to Jorslem together.” 
Avluela, who had been standing to one side frowning through 
all this colloquy, shot me a look 
of sudden terror. 
“I will not abandon them,” I 
said. 
“Then I go to Jorslem alone,” 
said the Pilgrim. Out of his robe 
stretched a bony hand, the fingers 
long and white and steady. I 
touched my fingers reverently to 
the tips of his and the Pilgrim 
said, “Let the Will give you mercy, friend Watcher. And when 
you reach Jorslem, search for 
me. 
He moved on down the road 
without further conversation. 
Gormon said to me, “You 
would have gone with him, 
wouldn’t you?” 
“I considered.it.” 
“What could you find in Jorslem that isn’t here? That’s a holy 
city and so is this. Here you can 
rest a while. You’re in no shape 
for more walking now.” 
“You may be right,” I conceded, and with the last of my energy 
strode toward the gate of Roum. 
Watchful eyes scaimed us from 
slots in the wall. When we were 
at midpoint in the gate a fat, 
pockmarked Sentinel with sagging 
jowls halted us and asked our 
business in Roum. I stated my 
guild and purpose, and he gave a 
snort of disgust. 
“Go elsewhere. Watcher! We 
need only useful men Here.” 
“Watching has its uses,” I said 
mildly. 
“No doubt No doubt.” He 
squinted at Avluela. “Who’s this? 
Watchers are celibates, no?” 
“She is notfung more than a 
traveling companion.” 
The Sentind guffawed coarsely. “It’s a route you travel often, 
I wager! Not that there’s much to 
18 
her. What is she, thirteen, fourteen? Come here, child. Let me 
check you for contraband.” He 
ran his Hands quickly over Her, 
scowling as He felt Her breasts, 
then raising an eyebrow as He encotmtered the mounds of Her 
wings below Her shoulders. 
“What’s this? What’s this? More 
in back than in front! A Flier, 
are you? Very dirty business. 
Fliers consorting with foul old 
Watchers.” He chuckled and put 
ffis hand on Avluela’s body in a 
way that sent Gormon starting 
forward in fury, murder in His 
fire-circled eyes. I caught Kim in 
time and grasped His wrist with 
all my strength. Holding him back 
lest he ruin the three of us by an 
attack on the Sentinel. He tugged 
at me, nearly pulling me over; 
then He grew calm and subsided, 
idly waiting as the fat one finished checking Avluela for “contraband.” 
At length the Sentinel turned in 
distaste to Gormon and said, 
“What kind of tlfing are you?” 
“Guildless, your mercy,” Gormon said in sharp tones. “The 
humble and worthless product of 
teratogenesis, and yet nevertheless a free man who desires entry 
to Roum.” 
“Do we need more monsters 
Here?” 
“I eat little and work hard.” 
“You’d work harder still if you 
were neutered,” said the Sentinel. 
Gormon glowered. I said, “May 
we Have entry?” 
“A moment.” TKe Sentinel 
donned His tHinking cap and narrowed His eyes as He transmitted 
a message to tKe memory tanks. 
His face tensed wdtH tKe effort; 
tHen it went slack, and moments 
later came tKe reply. We could 
not Hear tHe transaction at all, 
but from His disappointed look 
it appeared evident tKat no reason l^d been found to refuse us 
admission to Roum. 
“Go on in,” He said. “THe tKree 
of you. Quickly 1” 
We passed beyond tKe gate. 
G ormon said, “I could Have 
split Him open witK a blow.” 
“And be neutered by nigHtfall. 
A little patience, and we’ve come 
into Roum.” 
“TKe way He Handled Her — !” 
“You take a very possessive attitude toward Avluela,” I said. 
“Remember tKat sHe’s a Flier, 
and not sexually available to tHe 
guildless.” 
Gormon ignored my tKrust. 
“SHe arouses me no more tKan 
you do, WatcHer. But it pains me 
to see Her treated tKat way. I 
would Have killed Him if you 
Hadn’t Held me back.” 
Avluela said, “Wfiere sfiall we 
stay, now tKat we’re in Roum?” 
“F^irst let me find tKe Headquarters of my gxiild,” I said. “I’ll 
register at tfie WatcKers’ Inn. AfNIGHTWINGS 
ter tKat perKaps we’ll hunt up the 
Fliers’ Lodge for a meal.” 
“And tHen,” said Gormon drily, 
“we’ll go to tHe Guildless Gutter 
and beg for coppers.” 
“I pity you because you are a 
CKangeling,” I told Him, “but I 
fmd it ungraceful of you to pity 
yourself. Come.” 
We walked up a cobbled, winding street away from tKe gate and 
into Roum itself. We were in tHe 
outer ring of tHe city, a residential section of low, squat Houses 
topped by tHe unwieldy bulk of 
defense installations. WitHin lay 
tKe shining towers we Had seen 
from the fields tHe nigKt before; 
tHe remnant of ancient Roum, 
carefully preserved across ten 
thousand years or more; tHe market; th'e factory zone; tHe communications Hump; tKe temples 
of tKe Will; tfie memory tanks; 
tfie sleepers’ refuges; tKe outworlders’ brotfiels; tKe governmental buildings; tHe Headquarters of tHe various guilds. 
At tKe comer, beside a Second 
Cycle building witH walls of some 
rubbery texture, I found a public 
thinking cap and slipped it on my 
forehead. At once my thoughts 
raced down tKe conduit until 
they came to tKe interface that 
gave them access to one of the 
storage brains of a memory tank. 
I pierced tHe interface and saw 
tHe wrmkled Hrain itself, pale 
gray ageunst tfie deep green of its 
1? 
housing. A Rememberer once 
told me that in cycles past men 
built machines to do tKeir thinking for them, although these machines were hellishly expensive 
and required vast amounts of 
space and drank power like gluttons. That was not the worst of 
our forefathers’ follies; but why 
build artificial brains when death 
each day liberates scores of splendid natural ones to hook into the 
memory tanks? Was it that they 
lacked the knowledge to use 
them? I find that hard to believe. 
T gave the brain my guild identification and asked the coordinates of our inn. Instantly I 
received them, and we set out, 
Avluela on one side of me, Gormon on the other, myself wheeling as always the cart in which 
my instruments reside. 
The city was crowded. I had 
not seen such throngs in sleepy, 
heat-fevered Agupt, nor at any 
other point on my northward 
journey. The streets were full of 
Pilgrims, secretive and masked. 
Jostling through them went busy 
Rememberers and glum Merchants and now and then the 
litter of a Master. Avluela saw a 
number of Fliers, but was barred 
by the tenets of her guild from 
greeting them until she had undergone her ritual purification. I 
regret to say that I spied many 
Watchers, all of whom looked 
20 
upon me disdainfully and without welcome. I noted a good 
many Defenders and ample representation of such lesser guilds 
as Vendors, Servitors, Manufactories, Scribes, Communicants 
and Transporters. Naturally, a 
host of neuters went silently 
about their humble business, and 
numerous outworlders of all descriptions flocked the streets, 
most of them probably tourists, 
some here to do what business 
could be done with the sullen, 
poverty-blighted people of Earth. 
I noticed many Changelings limping furtively through the crowd, 
not one of them as proud of 
bearing as Gormon beside me. He 
was unique among his kind; the 
others, dappled and piebald and 
asjrmmetrical, limbless or overlimbed, deformed in a thousand 
imaginative and artistic ways, 
were slinkers, squinters, shufflers, 
hissers, creepers; they were cutpurses, brain-drainers, organpeddlers, repentance-mongers, 
gleam-buyers, but none held himself upright as though he thought 
he were a man. 
The guidance of the brain was 
exact, and in less than an Hour of 
walking we arrived at the Watchers’ Inn. I left Gormon and Avluela outside and wheeled my cart 
within. 
Perhaps a dozen members of 
my guild lounged in the main 
hall. I gave them the customary 
sign, and tKey returned it languidly. Were tKese guardians on 
wHom EartK’s safety depended? 
Simpletons and weaklings! 
“WBere may I register?” I asked. 
“New? WKere from?” 
“Agupt was my last place of 
registry.” 
“SKould Have stayed tKere. No 
need of WatcKers Here.” 
“WKere may I register?” 
A foppisH youngster indicated a 
screen in tKe rear of tKe great 
room. I went to it, pressed my 
fingertips against it, was interrogated and gave my name, wHicH 
a WatcKer may utter only to anotKer WatcKer and witKin tKe 
precincts of an inn. A panel sKot 
open, and a puffy-eyed man wKo 
wore the WatcKer emblem on Kis 
righ't cKeek and not on tKe left, 
signifying his KigK rank in tKe 
guild, spoke my name and said, 
“You should Kave known better 
than to come to Roum. We’re over our quota.” 
“I claim lodging and employment nonetheless.” 
“A man witH your sense of 
Kumor should Kave been born into the guild of Clowns,” Ke said. 
“I see no joke.” 
“Under laws promulgated by 
our guild in tKe most recent session an inn is under no obUgation 
to take new lodgers once it Kas 
reached its assigned capacity. We 
NIGHTWINGS 
are at our assigned capacity. 
Farewell, my friend.” 
I was aghast. “I know of no 
sucB regulation! This is incredible! For a guild to turn away a 
member from its own inn — wKen 
Ke arrives footsore and numb, a 
man of my age, having crossed 
Land Bridge out of Agupt, here 
as a stranger and hungry in 
Roum — ” 
“WKy did you not check with 
us first?” 
“I Kad no idea it would be 
necessary.” 
“TKe new regulations — ” 
“May the Will sKrivel the new 
regulations!” I shouted. “I demand lodging! For one wKo Kas 
Watched since before you were 
bom to be turned away — ” 
“Easy, brother, easy.” 
“Surely you Kave some comer 
wKere I can sleep — some crumbs 
to let me eat — ” 
Even as my tone Kad changed 
from bluster to supplication, Kis 
expression softened from indifference to mere disdain. “We Kave 
no room, we Have no food. TKese 
are hard times for our guild, you 
know. TKere is talk that we will 
be disbanded altogether, as a useless luxury, a drain upon tKe 
Will’s resources. We are very limited in our abihties. Because 
Rotun Kas a surplus of WatcKers, 
we all are on sKort rations as it is, 
and if we admit you our rations 
will be all the shorter.” 
“But where will I go? What 
shaU I do?” 
“I advise you,” lie said blandly, “to throw yourself upon the 
mercy of th"e IMnce of Roum.” 
IV 
/^utside, I told that to Gormon, 
and Ke doubled witH laughter, guffawing so furiously that 
the striations on his lean cheeks 
blazed like bloody stripes. “The 
mercy of the Prince of Roum!” 
he repeated. “The mercy — of 
the Prince of Roum — !” 
“It is customary for the unfortunate to seek the aid of the local 
ruler,” I said coldly. 
“The Prince of Roum knows no 
mercy,” Gormon told me. “The 
Prince of Roum will feed you 
your own limbs to ease your hunger!” 
“Perhaps,” Avluela put in, “we 
should try to find the Fliers’ 
Lodge. They’ll feed us there.” 
“Not Gormon,” I observed. 
“We have obligations to one another.” 
“We could bring food out to 
him,” she said. 
“I prefer to visit the court 
first,” I insisted. “Let us make 
sure of our status. Afterward we 
can improvise living arrangements, if we must.” 
She yielded, and we made our 
way to the palace of the Prince of 
Roum, a massive building fronted 
22 
by a colossal column-ringed plaza, on the far side of the river 
that splits the city. In the plaza 
we were accosted by mendicants 
of many sorts, some not even 
Earthbom. Something with ropy 
tendrils and a corrugated noseless face thrust itself at me and 
jabbered for alms until Gormon 
pushed it away, and moments later a second creatme equally 
strange, its skin pocked with luminescent craters and its limbs 
studded with’ eyes, embraced my 
knees and pleaded in the name of 
the Will for my mercy. “I am 
only a poor Watcher,” I said, indicating my cart, “and am here to 
gain mercy myself.” But the being persisted, sobbing out its misfortimes in a blurred feathery 
voice, and in the end, to Gormon’s 
immense disgust, I dropped a 
few food tablets into the shelflike pouch on its chest Then we 
muscled on toward the doors of 
the palace. At the portico a more 
horrid sight presented itself: a 
maimed Flier, fragile limbs bent 
and twisted, one wing Half unfolded and severely cropped, the 
other missing altogether. The 
Flier rushed upon Avluela, called 
her by a name not hers, moistened her leggings with tears so copious that the fur of them grew 
matted and stained. “Sponsor me 
to the lodge,” he appealed. “They 
have turned me away because I 
am crippled, but if you sponsor 
me — ” Avluela explained tHat sHe 
could do notHing, tHat sKe was a 
stranger to tHis lodge. The broken 
Flier would not release Her, and 
Gormon witB great delicacy lifted him like tKe bundle of dry 
bones tHat He was, and set Him 
aside. We stepped up onto tKe 
portico and at once were confronted by a trio of soft-faced 
neuters, wHo asked our business 
and admitted us quickly to tKe 
next line of barrier, wfficH was 
manned by a pair of wizened Indexers. Speaking in unison, tKey 
queried us. 
CtTXT’e seek audience,” I said. 
’ ’ “A matter of mercy.” 
“TKe day of audience is four 
da5^ hence,” said the Indexer on 
the rigKt. “We will enter your request on tKe rolls.” 
“We Have no place to sleepl” 
Avluela burst out “We are Hungry! We—” 
I KusKed Her. Gormon, meanwhile, was groping in tKe moutH 
of His overpocket. BrigKt tffings 
glimmered in His Hand: pieces of 
gold, the eternal metal, stamped 
witK Hawk-nosed bearded faces. 
He Had found them grubbing in 
tKe ruins. He tossed one coin to 
tKe Indexer wKo Had refused us. 
TKe man snapped it from tKe air, 
rubbed Kis tKumb roughly across 
its shining obverse, and dropped 
it instantly into a fold of Kis garment. TKe second Indexer waited 
NIGHTWINGS 
expectantly. Smiling, Gormon 
gave him his coin. 
“Perhaps,” I said, “we can arrange for a special audience within.” 
“Perhaps you can,” said one of 
the Indexers. “Go througK.” 
And so we passed into tKe nave 
of the palace itself, and stood in 
that great echoing space, looking 
down tKe central aisle toward the 
shielded throne cKamb'er at the 
apse. TKere were more beggars in 
Here — licensed ones. Holding Hereditary concessions — and also 
throngs of Pilgrims, Communicants, Rememberers, Musicians, 
Scribes and Indexers. I Heard 
muttered prayers: I smelled tKe 
scent of spicy incense; I felt tKe 
vibration of subterranean gongs. 
In cycles past this building Kad 
been a sKrine of one of tKe old 
religions — tKe CKristers, Gormon told me, making me suspect 
once more tKat Ke was a Rememberer masquerading as a Changeling — and it still maintained 
sometKing of its Holy cBaracter 
even though it served as Room’s 
seat of secular government. But 
how were we to get to see the 
Prince? 
To my left I saw a small ornate 
cKapel to whicK a line of prosperous-looking Merchants and Landholders was slowly entering. Peering past them, I noted three skulls 
mounted on an interrogation fixture T- a memory-tank input — 
and beside them a burly Scribe. 
Telling Gormon and Avluela to 
wait for me in the aisle, I joined 
the line. 
It moved infrequently, and 
nearly an Hour passed before I 
reached the interrogation fixture. 
The skulls glared sightlessly at 
me; within their sealed crania nutrient fluids bubbled and gurgled, 
caring for the dead yet still functional brains whose billion billion 
synaptic units now served as incomparable mnemonic devices. 
The Scribe seemed aghast to find 
a Watcher in this line, but before 
he could challenge me I blurted, 
“I come as a stranger to claim the 
Prince’s mercy. I and my companions are without lodging. My 
own guild has turned me away. 
What shall I do? How may I 
gain an audience?” 
“Come back in four days.” 
“I’ve slept on the road for more 
da5Ts than that. Now I must rest.” 
“A public inn—” 
“But I am guilded!” I protested. “The public inns would not 
admit me while my guild maintains an inn Here, and my guild 
refuses me because of some new 
regulation, and — you see my 
predicament?” 
Tn a wearied voice the Scribe 
-*■ said, “You may make application for a special audience. It 
will be denied. But you may apply.” 
“Where?” 
“Here. State your purpose.” 
I identified myself to the skulls 
by my public designation, listed 
the names and status of my two 
companions, and explained my 
case. All this was absorbed and 
transmitted to the ranks of brains 
mounted somewhere in the depths 
of the city, and when I was done 
the Scribe said, “If the application is approved, you will be notified.” 
“Meanwhile where shall I 
stay?” 
“Close to the palace, I would 
suggest.” 
I understood. I could join that 
legion of unfortunates packing the 
plaza. How many of them had 
requested some special favor of 
the Prince and were still there, 
months or years later, waiting to 
be summoned to the Presence? 
Sleeping on stone, begging for 
crusts, living in foolish hope — 
But I had exhausted my avenues. I returned to Gormon and 
Avluela, told them of the situation, and suggested that we now 
attempt to hunt whatever accommodations we could. Gormon, 
guildless, was welcome at any of 
the squalid public inns maintained for his kind; Avluela could 
probably find residence at her 
own guild’s lodge; only I would 
have to sleep in the streets, not 
for the first time. But I hoped 
that we would not have to sepa
GAIAXY 
rate. I had come to think of us as 
a family, strange thought though 
that was for a Watcher. 
As we moved toward the exit 
my timepiece told me softly that 
the hour of Watching had come 
round again. It is my obligation 
and my privilege to tend to my 
Watching wherever I may be, regardless of the circumstances, 
whenever my hour comes round; 
and so I halted, opened the cart, 
activated the equipment. Gormon 
and Avluela stood beside me. 
I saw smirks and open mockery on the faces of those who 
passed in and out of the palace. 
Watching is not held in very high 
repute, for we have Watched so 
long, and the promised enemy 
has never come. One has one’s 
duties, comic though they may 
seem to others. What is a hollow 
ritual to some is a life’s work to 
others. Doggedly I forced myself 
into a state of Watchfulness. The 
world melted away from me, and. 
I plunged into the heavens. The 
familiar joy engulfed me; and I 
searched the familiar places, and 
some that were not so familiar, 
my amplified mind leaping 
through the galaxies in wild 
swoops. Was an armada massing? 
Were troops drilling for the conquest of Earth? Four times a day 
I watched, and the other members of my guild did the same, 
each at slightly different Hours, 
so that no moment went by withNIGHTWINGS 
out some vigilant mind on guard. 
I do not believe that that is a 
foolish calling. 
■fl^hen I came up from my 
' ^ trance a brazen voice was 
crying, “ — for the Prince of 
Roum! Make way for the Prince 
of Roum!” 
I blinked and caught my 
breath and fought to shake off 
the last strands of my concentration. A gilded palanquin Had 
emerged from the rear of the palace and was proceeding down the 
nave toward me, borne by a phalanx of neuters. Four men in the 
ornate costumes and brilliant 
masks of the guild of Masters 
flanked the litter, and it was preceded by a trio of Changelings, 
squat and broad, whose throats 
were so modified as to imitate the 
sounding-boxes of bullfrogs. They 
emitted a trumpet-like boom of 
majestic sound as they advanced. 
It struck me as most strange 
that a prince would admit 
Changelings to His service, even 
ones as gifted as these. 
My cart was blocking the progress of this magnificent procession, and hastily I struggled to 
close it and move it aside before 
the parade swept down upon me. 
Age and fear made my fingers 
tremble, and I could not make the 
sealings properly; while I fumbled in increasing clumsiness the 
strutting Changelings drew so 
close th'at the blare of their 
throats was deafening, and Gormon attempted to aid me, forcing 
me to hiss at him that it is forbidden for anyone not of my 
guild to touch the equipment. I 
pushed him away; and an instant 
later a vanguard of neuters descended on me and prepared to 
scourge me from the spot with 
sparkling whips. 
“In the Will’s name,” I cried, 
“I am a Watcher!” 
And in antiphonal response 
came the deep, calm, enormous 
reply, “Let him be. He is a 
Watcher.” 
All motion ceased. The Prince 
of Roum had spoken. 
The neuters drew back. The 
Changelings halted their music. 
The bearers of the palanquin eased it to the floor. All those in the 
nave of the . palace had pulled 
back, save only Gormon and Avluela and myself. The shimmering 
chain-curtains of the palanquins 
parted. Two of the Masters hurried forward and thrust their 
hands through the sonic barrier 
within, offering aid to their monarch. The barrier died away with 
a whimpering buzz. 
The Prince of Roum appeared. 
TT e was so young! He was nothing more than a boy, his hair 
full and dark, his face unlined. 
But he had been bom to rule, and 
for all his youth he was as com26 
manding as anyone I had ever 
seen. His lips were thin and tightly compressed; his aquiline nose 
was sharp and aggressive; his 
eyes, deep and cold, were infinite 
pools. He wore the jeweled garments of the guild of Dominators, 
but incised on his cheek was the 
double-barred cross of the Defenders, and aroxmd his neck he 
carried the dark shawl of the Rememberers. A Dominator may 
enroll in as many guilds as he 
pleases, and it would be a strange 
thing for a Dominator not also 
to be a Defender; but it startled 
me to find this prince a Rememberer as well. That is not normally a guild for the fierce. 
He looked at me with little 
interest and said, “You choose an 
odd place to do your Watching, 
old man.” 
“The hour chose the place, 
sire,” I replied. “I was there, and 
my duty compelled me. 'I had no 
way of knowing that you were 
about to come forth.” 
“Your Watching found no enemies?” 
“None, sire.” 
I was about to press my luck, 
to take advantage of the unexpected appearance of the Prince 
to beg for his aid; but his interest 
in me died like a guttering candle 
as I stood there, and I did not 
dare call to him when his Head 
had turned. He eyed Gormon a 
long moment, frowning and tug
GALAXY 
ging at his chin. Then his gaze 
fell on Avluela. His eyes brightened. His jaw-muscles flickered. 
His delicate nostrils widened. 
“Come up here, little Flier,” Ke 
said, beckoning. “Are you this 
Watcher’s friend?” 
She nodded, terrified. 
The Prince held out a hand to 
her and grasped; she floated up 
onto the palanquin, and with’ a 
grin so evil it seemed a parody 
of wickedness the young Dominator drew her through the curtain. Instantly a pair of Masters 
restored the sonic barrier, but the 
procession did not move on. I 
stood mute. Gormon beside me 
was frozen, his powerful body 
rigid as a rod. I wheeled my cart 
to a less conspicuous place. Long 
moments passed. The courtiers 
remained silent, discreetly looking away from the palanquin. 
At length the curtain parted 
once more. Avluela came stumbling out, her face pale, her eyes 
blinking rapidly. She looked dazed. Streaks of sweat gleamed on 
her cheeks. She nearly fell, and 
a neuter caught her and swung 
her down to floor level. Beneath’ 
Her jacket her wings were partly 
erect, giving her a hunchbacked 
look and telling me that she was 
in great emotional distress. In 
ragged sliding steps she came to 
us, quivering, wordless; she darted a glance at me and flung herself against Gormons chest. 
NIGHTWINGS 
The bearers lifted the palanquin. The Prince of Roum went 
out from his palace. 
When he was gone, Avluela 
stammered Hoarsely, “The Prince 
has granted us lod^ng in the 
royal Hostelry!” 
V 
^'T^he hostelkeepers, of eourse, 
would not believe us. 
Guests of the Prince are Housed 
in the royal hostelry, which is to 
the rear of the palace in a small 
garden of frostflowers and blossoming ferns. The usual inhabitants of such a hostelry are Masters and an occasional Dominator; sometimes a particularly important Rememberer on an errand of research will win a niche 
there, or some highly placed Defender visiting for purposes of 
strategic planning. To house a 
Flier in a royal Hostelry would be 
distinctly odd; to admit a Watcher would be unlikely; to take in 
a Changeling or some other guildless person would be improbable 
beyond comprehension. When we 
presented ourselves, therefore, we 
were met by Servitors whose attitude was at first one of High 
humor at our joke, then of irritation, finally of scorn. “Get away,” 
they told us ultimately. “Scum! 
Rabble!” 
Avluela said in a grave voice, 
“The Prince Has granted us lodg
27 
ing here, and you may not refuse 
us.” 
“Away! Away!” 
One snaggletootKed Servitor 
produced a neural truncheon and 
.^brandished it in Gormon’s face, 
passing a foul remark about his 
gutldlessness. Gormon slapped the 
truncheon from his grasp, oblivious to the painful sting, and 
kicked the man in his gut, so that 
he coiled and fell over, puking. 
Instantly a throng of neuters 
came rushing from within the 
hostelry. Gormon seized another 
of the Servitors and hurled Him 
into the midst of them, turning 
them into a muddled mob. Wild 
shouts and angry cursing cries 
attracted the attention of a venerable Scribe who waddled to the 
door, bellowed for silence, and interrogated us. “That’s easily 
checked,” he said, when Avluela 
had told the story. To a Servitor 
he said contemptuously, “Send a 
think to the Indexers fast!” 
In time the confusion was untangled, and we were admitted. 
We were given separate but adjoining rooms. I had never known 
such luxury before, and perhaps 
never shall again. The rooms were 
long, high, and deep. One entered 
them through telescopic pits keyed to one’s own thermal output, 
to assure privacy. Lights glowed 
at the resident’s merest nod, for 
hanging from ceiling globes and 
nestling in cupolas on the walls 
28 
were spicules of slavelight from 
one of the Brigh'tstar worlds, 
trained through suffering to obey 
such commands. The windows 
came and went at the dweller’s 
whim. When not in use they were 
concealed by streamers of quasisentient outworld gauzes, wfficH 
not only were decorative in their 
own right but functioned as monitors to produce delightful scents 
according to requisitioned patterns. The rooms were equipped 
with individual thinking caps 
connected to the main memory, 
banks. They likewise had conduits that summoned Servitors, 
Scribes, Indexers or Musicians as 
required. Of course, a man of my 
own human guild would not deign 
to make use of other human beings that way, out of fear of their 
glowering resentment But in any 
case I had little need of them. 
I did not ask of Avluela what 
had occurred in the Prince’s palanquin to bring us such bounty. 
I could well imagine, as could 
Gormon, whose barely suppressed 
inner rage was eloquent of his 
never-admitted love for my pale, 
slender little Flier. 
TT^e settled in. I placed my cart 
^ beside the window, draped 
it with gauzes, and left it in readiness for my next period of 
Watching. I cleaned my body of 
grime while entities mounted in 
the wall sang me to peace. Later 
I ate. Afterwards Avluela came 
to me, refresh’ed, relaxed, and sat 
beside me in my room as we talked quietly of our recent experiences. 
Gormon did not appear for 
Hours. I thought that perhaps he 
Had left this hostelry altogether, 
finding the atmosphere to rarefied 
for him, and Had sought company 
among his own guildless kind. 
But at twilight Avluela and I 
walked in the cloistered courtyard 
of the hostelry and mounted a 
ramp to watch the stars emerge 
in Roum’s sky, and Gormon was 
there. With him was a lanky and 
emaciated man in a Rememberer’s shawl; they were talking in 
low tones. 
Gormon nodded to me and said, 
“Watcher, I want you to meet 
my new friend.” 
The emaciated one fingered His 
shawl. “I am the Rememberer 
Basil,” he intoned, in a voice as 
thin as a fresco that Has been 
peeled from its wall. “I Have come 
from Perris to delve into the mysteries of Roum. I shall be Here 
many years.” 
“The Rememberer Has fine 
stories to tell,” said Gormon. “He 
is among the foremost of his guild. 
As you approached. He was describing to me the techniques by 
which the past is revealed. They 
drive a trench through the strata 
of Third Cycle deposits, you see, 
and with vacuum cores they lift 
NIGHTWINGS 
the molecules of earth to lay bare 
the ancient layers.” 
“We have found,” Basil said, 
“the catacombs of Imperial 
Roum, and the rubble of the Time 
of Sweeping, and books inscribed 
on slivers of white metal, written 
toward the close of the Second 
Cycle. All these go to Perris for 
examination and classification 
and decipherment; then they return. Does the past interest you. 
Watcher?” 
“To some extent.” I smiled. 
“This Changeling here shows 
much more fascination for it. I 
sometimes suspect his authenticity. Would you recognize a Rememberer in disguise?” 
Basil scrutinized Gormon, lingering over the bizarre features, 
the excessively muscular frame. 
“He is no Rememberer,” he said 
at length. “But I agree that he 
has antiquarian interests. He has 
asked me many profound questions.” 
“Such as?” 
“He wishes to know the origin 
of guilds. He asks the name of 
the genetic sxirgeon who crafted 
the first true-breeding Fliers. He 
wonders why there are Changelings, and if they are truly under 
the curse of the Will.” 
“And do you have answers for 
these?” I asked. 
“For some,” said Basil. “For 
some.” 
“The origin of guilds?” 
give structure and meaning to a society tKat Has 
suffered defeat and destruction,” 
said tKe Rememberer. “At tKe end 
of tKe Second Cycle all was in 
flux. No man knew his rank nor 
his purpose. Through’ our world 
strode Haughty outworlders wHo 
looked upon us all as worthless. It 
was necessary to establish fixed 
frames of reference by wKicK one 
man migKt know his value beside 
another. So the first guilds appeared : Dominators, Masters, 
Merchants, Manufactories, Vendors and Servitors. Then came 
Scribes, Musicians, Clowns and 
Transporters. Afterwards Indexers became necessary, and then 
Watchers and Defenders. When 
the years of Magic gave us Fliers 
and Changelings, those guilds 
were added, and then the guildless ones, the neuters, were produced, so that — ” 
“But surely the Changelings 
are guildless tool” said Avluela. 
The Rememberer looked at her 
for the first time. “Who are you?” 
“Avluela of the Fliers. I travel 
with this Watcher and this 
Changeling.” 
Basil said, “As I have been 
telling the Changeling here, in the 
early days ffis kind was guilded. 
The guild was dissolved a thousand years ago Ky order of the 
Council of Dominators after an 
attempt by a disreputable 
Changeling faction to seize con30 
trol of the holy places of Jorslem. 
Since that time Changelings have 
been guildless, ranking only above 
neuters.” 
“I never knew that,” I said. 
“You are no Rememberer,” 
said Basil smugly. “It is our craft 
to uncover the past.” 
“True. True.” 
Gormon said, “And today, how 
many guilds there are?” 
Discomfited, Basil replied vaguely, “At least a hundred, my 
friend. Some are quite small; 
some are local. I am concerned 
only with the original guilds and 
their immediate successors; what 
has happened in the past few 
hundred years is in the province 
of others. Shall I requisition an 
information for you?” 
“Never mind,” Gormon said. 
“It was only an idle question.” 
“Your curiosity is well developed,” said the Rememberer. 
“I find the world and all it 
contains extremely fascinating. Is 
this sinful?” 
“It is strange,” said Basil. “The 
guildless rarely look beyond their 
own horizons.” 
VI 
A Servitor appeared. With a 
mixture of awe and contempt 
he genuflected before Avluela and 
said, “TKe Prince has returned. 
He desires your company in the 
palace at this time.” 
Terror glimmered in Avluela’s 
eyes. But to refuse was inconceivable. “SEall I come witK you?” 
sHe asked. 
“Please. You must be robed 
and perfumed. He wisHes you to 
come to Him witH your wings 
open, as well.” 
Avluela nodded. TKe Servitor 
led Her away. 
We remained on tKe ramp a 
while longer. TKe Rememberer 
Basil talked of tEe old days of 
Roum, and I listened, and Gormon peered into tKe gatEering 
darkness. Eventually, His tKroat 
dry, 'th'e Rememberer excused 
himself and moved solemnly 
away. A few moments later, in 
the courtyard below us, a door 
opened and Avluela emerged, 
walking as tEougH sKe was of the 
guild of Somnambulists, not of 
Fliers. 
She was nude, and Eer fragile 
body gleamed ghostly white in 
the starbeams. Her wings were 
spread and fluttered slowly in a 
somber S3rstole and diastole. One 
Servitor grasped eacE of Her elbows; tKey seemed to be propelling Eer toward the palace as 
thougH she were but a dreamed 
facsimile of herself and not a real 
woman. 
“Fly, Avluela, fly,” Gormon 
whispered. “Escape while you 
can!” 
She disappeared into a side entrance of the palace. 
NIGHTWINGS 
The Changeling looked at me. 
“She Has sold Eerself to tKe Prince 
to provide lod^g for us.” 
“So it seems.” 
“I could smasK down that palace! ” 
“You love Her?” 
“It sKould be obvious.” 
“Cure yourself,” I advised. 
“You are an unusual man, but 
still a Flier is not for you. Particularly a Flier wHo Has sEared tHe 
bed of the Prince of Roum.” 
“She goes from my arms to 
his.” 
I was staggered. “You’ve 
known Her?” 
“More than once,” Ke said, 
smiling sadly. “At tKe moment of 
ecstasy Her wings thrash' like 
leaves in a storm.” 
I gripped the railing of the 
ramp so that I would not tumble 
into the courtyard. TKe stars 
whirled overhead; the old moon 
and its two blank-faced consorts 
leaped and bobbed. I was shaken 
witfout fully understanding the 
cause of my emotion. Was it 
wrath that Gormon had dared to 
violate a canon of the law? Was 
it a manifestation of those pseudo-parental feelings I had toward 
Avluela? Or was it mere envy of 
Gormon for daring to commit a 
sin beyond my capacity, though' 
not beyond my desires? 
I said, “They could burn your 
brain for that. They could 
mince your soul. And now you 
make me an accessory.” 
“What of it? That Prince commands, and he gets — but others 
have been there before him. I had 
to tell someone.” 
* “Enough. Enough.” 
“Will we see her again?” 
“Princes tire quickly of their 
women. A few days, perhaps a 
single night — then he will throw 
her back to us. And perhaps then 
we shall have to leave this hostelry.” I sighed. “At least we’ll have 
known it a few nights more than 
we deserved.” 
“Where will you go then?” Gormon asked. 
“I will stay in Roum a while.” 
“Even if you sleep in the 
streets? There does not seem to 
be much demand for Watchers 
here.” 
“I’ll manage,” I said. “Then I 
may go toward Perris.” 
“To learn from the Rememberers?” 
“To see Perris. What of you? 
What do you want in Roum?” 
“Avluela.” 
“Stop that talk!” 
“Very well,” he said, and his 
smile was bitter. “But I will stay 
here until the Prince is through 
with her. Then she will be mine, 
and we’ll find ways to survive. 
The guildless are resourceful. 
They have to be. Maybe we’ll 
scrounge lodgings in Roum a 
while, and then follow you to 
32 
Perris. If you’re willing to travel 
with monsters and faithless Fliers.” 
I shrugged. “We’ll see about 
that when the time comes.” 
“Have you ever been in the 
company of a Changeling before?” 
“Not often. Not for long.” 
“I’m honored.” He drummed 
on the parapet. “Don’t cast me 
off, Watcher, I have reason for 
wanting to stay with' you.” 
“Which is?” 
“To see your face on the day 
your machines tell you that the 
invasion of Earth’ has begvin.” 
I let myself sag forward, shoulders drooping. “You’ll stay 
with me a long time, then.” 
“Don’t you believe the invasion 
is coming?” 
“Some day. Not soon.” 
Gormon chuckled. “You’re 
wrong. It’s almost here.” 
“You don’t amuse me.” 
“What is it. Watcher? Have 
you lost your faith? It’s been 
known for a thousand years: another race covets Earth and owns 
it by treaty and will some day 
come to collect. That much’ was 
decided at the end of the Second 
Cycle.” 
“I know all that, and I am no 
Rememberer.” Then I turned to 
him and spoke words I never 
thought I would say aloud. “For 
twice your lifetime. Changeling, 
I’ve listened to tKe stars and done 
my WatcKing. Something done 
that often loses meaning. Say 
your own name ten thousand 
times and it will be an empty 
sound. I Have Watched, and 
Watched well, and in the dark 
Hours of the night I sometimes 
think I Watch for nothing, that I 
have wasted my life. There is a 
pleasure in Watching, but perhaps there is no real purpose.” 
His Hand encircled my wrist. 
“Your confession is as shocking 
as mine. Keep your faith'. Watcher. The invasion comes!” 
“How could you possibly 
know?” 
“The guildless also have their 
skills.” 
The conversation distressed me. 
I said, “Is it painful to be guildless?” 
“One grows reconciled. And 
there are certain freedoms to 
compensate for the lack of status. 
I may speak freely to all.” 
“I notice.” 
“I move freely. I am always 
sure of food and lodging, though 
the food may be rotten and the 
lodging poor. Women are attracted to me despite all prohibitions. 
Because of them, perhaps. I am 
untroubled by ambitions.” 
“Never desire to rise above your 
rank?” 
“Never.” 
“You might have been Happier 
as a Rememberer.” 
NIGHTWINGS 
“I am happy now. I can have a 
Rememberer’s pleasures without 
his responsibility.” 
“How smug you are!” I cried. 
“To make a virtue of guildlessness!” 
“How else does one endure the 
weight of the Will?” He looked 
toward the palace. The humble 
rise. The mighty fall. Take this 
as prophesy. Watcher: that lusty 
Prince in there will know mare 
of life before summer comes. I’B 
rip out his eyes for taking her!” 
“Strong words. You bubble 
with treason tonight.” 
“Take it as prophesy.” 
“You can’t get close to him,” 
I said. Then, irritated for taking 
his foolishness seriously, I added, 
“And why blame him? He does 
only as princes do. Blame the 
girl for going to him. She might 
have refused.” 
“And lost her wings. Or died. 
No, she had no choice. I do!” In 
a sudden terrible gestiue the 
Changeling Held out thumb and 
forefinger, double-jointed, longnailed, and plunged them forward 
into imagined eyes. “Wait,” he 
said. “You’ll see!” 
In the courtyard two CHronomancers appeared, set up the apparatus of their guild and lit 
tapers by which to read the shape 
of tomorrow. A sickly odor of 
pallid smoke rose to my nostrils. 
I had lost further desire to speak 
with the Changeling now. 
“It grows late,” I said. “I need 
rest, and soon I must do my 
WatcKing.” 
“Watch’ carefully,” Gormon 
told me. 
VII 
Tn my chamber by night I performed my fourth and last 
Watch of that long day, and for 
the first time in my life I detected an anomaly. I could not interpret it. It was an obscure sensation, a mingling of tastes and 
sounds, a feeling of being in contact with some colossal mass. 
Worried, I clung to my instruments far longer than usual, but 
perceived no more clearly at the 
end of my seance than at its 
commencement. 
Afterward I wondered about 
ttiy obligations. 
Watchers are trained from 
childhood to be swift to sound 
the alarm; and the alarm must 
be sounded when the Watcher 
judges the world in peril. Was 
I now obliged to notify the Defenders? Four times in my life 
the alarm had been given, on each 
occasion in error; and each 
Watcher who had thus touched 
off a false mobilization had suffered a fearful loss of status. One 
Had contributed KJs brain to the 
memory banks; one Had become 
a neuter out of shame; one had 
smashed his instruments and gone 
34 
to live among the guildless; and 
one, vainly attempting to continue in his profession, had discovered himself mocked by all 
his comrades. I saw no virtue in 
scorning one who Had delivered a 
false alarm; for was it not preferable for a Watcher to cry out 
too soon than not at all? But 
those were the customs of our 
guild, and I was constrained by 
them. 
I evaluated my position and 
decided that I did not Have valid 
grounds for an alarm. 
I reflected that Gormon had 
placed suggestive ideas in my 
mind that evening. I might possibly be reacting only to KSs peering talk of imminent invasion. 
I could not act. I dared not 
jeopardize my standing by Hasty 
outcry. I mistrusted my own emotional sfate. 
I gave no alarm. 
Seetffing, confused, my soul 
roiling, I closed my cart and let 
myself sink into a drugged sleep. 
\ t dawn I woke and rushed to 
the window, expecting to find 
invaders in the streets. But all 
was still. A vdnter grayness Hung 
over the courtyard, and sleepy 
Servitors pushed passive neuters 
about. Uneasily I did my first 
WatcEng of the day, and to my 
relief the strangeness of the night 
before did not return, although I 
had it in mind that my sensitivity 
is always greater at nigfit tfian 
upon arising. 
I ate and went to the courtyard. Gormon and Avluela were 
already there. She looked fatigued 
and downcast, depleted by Ker 
night with the Prince of Roum, 
but I said nothing to her about 
it. Gormon, slouching disdainfully against a wall embellished with 
the shells of radiant mollusks, 
said to me, “Did your Watching 
go well? ” 
“Well enough.” 
“What of the day?” 
“Out to roam Roum,” I said. 
“Will you come? Avluela? Gormon?” 
“Surely,” he said, and she gave 
a faint nod, and, like the tourists 
we were, we set off to inspect the 
splendid city of Roum. 
Gormon acted as our guide to 
the jumbled pasts of Roum, beIjdng his claim never to have been 
here before. As well as any Rememberer he described the things 
we saw as we walked the winding 
streets. All the scattered levels of 
thousands of years were exposed. 
We saw the power domes of the 
Second Cycle, and the Colosseum 
where at an unimaginably early 
date , man and beast contended 
like jungle creatures. In the broken hull of that building of horrors Gormon told us of the savagery of that unimaginably ancient time. “They fought,” he said, 
“naked before huge throngs. With 
NIGHTWINGS 
bare hands men challenged beasts 
called lions, great hairy cats witU 
swollen heads; and when the lion 
lay in its gore the victor turned 
to the Prince of Roum and asked 
to be pardoned for whatever crime 
it was that had cast him into the 
arena. And if He Had fought well, 
the Prince made a gesture with 
his hand, and the man was freed.” 
Gormon made the gesture for us; 
a thumb upraised and jerked 
backward over the right shoulder 
several times. “But if the man 
had shown cowardice, or if the 
lion had distinguished itself in 
the manner of its dying, the 
Prince made another gesture, and 
the man was condemned to be 
slain by a second beast.” Gormon 
showed us that gesture too: the 
middle finger jutting upward 
from a clenched fist and lifted in 
a short sharp thrust. 
“How are these things known?” 
Avluela asked, but Gormon pretended not to hear her. 
We saw the line of fusion pylons built early in the Third Cycle to draw energy from the 
world’s core, and still functioning, although stained and corroded. We saw the shattered stump 
of a Second Cycle weather machine, still a mighty column at 
least twenty mfen High. We saw a 
hill on which white marble relics 
of First Cycle Roum sprouted 
like pale clumps of winter deathflowers. Penetrating toward the 
inner part of the city, we came 
upon the embankment of defensive amplifiers waiting in readiness to hurl the full impact of the 
Will against invaders. We viewed 
a market where visitors from the 
stars haggled with peasants for 
excavated fragments of antiquity. 
Gormon strode into the crowd 
and made several purchases. We 
came to a flesh house for travelers from afar, where one could 
buy anything from quasi-life to 
mounds of passion-ice. We ate at 
a small restaurant by the edge of 
the river Tver, where guildless 
ones were served without ceremony, and at Gormon’s insistence 
we dined on mounds of a soft 
doughy substance. 
^fterward we passed through a 
covered arcade in whose 
many aisles plump Vendors peddled star-goods, costly trinkets 
from Afreek and the flimsy constructs of the local Manufactories. 
Just beyond we emerged in a plaza that contained a fountain in 
the shape of a boat, and to the 
rear of this rose a flight of cracked and battered stone stairs ascending to a zone of rubble and 
weeds. Gormon beckoned, and we 
scrambled into this dismal area, 
passing rapidly through it to a 
place where a sumptuous palace, 
by its looks early Second Cycle 
or even First, brooded over a 
sloping vegetated hill. 
“They say this is the center of 
the world,” Gormon declared. “In 
Jorslem one finds another place 
that also claims the honor. They 
mark the spot here by a map.” 
“How can the world have one 
center,” Avluela asked, “when it 
is a sphere?” 
Gormon laughed. We went in. 
Within, in wintry darkness, there 
stood a colossal jeweled globe lit 
by some inner glow. 
“Here is your world,” said Gormon, gesturing grandly. 
“Oh!” Avluela gasped. “Everything! Everything is here!” 
The map was a masterpiece of 
craftsmanship. It showed natural 
contours and elevations; its seas 
seemed deep liquid pools; its deserts were so parched as to make 
thirst spring in one’s mouth; it 
cities swirled with vigor and life. 
I beheld the continents, Eyrop, 
Afreek, Ais, Stralya. I saw the 
vastness of Earth Ocean. I traversed the golden span of Land 
Bridge, which I Had crossed so 
toilfully on foot not long before. 
Avluela rushed forward and 
pointed to Roum, to Agupt, to 
Jorslem, to Perris. She tapped the 
globe at the high mountains north 
of Hind and said softly, “This is 
where I was bom, where the ice 
lives, where the moimtains touch 
the moons. Here is where the 
Fliers Have their kingdom.” She 
ran a finger westward toward 
Pars and beyond it into the ter
GALAXY 
rible Arb'aa Desert, and on to 
Agupt “Tills is wfiere I flew. By 
nigEt, wEen I left my girlEood. 
We all must fly, and I flew Bere. 
A Eundred times I tEougEt I 
would die. Here, Bere in tEe desert, sand in my tEroat as I flew, 
sand beating against my wings 
— I was forced down, I lay naked 
on tEe Bot sand for days, and anotEer Flier saw me, Ee came down 
to me and pitied me, and lifted 
me up, and wKen I was aloft my 
strengtB returned, and we flew on 
toward Agupt. And Ee died over 
tKe sea. His life stopped, tHougE 
Ke was young and strong, and Ee 
fell down into tEe sea, and I flew 
down to be witB Eim, and tEe 
water was Hot even at nigKt. I 
drifted, and morning came, and 
I saw tKe living stones growing 
Eke trees in tKe water, and tKe 
fisH of many colors, and tKey 
came and pecked at Kis flesE as 
Ke floated witE Kis wings outspread on tKe water, and I left 
Kim, I tKrust Kim down to rest 
tKere, and I rose, and I flew on 
to Agupt, alone, frigKtened, and 
tKere I met you, WatcBer.” Timidly sKe smiled to me. “SKow us 
tKe place wKere you were young. 
Watcher.” 
■painfully, for I was suddenly 
^ stiff at tKe knees, I Kobbled 
to tKe far side of tKe globe. Avluela followed me. Gormon Kung 
back, as tKougH not interested at 
NIGHTWINGS 
all. I pointed to tKe scattered islands rising in two long strips 
from EartE Ocean — the remnants of tKe Lost Continents. 
“Here,” I said, indicating my 
native island in tKe west. “I was 
bom Here.” 
“So far awayl” Avluela cried. 
“And so long ago,” I said. “In 
tEe middle of tKe Second Cycle, 
it sometimes seems to me.” 
“No! TKat is not possible!”'But 
sHe looked at me as though' it 
migKt just be true that I was 
thousands of years old. 
I smiled and touched her satiny cheek. “It only seems that 
way to me,” I said. 
“WKen did you leave your 
home?” 
“WKen I was twice your age,” 
I said. “I came first to Kere.” I 
indicated the eastern group of 
islands. “I spent a dozen years as 
a Watcher on PalasE. Then the 
Will moved me to cross Earth 
Ocean to Afreek. I came. I lived 
a while in the Eot countries. I 
went on to Agupt. I met a certain 
small Flier.” Falling silent, I looked a long while at tKe islands 
that had been my Kome, and 
witHin my mind my image changed from the gaunt and eroded 
thing I am today, and I saw myself young and well fleshed, 
climbing the green mountains and 
swimming in tKe cEill sea, and doing my Watching at tKe rim of a 
white beacH Bammered by surf. 
While I brooded Avluela turned away from me to Gormon and 
said, “Now you. Show us wfiere 
you come from, CKangeling!” 
Gormon shrugged. “The place 
does not appear to be on this 
globe.” 
“But that’s impossible!” 
“Is it?” he asked. 
She pressed Him, but Ke evaded her, and we passed through a 
side exit and into the streets. 
VIII 
T was growing tired, but Avluela 
-*■ hungered for this city, wishing 
to devour it all in an afternoon, 
and we went on through a maze 
of interlocking streets, through a 
zone of sparkling mansions of 
Masters and Merchants, and 
through a foul den of Servitors 
and Vendors that extended into 
subterranean catacombs, and to a 
place where Clowns and Musicians resorted, and to another 
where the guild of Somnambulists 
begged us to come inside and buy 
the truth that comes with trances. 
Avluela urged us to go, but Gormon shook his head and I smiled, 
and we moved on. Now we were 
at the edge of a park close to the 
city’s core. Here the citizens of 
Roum promenaded with an energy rarely seen in hot Agupt, and 
we joined the parade. 
“Look there!” Avluela said. 
“How bright it is!” 
She pointed toward the shining 
arc of a dimensional sphere enclosing some relic of the ancient 
city. Shading my eyes, I could 
make out a weathered stone wall 
within, and a knot of people. 
Gormon said, “It is the Mouth of 
Truth.” 
“What is that?” Avluela asked. 
“Come. See.” 
A line progressed into the 
sphere. We joined it and soon 
were at the lip of the interior, 
peering at the timeless region 
just across the threshold. Why 
this relic and so few others had 
been accorded such special protection I did not know, and I 
asked Gormon, whose knowledge 
was so xmaccountably as profound as any Rememberer’s, and 
he replied, “Because this is the 
realm of certainty, where what 
one says is absolutely congruent 
with what actually is the case.” 
“I don’t understand,” said Avluela. 
“It is impossible to lie in this 
place,” Gormon told her. “Can 
you imagine any relic more worthy of protection?” He stepped 
across the entry duct, blurring as 
he did so, and I followed him 
quickly within. Avluela hesitated. 
It was a long moment before she 
entered; she paused a moment on 
the very threshold, seemingly 
buffeted by the wind that blew 
along the line of demarcation between the outer world and the 
pocket universe in wlncE we 
stood. 
An inner compartment Held tKe 
MoutH of Trutk itself. TKe line 
extended toward it, and a solemn 
Indexer was controlling tHe flow 
of entry to tKe tabernacle. It was 
a wHile before we tKree were permitted to go in. We found ourselves before tKe ferocious Head 
of a monster in HigH relief, affixed to an ancient wall pockmarked by time. TKe monster’s jaws 
gaped; tKe open moutK was a 
dark and sinister Kole. Gormon 
nodded, inspecting it, as tKougK 
Ke seemed pleased to find it exactly as Ke Kad tKougKt it would 
be. 
“WKat do we do?” Avluela 
asked. 
Gormon said, “WatcKer, put 
your rigKt Hand into tKe MoutK 
of TrutH.” 
Frowning, I complied. 
“Now,” said Gormon, “one of 
us asks a question. You must answer it. If you speak anytKing 
but tKe trutK, tKe moutK will close 
and sever your Hand.” 
“No!” Avluela cried. 
T stared uneasily at tKe stone 
jaws rimming my wrist. A 
WatcKer witKout botK Kis Hands 
is a man witKout a craft; in Second Cycle days one migKt obtain 
a prostKesis more artful tKan 
one’s original Hand, but tKe Second Cycle Kad long ago been conNIGHTWINGS 
eluded, and sucK niceties were 
not to be purchased on EartK 
nowadays. 
“How is sucK a thing possible?” 
I asked. 
“TKe Will is unusually strong 
in tKese precincts,” Gormon replied. “It distinguishes sternly between trutK and untrutH. To tKe 
rear of this wall sleeps a trio of 
Somnambulists tKrougK wKom 
tiie Will speaks, and tKey control 
tKe MoutK. Do you fear tKe Will, 
WatcKer?” 
“I fear my own tongue.” 
“Be brave. Never Has a lie been 
told before this wall. Never Kas 
a Kand been lost.” 
“Go ahead, then,” I said. “WKo 
will ask me a question?” 
“I,” said Gormon. “Tell me, 
WatcKer: all pretense aside, 
would you say that a life spent in 
Watching Kas been a life spent 
wisely?” 
I was silent a long moment, rotating my thoughts, eyeing tKe 
jaws. 
At length I said, “To devote 
one’s self to vigilance on behalf of 
one’s fellow man is perhaps tKe 
noblest purpose one can serve.” 
“Careful!” Gormon cried in 
alarm. 
“I am not finished,” I said. 
“Go on.” 
“But to devote one’s self to vigilance when the enemy is an imaginary one is idle, and to congratulate one’s self for looking long 
and well for a foe that is not 
coming is foolish and sinful. My 
life has been a waste.” 
The jaws of the Mouth' of 
Truth did not quiver. 
I removed my Hand. I stared 
at it as though it Had newly 
sprouted from my wrist. I felt 
suddenly several cycles old. Avluela, her eyes wide, Her Hands to 
her lips, seemed shocked by wKat 
I had said. My own words appeared to hang congealed in the 
air before the hideous idol. 
“Spoken Honestly,” said Gormon, “although without much 
mercy for yourself. You judge 
yourself too Harshly, Watcher.” 
“I spoke to save my hand,” I 
said. “Would you have had me 
lie?” 
He smiled. To Avluela the 
Changeling said, “Now it’s your 
turn.” 
X visibly frightened, the little 
^ Flier approached the Mouth. 
Her dainty hand trembled as she 
inserted it between the slabs of 
cold stone. I fought back an urge 
to rush toward her and pull her 
free of that devilish grimacing 
head. 
“Who will question Her?” I 
asked. 
“I,” said Gormon. 
Avluela’s wings stirred faintly 
beneath Her garments. Her face 
grew pale; her nostrils flickered, 
her upper lip slid over the lower 
40 
one. She stood slouched against 
the wall, staring in horror at the 
termination of her arm. Outside 
the chamber vague faces peered at 
us, lips moved in what no doubt 
were expressions of impatience 
over our lengthy visit to the 
Mouth; but we heard nothing. 
The atmosphere around us was 
warm and clammy, with a musty 
tang like that which would come 
from a well that was driven 
through the structure of Time. 
Gormon said slowly, “This 
night past you allowed your body 
to be possessed by the Prince of 
Roum. Before that, you granted 
yourself to the Changeling Gormon, although such liaisons are 
forbidden by custom and law. 
Much prior to that you were the 
mate of a Flier, now deceased. 
You may have had other men, 
but I know notffing of them, and 
for the purposes of my question 
they are not relevant. Tell me 
this, Avluela: which of the three 
gave you the most intense physical pleasure, which of the three 
aroused your deepest emotions, 
and which of the three would you 
choose as a mate, if you were 
choosing a mate?” 
I wanted to protest that the 
Changeling had asked Her tluee 
questions, not one, and so had 
taken unfair advantage. But I 
had no chance to speak, because 
Avluela replied unfalteringly, 
hand wedged deep into the Mouth 
of TrutK, “Ttie Prince of Roum 
gave me greater pleasure of the 
body than I Had ever known before, but Ke is cold and cruel, and 
I despise Him. My dead Flier I 
loved more deeply than any person before or since, but Ke was 
weak, and I would not Have wanted a weakling as a mate. You, 
Gormon, seem almost a stranger 
to me even now, and I feel tKat 
I know neitKer your body nor 
your soul, and yet, tKougH tKe 
gulf between us is so wide, it is 
you witK wKom I would spend 
my days to come.” 
SKe drew Ker Hand from tKe 
MoutK of l*rutH. 
“Well spoken!” said Gormon, 
though the accuracy of Ker words 
Had clearly wounded as well as 
pleased him. “Suddenly you find 
eloquence, eK, wKen tKe circumstances demand it? And now tKe 
turn is mine to risk my Hand.” 
TTe neared the MoutK. I said, 
“You Have asked tKe first 
two questions. Do you wisK to 
finish tKe job and ask tKe third 
as well?” 
“Hardly,” Ke said. He made a 
negligent gesture witH His free 
Hand. “Put your Heads together 
and agree on a joint question.” 
Avluela and I conferred. WitK 
uncKaracteristic forwardness sKe 
proposed a question; and since it 
was tKe one I would Have asked, 
I accepted and told Ker to ask it. 
NIGHTWINGS 
She said, “WKen we stood before tKe globe of the world, Gormon, I asked you to sKow me tKe 
place wKere you were bom, and 
you said you were unable to find 
it on tKe map. TKat seemed most 
strange. Tell me now: are you 
wKat you say you are, a Changeling v^o wanders the world?” 
He replied, “I am not.” 
In a sense Ke Had satisfied the 
question as Avluela had phrased 
it; but it went without saying 
that his reply was inadequate, 
and without removing his hand 
from tKe MoutK of Truth' he continued, “I did not show my birthplace to you on the globe because 
I was bom nowhere on this globe, 
but on a world of a star I must 
not name. I am no Changeling 
in your meaning of tKe word, 
tKougH by some definitions I am, 
for my body is somewhat disguised, and on my own world I 
wear a different flesK. I Have lived Here ten years.” 
“WKat was your purpose in 
coming to EartH?” I asked. 
“I am obliged only to answer 
one question,” said Gormon. TKen 
Ke smiled. “But I give you an 
answer an3nvay: I was sent to 
EartH in tKe capacity of a military observer, to prepare tKe way 
for tKe invasion for which’ you 
have Watched so long and in 
wKicK you Have ceased to believe, 
and which will be upon you in a 
matter now of some hours.” 
“Lies!” I bellowed “All lies!” 
Gormon laugh'ed. And drew his 
hand from th'e MoutH of Truth, 
intact, unharmed. 
IX 
■^"umb with confusion, I fled 
~ with my cart of instruments 
from that gleaming ^sphere and 
emerged into a street suddenly 
cold and dark. Night Had come 
with winter’s swiftness; it was almost the ninth Hour, and almost 
the time for me to Watch once 
more. 
Gormon’s mockery thundered 
in my brain. He had arranged 
everything: He had maneuvered 
us into the MoutH of Truth, he 
had wrung a confession of lost 
faith from me and a confession 
of a different sort from Avluela, 
he had mercilessly volunteered 
information He need not Have revealed, spoken words calculated 
to split me to the core. 
Was the MoutH of Truth a 
fraud? Could Gormon lie and 
emerge imscatHed? 
Never since I first took up my 
tasks had I Watched at anything 
but my appointed hours. This 
was a time of crumbling realities; 
I could not wait for the ninth 
hour to come round. Crouching 
in the windy street, I opened my 
cart, readied my equipment and 
sank like a diver into Watchfulness. 
My amplified consciousness 
roared toward the stars. 
Godlike I roamed infinity. I felt 
the rush of the solar wind, but I 
was no Flier to be Hurled to destruction by that pressure, and I 
soared past it, beyond the reach 
of those angry particles of light, 
into the blackness at the edge of 
the sun’s dominion. Down upon 
me there beat a different pressure. 
Starships coming near. 
Not the tourist lines, bringing 
sightseers to gape at our diminished world. Not the registered 
mercantile transport vessels, nor 
the scoopships that collect the 
interstellar vapors, nor the resort 
craft on their h3rperbolic orbits. 
These were military craft, dark, 
alien, menacing. I could not tell 
their number; I knew only that 
they sped Earthward at many 
lights, nudging a cone of deflected 
energies before them, and it was 
that cone than I sensed, that I 
Had felt also the night before, 
booming into my mind through 
my instruments, engulfing me like 
a cube of crystal through which 
stress patterns play and shine. 
A ll my life I Had Watched for 
this. 
I Had been trained to sense it. 
I had prayed that I never would 
sense it, and then in my emptiness I had prayed that I would 
sense it, and then I Had ceased to 
believe in it. And then by grace 
of tEe CGangeling Gormon I Had 
sensed it after all, WatcHing 
aHead of my Hour, croucHing in a 
cold RoumisH street just outside 
tHe MoutH of TrutH. 
In His training a WatcHer is 
instructed to break from his 
WatcGfulness as soon as His observations are confirmed by a 
careful check, so tKat He can 
sound tHe alarm. Obediently I 
made my check, shifting from one 
channel to another to another, 
triangulating and still picking up 
that foreboding sensation of titanic force rushing upon Earth’ at 
unimaginable speed. 
Either I was deceived, or the 
invasion was come. But I could 
not shake from my trance t© give 
the alarm. 
Lingeringly, lovingly, I drank 
in the sensory data for what 
seemed like Hours. I fondled my 
equipment, draining from it the 
total affirmation of faith that my 
readings gave me. Dimly I warned myself that I was wasting vital time, that it was my duty to 
leave this lewd caressing of destiny and summon the Defenders. 
And at last I burst free of 
Watchfulness and returned to the 
world I was guarding. 
Avluela was beside me, dazed, 
terrified, her knuckles to Her 
teeth, her eyes blank. 
“Watcher! Watcher, do you 
hear me? Wh'afs happening? 
What’s going to Happen?” 
NIGHTWINGS 
“THe invasion,” I said. “How 
long was I under?” 
“About half a minute. I don’t 
know. Your eyes were closed. I 
thought you were dead.” 
“Gormon was speaking the 
truth! The invasion is almost 
here. Where is He? Where did He 
go?” 
“He vanished as we came away 
from that place with the MoutH,” 
Avluela whispered. “Watcher, I’m 
frightened. I feel ever3dhing collapsing. I have to fly — I can’t 
stay down Here now!” 
“Wait,” I said, clutching at Her 
and missing Her arm. “Don’t .go 
now. First I have to give the 
alarm, and then — ” 
But she was already stripping 
off her clothing. Bare to the waist, 
her pale body gleamed in the evening light, while about us people 
were rushing to and fro in ignorance of all that was about to occur. I wanted to keep Avluela beside me, but I could delay no 
longer in giving the alarm, and I 
turned away from Her, back to 
my cart. 
As though caught up in a 
dream bom of overripe longings I 
reached for the node that I Had 
never used, the one that would 
send forth a planetwide alert to 
the Defenders. 
Had the alarm already been 
given? Had some other Watcher 
sensed what I Had sensed and, 
less paralyzed by bewilderment 
and doubt, performed a WatcKer’s final task? 
No. No. For then I would be 
hearing the sirens’ sKriek reverberating from the orbiting loudspeakers above the city. 
I touched the node. From the 
comer of my eye I saw Avluela, 
free of her encumbrances now, 
kneeling to say Her words, filling 
her tender wings witH strength. 
In a moment she would be in the 
air, beyond my grasp. 
With a single svnft tug I activated the alarm. 
I n that instant I became aware 
of a burly figure striding toward us. Gormon, I thought; and 
as I rose from my equipment I 
reached out to Him, wanting to 
seize him and Hold Him fast. But 
he who approached was not Gormon but some officious doughfaced Servitor who said to Avluela, “Go easy. Flier, let your 
wings drop. The Prince of Roum 
sends me to bring you to His presence.” 
He grappled with Her. Her little breasts Heaved; Her eyes flashed anger at Him. 
“Let go of me! I’m going to 
fly!” ^ 
“The Prince of Roum summons 
you,” tKe Servitor said, enclosing 
her in His Heavy arms. 
“The Prince of Roum will Have 
other distractions tonigHt,” I said. 
“He’ll Have no need of Her.” 
As I spoke the sirens began to 
sing from the skies. 
The Servitor released Her. His 
moutH worked noiselessly for an 
instant; He made one of the protective gestures of tKe Will; he 
looked skyward and grunted, 
“TKe alarm! Who gave tKe 
alarm? You, old Watcher?” 
Figures rusKed about insanely 
in the streets. 
Avluela, freed, sped past me — 
on foot, her wings but Kalf-furled — and was swallowed up in 
the surging tKrong. Over tKe terrifying sound of the sirens came 
booming messages from the public annunciators, giving instructions for defense and safety. A 
lanky man with tKe mark of the 
guild of Defenders upon lus cheek 
rusKed up to me, shouted words 
too incoherent to be understood 
and sped on down the street. The 
world seemed to Have gone mad. 
Only I remained calm. I looked 
to the skies, half expecting to see 
the invaders’ black sKips already 
hovering above tKe towers of 
Roum. But I saw nothing except 
the Hovering nigHtligHts and the 
other objects one might expect 
overhead. 
“Gormon?” I called. “Avluela?” 
I was alone. 
A strange emptiness swept over 
me. I Had given tKe alarm. TKe 
invaders were on th'eir way; I Had 
lost my occupation. There was no 
need of Watchers now. 
Almost lovingly I toucHed tlie 
worn cart tKat had been my companion for so many years. I ran 
my fingers over its stained and 
pitted instruments; and then I 
looked away, abandoning it, and 
went down tKe dark streets cartless, burdenless, a man whose life 
had found and lost meaning in 
the same instant. And about me 
raged chaos. 
X 
Tt was understood that when the 
moment of Earth’s final battle arrived, all guilds would be 
mobilized, the Watchers alone exempted. We who had manned the 
perimeter of defense for so long 
had no part in the strategy of 
combat; we were discharged by 
the giving of a true alarm. Now 
it was the time of the guild of 
Defenders to show its capabilities. 
They had planned for Half a cycle what they would do in time 
of war. What plans would they 
call forth now? WHat deeds would 
they direct? 
My only concern was to return 
to the royal hostelry and wait 
out the crisis. It was hopeless to 
think of finding Avluela, and I 
pummelled myself savagely for 
Having let her slip away like 
that, naked and without a protector, in that confused moment. 
Where would she go? Who would 
shield her? 
NIGHTWINGS 
A fellow Watcher, pulling his 
cart madly along, nearly collided 
with me. “Careful!” I snapped. 
He looked up, breathless, stunned. “Is it true?” he asked. “The 
alarm?” 
“Can’t you hear?” 
“But is it real?” 
I pointed to his cart. “You 
know how to find that out.” 
“They say the man who gave 
the alarm was drunk, an old foel 
who was turned away from the 
inn yesterday?” 
“It could be so,” I admitted. 
“But if the alarm is real — !” 
Smiling, I said, “If it is, now 
we all may rest. Good day to 
you. Watcher.” 
“Your cart! Where’s your 
cart?” he shouted at me. 
But I had moved past Him, toward the mighty carven stone pillar of some relic of Imperial 
Roum. 
Ancient images were carved on 
that pillar: battles and victories, 
foreign monarchs marched in the 
chains of disgrace through the 
streets of Roum, triumphant eagles celebrating imperial grandeur. In my strange new calmness 
I stood a while before the column 
of stone, admiring its elegant engravings. Toward me rushed a 
frenzied figure whom I recognized as the Rememberer Basil; I 
hailed him, saying, “How timely 
you come! Do me the kindness of 
explaining these images, Remem 
45 
berer. TKey fascinate me, and my 
curiosity is aroused.” 
“Are you insane? Can’t you 
Bear tKe alarm?” 
“I gave tKe alarm, Rememberer.” 
‘Tlee, tKen! Invaders come! We 
must figKt!” 
“Not I, Basil. Now my time is 
over. Tell me of tHese images. 
TKese beaten kings, tKese broken 
emperors. Surely a man of your 
years will not be doing battle.” 
“All are mobilized now!” 
“All but WatcKers,” I said. 
“Take a moment. Yearning for 
tKe past is bom in me. Gormon 
Kas vanisKed; be my guide to 
tKese lost cycles.” 
'^Ke Rememberer sKook Kis 
Kead wildly, circled around 
me, and tried to get away. I made 
a lunge at Kim, Hoping to seize 
his skinny arm and pin Kim to 
the spot; but Ke eluded me and I 
caught only His dark sKawl, 
wKicK pulled free and came loose 
in my Hands. TKen Ke was gone, 
his spindly limbs pumping madly 
as Ke fled down tKe street and 
left my view. 
I sKrugged and examined tKe 
sKawl I Had so imexpectedly acquired. It was sKot ^ougK witH 
glimmering tKreads of metal, arranged in intricate patterns tKat 
teased tKe eye: it seemed to me 
tKat eacK strand disappeared into 
tKe weave of tKe fabric, only to 
46 
reappear at some improbable 
point, like the lineage of dynasties 
unexpectedly revived in distant 
cities. TKe workmansHip was superb. Idly I draped tKe sKawl 
about my shoulders. 
I walked on. 
My legs, wKicK Had been on 
tKe verge of failing me earlier in 
tKe day, now served me well. In 
renewed youtHfulness I made my 
way tKrougH tKe cKaotic city, 
finding no difficulties about 
cKoosing my route. I Headed for 
tKe river, tKen crossed it and, on 
tKe Tver’s far side, sougKt tKe 
palace of tKe Prince. TKe nigKt 
had deepened, for most ligKts 
were extinguisKed under tKe mobilization orders, and from time 
to time a dull boom signaled tKe 
explosion of a screening bomb 
overKead, liberating clouds of 
murk tKat shielded tKe city from 
most forms of long-range scrutiny. TKere were fewer pedestrians in tKe streets. The sirens still 
cried out Atop tKe buildings tKe 
defensive installations were going 
into action; I Heard the bleeping 
sounds of repellors warming up 
and saw long spidery arms of 
amplification booms swinging 
from tower to tower as tKey linked for maximiun output. I Had 
no doubt now tKat the invasion 
actually was coming. My own 
instruments might Have been fouled by inner confusion, but they 
would not Have proceeded tKus 
far witK tKe mobilization if tfie 
initial report Had not been confirmed by the findings of Hundreds of other members of my 
guild. 
As I neared tKe palace a pair 
of breathless Rememberers sped 
toward me, tHeir shawls flapping 
behind them. They called to me 
in words I did not comprehend 
— some code of their guild, I 
realized, recollecting that I wore 
Basil’s shawl. I could not reply, 
and they rushed upon me, still 
gabbling; and switching to the 
language of ordinary men they 
said, “What is the matter with 
you? To your post! We must record! We must comment! We 
must observe!” 
“You mistake me,” I said mildly. “I keep this sKawl only for 
your brother Basil, who left it in 
my care. I Have no post to guard 
at this time.” 
“A Watcher,” they cried in unison and cursed me separately 
and ran on. I laughed and went 
to the palace. 
Tts gates stood open. TKe neuters 
who had guarded the outer 
portal were gone, as were the two 
Indexers who had stood just 
within the door. The beggars that 
had thronged the vast plaza had 
jostled their way into the building itself to seek shelter; this had 
awakened the anger of the licensed hereditary mendicants whose 
NIGHTWINGS 
customary stations were in that 
part of the building, and they had 
fallen upon the inflowing refugees with fury and unexpected 
strength. I saw cripples lashing 
out with their crutches Held as 
clubs; I saw blind men landing 
blows with suspicious accuracy; 
meek penitents were wielding a 
variety of weapons ranging from 
stilettos to sonic pistols. Holding 
myself aloof from this shameless 
spectacle I penetrated to the inner recesses of the palace, peering 
into chapels where I saw Pilgrims 
beseeching the blessings of the 
Will and Communicants desperately seeking spiritual guidance 
as to the outcome of the coming 
conflict 
Abruptly I heard the blare of 
trumpets and cries of, “Make 
way! Make way!” 
A file of sturdy Servitors 
marched into the palace, striding 
toward the Prince’s chambers in 
the apse. Several of them held a 
struggling, kicking, frantic figure 
with half -unfolded wings: Avluela! I called out to her, but my 
voice died in the din, nor could 
I reach her. The Servitors shoved 
me aside. The procession vanished into the princely chambers. I 
caught a final glimpse of the little 
Flier, pale and small in the grip 
of her captors, and then she was 
gone once more. 
I seized a bumbling neuter who 
had been moving uncertainly. 
“THat Flier! WKy was sKe 
brougEt Here?” 
“He — Ke — tKey — ” 
“Tell me!” 
“TKe Prince — His woman — 
in Kis cHariot — He — Be — tHey 
— tKe invaders — ” 
I pusBed tBe flabby creature 
aside and rusBed toward tBe apse. 
A brazen wall ten times my own 
BeigBt confronted me. I pounded 
on it. “Avluela!” I sBouted 
• Hoarsely. “Av . iu . ela . .!” 
I was neitHer tBrust away nor 
admitted. I was ignored. TBe Bedlam at tiie western doors of tBe 
palace Had extended itself now 
to tBe nave and aisles, and as tBe 
ragged beggars boiled toward me 
I executed a quick turn and found 
myself passing tHrougH one of tBe 
side doors of tBe palace. 
T stood in tBe courtyard tBat led 
* to tBe royal Hostelry, suspended and passive. A strange 
' electricity crackled in tiie air. I 
assumed it was an emanation 
from one of Roum’s defense installations, some kind of beam 
derigned to screen tiie city from 
attack. But an instant later I 
realized tBat it presaged tiie actual arrival of tiie invaders. 
StarsBips blazed in tiie Heavens. 
WBen I Bad perceived tiiem in 
my Watclfing tiiey Had appeared 
black against tBe infinite blackness, but now tHey burned witH 
tBe radiance of suns. A stream of 
48 
brigHt, Hard, jewel-like globes bedecked tiie sky; they were ranged 
side by side, stretching from east 
to west in a continuous band, 
filling all tiie celestial arcB, and 
as tiiey erupted simultaneously 
into being it seemed to me tBat I 
Beard tiie crasH and tiirob of an 
invisible sympHony Heralding tiie 
arrival of tBe conquerors of EartH, 
I do not know Bow far above 
me tiie starsBips were, nor How 
many of tHem Hovered tHere, nor 
any of tBe details of tiieir design. 
I know only tiiat in sudden massive majesty tiiey were tHere. If 
I Had been a Defender my soul 
would Have withered instantly at 
tiie sigHt. 
Across tBe Beavens sfiot ligHt of 
many Hues. TBe battle Had been 
joined. I could not compreHend 
tiie actions of our warriors, and 
I was equally baffled by tfie maneuvers of ffiose wHo Had come 
to take possession of our Historycrusted but time-diminisHed planet. To my sHame I felt not only 
out of tfie struggle but above tiie 
struggle, as tiiougH tfiis were no 
quarrel of mine. I wanted Avluela beside me, and sHe was somewfiere within tiie depths of tfie 
palace of tiie Prince of Roum. 
Even Gormon would Have been 
a comfort now, Gormon tiie 
CHangeling, Gormon tfie spy, 
Gormon the monstrous betrayer 
of our world. 
Gigantic amplified voices b'elGALAXY 
lowed, “Make way for the Prince 
of Roum! The Prince of Roum 
leads the Defenders in the battle 
for the fatherworld!” 
From the palace emerged a 
shining vehicle the shape of a 
teardrop, in whose bright-metalled roof a transparent sheet had 
been mounted so that all the populace could see and take heart in 
the presence of the ruler. At the 
controls of the vehicle sat the 
Prince of Roum, proudly erect. 
His cruel, youthful features fixed 
in harsh determination; and beside him, robed like an empress, 
I beheld the slight figure of the 
Flier Avluela. She seemed in a 
trance. 
The royal chariot soared upward and was lost in the darkness. 
It seemed to me that a second 
vehicle appeared and followed its 
path, and that the Prince’s reappeared, and that the two flew in 
tight circles, apparently locked in 
combat. Clouds of blue sparks 
wrapped both chariots now; and 
then they swimg high and far and 
were lost to me behind one of the 
hills of Roum. 
V^as the battle raging all over 
^ ’ the planet, now? Was Perris in jeopardy, and Holy Jorslem, 
and even the sleepy isles of the 
Lost Continents? Did starships 
hover everywhere? I did not 
know. I perceived events in only 
NIGHTWINGS 
one small segment of the sky 
over Roum, and even there my 
awareness of what was taking 
place was dim, uncertain and illinformed. There were momentary 
flashes of light in which I saw 
battalions of Fliers streaming 
across the sky; and then darkness returned as though a velvet 
shroud had been hurled over the 
city. In fitful bursts I saw the 
great machines of our defense 
speaking from the tops of ®ur 
towers; and yet I saw the starships untouched, unharmed, unmoved above. The courtyard in 
which I stood was deserted, but 
in the distance I Heard voices, 
full of fear and foreboding, 
shouting in tinny tones that might 
have been the screeching of birds. 
Occasionally there came a booming sound that rocked all the 
city. 
Once a platoon of Somnambulists was driven past where I was. 
In the plaza fronting the palace 
I observed what appeared to be 
an array of Clowns unfolding 
some sort of sparkling netting of 
a military look. By wie flash of 
lightning I was able to see a trio 
of Rememberers soaring aloft on 
a gravity plate, making copious 
notes of all that elapsed. It seemed — I was not sure — that the 
vehicle of the Prince of Roum returned, speeding across the sky 
with its pursuer clinging close. 
“Avluela,” I whispered, as the 
twin dots of lights left my sight. 
Were the starships disgorging 
troops? Did colossal pylons of 
force spiral down from those orbiting brightnesses to touch the 
surface of the Earth? Why had 
the Prince seized Avluela? Where 
was Gormon? What were our Defenders doing? Why were the enemy ships not blasted from the 
sky? 
Rooted to the ancient cobbles 
of the courtyard, I observed the 
cosmic battle in total lack of understanding throughout the long 
night. 
Dawn came. Strands of pale 
light looped from tower to tower. 
I touched fingers to my eyes, realizing that I must have slept 
while standing. Perhaps I should 
apply for membership in the guild 
of Somnambulists, I told myself 
lightly. I put my hands to the 
Rememberer’s shawl about my 
shoulders, wondering how I had 
managed to acquire it, and the 
answer came. 
I looked toward the sky. 
The alien starships were gone. 
I saw only the ordinary morning 
sky, gray with pinkness breaking 
through. I felt the jolt of compulsion and looked about for my 
cart, and reminded myself that 
I need do no more Watching, and 
I felt more empty than one would 
ordinarily feel at such an hour. 
Was the battle over? 
Had the enemy been conquered? 
50 
Were the ships of the invaders 
blasted from the sky and lying 
in charred ruin outside Roum? 
All was silent. I heard no more 
celestial symphonies. Then, ouf 
of the eerie stillness there came a 
new sound, a rumbling noise as of 
wheeled vehicles passing through 
the streets of the city. And the 
invisible Musicians played one 
final note, deep and resonant, 
which trailed away jaggedly as 
though every string Had been 
broken at once. 
Over the speakers used for public announcements came quiet 
words : 
“Roum is fallen. Roum is fallen.” 
XI 
T he royal hostelry was untended. Neuters and members of 
the servant guilds all had fled. 
Defenders, Masters and Dominators must Have perished honorably in combat. Basil the Rememberer was nowhere about; 
likewise none of His brethren. I 
went to my room, cleansed and 
refreshed and fed myself, gathered my few possessions and bade 
fareweU to the luxuries I had 
known so briefly. I regretted that 
I had had such a short time to 
visit Roum; but at least Gormon 
Had been a most excellent guide, 
and I had seen a great deal. 
Now I proposed to move on. 
It did not seem prudent to remain in a conquered city. My 
room’s tHinking cap did not respond to my queries, and so I did 
not know wHat tHe extent of tBe 
defeat was, Here or in otHer regions, but it was evident to me 
tHat Roum at least Had passed 
from Human control, and I wisHed to depart quickly. I weigHed 
the tKough't of going to Jorslem, 
as that tall pilgrim Had suggested^ 
upon my entry into Roum. But 
tHen I reflected and cHose a westward route, toward Perris, wHicH 
not only was closer but Held tHe 
Headquarters of tHe Rememberers. 
My own occupation Had been 
destroyed; but on this first morning of Eartfi’s conquest I felt a 
sudden powerful and strange 
yearning to offer myself Humbly 
to tHe Rememberers and seek 
witfi tHem knowledge of our more 
glittering yesterdays. 
At midday I left tHe Hostelry. 
I walked first to tHe palace, wHicfi 
still stood open. THe beggars lay 
strewn about, some drugged, some 
sleeping, most dead; from tHe 
crude manner of tHeir deatH I 
saw tHat tHey must Have slain 
one anotHer in tHeir panic and 
frenzy. A despondent-looking Indexer squatted beside tHe tHree 
skulls of tHe interrogation fixture 
in tHe cHapel. As I entered He 
said, “No use. THe brains do not 
reply.” 
NIGHTWINGS 
“How goes it witH tHe Prince 
of Roum?” 
“Dead. THe invaders sHot Him 
from tfie sky.” 
“A young Flier rode beside Him. 
WHat do you know of Her?” 
“Notffing. Dead, I suppose.” 
“And tHe city?” 
“Fallen. Invaders are everywBere.” 
“Killing?” 
“Not even looting,” tfie Indexer 
said. “THey are most gentle. Tfiey 
Have collected us.” 
“In Roum alone, or everywHere?” 
THe man sHrugged. He began 
to rock rHytHmically Hack and 
fortH. I let Him be, and walked 
deeper into tHe palace. To my 
surprise, tHe imperial cHamHers 
of tHe Prince were unsealed. I 
went witHin, awed b'y tHe sumptuous luxury of tHe Hangings, tHe 
draperies, tHe ligHts, tHe fumisHings. I passed from room to room, 
coming at last to tHe royal bed, 
wHose coverlet was tHe flesH of a 
colossal bivalve of tHe planet of 
anotHer star, and as tHe sHell 
yawned for me I toucHed tHe infinitely soft fabric imder wHicH 
tHe Prince of Roum Had lain, and 
I recalled tHat Avluela too Had 
lain Here, and if I Had been a 
younger man I would certainly 
Have wept. 
I left tHe palace and slowly 
crossed tfie plaza to begin my 
journey toward Perris. 
A s I departed I had my first 
glimpse of our conquerors. A 
vehicle of alien design drew up at 
the plaza’s rim, and perhaps a 
dozen figures emerged. 
They might almost Have been 
human. They were tall and broad, 
deep-chested, as Gormon Had 
been, and only the extreme length 
of their arms marked them instantly as alien. Their skins were 
of strange texture, and if I had 
been closer I suspect I would have 
seen eyes and lips and nostrils 
that were not of a human design. 
Taking no notice of me, they 
crossed the plaza, walking in a 
curious loosejointed loping way 
that reminded me irresistibly of 
Gormon’s stride, and entered the 
palace. They seemed neither 
swaggering nor belligerent. 
Sightseers. Majestic Roum once 
more exerted its magnetism upon 
strangers. 
Leaving our new masters to 
their amusement, I walked off, 
toward the outskirts of the city. 
The bleakness of eternal winter 
crept into my soul. I wondered: 
did I feel sorrow that Roum had 
fallen? Or did I mourn the loss 
of Avluela? Or was it only that 
I now missed three successive 
Watchings, and like an addict I 
was experiencing the pangs of 
withdrawal? 
It was all of these that pained 
me, I decided. But mostly the 
last. 
No one was abroad in the city 
as I made for the gates. Fear of 
the masters kept the Roumish in 
hiding, I supposed. From time to 
time one of the alien vehicles 
hummed past, but I was unmolested. I came to the city’s western gate late in the afternoon. It 
was open, revealing to me a gently rising hill on whose breast 
rose trees with dark green crowns. 
I passed through, and saw a short 
distance beyond the gate the figure of a Pilgrim who was shuffling slowly away from the city. 
His faltering, uncertain walk 
seemed strange to me, for not 
even his thick brown robes could 
hide the strength and youth of 
His body; He stood erect, his 
shoulders square and his back 
straight, and yet He walked with 
the Hesitating, trembling step of 
an old man. When I drew abreast 
of him and peered under his hood 
I understood, for affixed to the 
bronze mask all Pilgrims wear 
was a reverberator, sucH as is used by blind men to warn them of 
obstacles and Hazards. He became 
aware of me and said, “I am a 
sightless Rlgrim. I pray you do 
not molest me.” 
It was not a Pilgrim’s voice. It 
was a strong and harsh and imperious voice. 
T replied, “I molest no one. I am 
a Watcher who Has lost hisoccupation this night past.” 
“Many occupations were lost 
tliis nigtit past, Watcfier.” 
“Surely not a Pilgrim’s.” 
“No,” Ke said. “Not a Pilgrim’s.” 
“WKere are you found?” 
“Away from Roum.” 
“No particular destination?” 
“No,” tKe Pilgrim said. “None. 
I will wander.” 
“PerUaps we sKould wander togetKer,” I said, for it is accounted 
good luck to travel witH a Pilgrim, and, sHorn of my Flier and 
my CHangeling, I would otKerwise Have traveled alone. “My 
destination is Perris. Will you 
come?” 
“TKere as well as anywSere 
else,” Ke said bitterly. “Yes. We 
will go to Perris togetHer. But 
wEat business does a WatcKer 
Have tHere?” 
“A WatcKer Kas no business 
an3rwKere. I go to Perris to offer 
msrself in service to tKe Rememberers.” 
“AE.” 
“WitK EartE fallen, I wisB to 
learn more of EartE in its pride.” 
“Is all EartE fallen, tKen, and 
not only Roum?” 
“I think it is so,” I said. 
“AB,” replied the Pilgrim. 
“Ah!” 
He fell silent, and we went onward. I gave Him my arm, and 
now Ee sKuffled no longer, but 
moved witE a young man’s brisk 
stride. From time to time Ke utNIGHTWINGS 
tered wEat might have been a 
sigK or a smothered sob. When I 
asked Him details of Eis Pilgrimage, Ee answered obliquely or not 
at all. When we were an Bout’s 
journey outside Roum, and already amid forests, Ee said suddenly, “Tffis mask gives me pain. 
Will you Kelp me adjust it?” 
To my amazement Ee began to 
remove it I gasped, for it is forbidden for a Pilgrim to reveal Eis 
face. Had Ke forgotten tEat I was 
not sightless too? 
^ the mask came away He 
said, “You will not welcome this 
sigKt.” 
TEe bronze grillwork slipped 
down from IBs forehead, and I 
saw first eyes tEat Bad been newly blinded, gaping Holes where no 
surgeon’s knife but possibly 
tKrusting fingers Ead penetrated, 
and tKen tEe sKarp regal nose, 
and finally tEe quirked, taut lips 
of tKe Prince of Roum. 
“Your majesty!” I cried. 
Trails of dried blood ran down 
Eis cEeeks. About tKe raw sockets tKemselves were smears of 
ointment. He felt little pain, for 
Ee Bad killed it witK those green 
smears, but tKe pain that burst 
througH me was real and potent. 
“Majesty no longer,” Ke said. 
“Help me witE tKe mask!” His 
Hands trembled as Ke Held it 
fortH. “TKese flanges must be 
widened. TEey press cruelly at 
my cKeeks. Here — here — ” 
Q uickly I made tKe adjustments, so tKat I would not 
Have to see Es face for long. 
He replaced tKe mask. 
In silence we continued. I Had 
no way of making small talk 
witH sucH a man. It would be a 
somber joiomey for us to Perris; 
but I was committed now to be 
bis guide. I tKougKt of Gormon 
and Kow well Ke Had kept Kis 
vows. I tKougKt too of Avluela, 
and a Kundred times tKe words 
leaped to my tongue to ask tKe 
fallen Prince Kow His consort tKe 
Flier Had fared in tKe nigKt of 
defeat, and I did not ask. 
TwiligKt gatKered, but tKe sun 
still gleamed golden-red before us 
in tKe west. And suddenly I Halted, and made a Hoarse sound of 
surprise deep in my tKroat, as a* 
sHadow passed overKead. 
HigK above me Avluela soared. 
Her skin was stained by tKe colors of tKe sunset, and Her wings 
were spread to tKeir fullest, radiant witH every Hue of tKe spectrum. SKe was already at least 
tKe KeigKt of a Kundred men 
above tKe ground, and still climbing, and to Her I must Have been 
only a speck among tKe trees. 
“WKat is it?” tKe Prince asked. 
“WKat do you see?” 
“NotHing.” 
“Tell me wKat you see!” 
I could not deceive Kim. *I see 
a Flier, your Majesty. A slim girl 
far aloft.” 
NIGHTWINGS 
“TKen tKe night must Have 
come.” 
“No,” I said. “The sxm is still 
above tKe Horizon.” 
“How can tKat be? SKe can 
Have only nigKtwings. The sun 
would Kvirl Her to tKe ground.” 
1 Hesitated. I could not bring 
myself to explain Kow it was 
that Avluela flew by day, tKougK 
sKe Had only nigKtwings. I could 
not tell tKe Prince of Roum that 
beside Her, wingless, flew the invader Gormon, effortlessly moving tKrougH tKe air. His arm about 
Her tHin shoulders, steadying Her, 
supporting Her, Helping Her resist 
tKe pressure of tKe solar wind. 
“Well?” he demanded. “How 
does sKe fly by day?” 
“I do not know,” I said. “It is 
a mystery to me. TKere are many 
things nowadays I can no longer 
understand.” 
TKe Prince appeared to accept 
tKat. “Yes, WatcKer. Many things 
none of us can understand.” 
He fell once more into silence. 
I yearned to call out to Avluela, 
but I knew sKe could not and 
would not Hear me, and so I 
walked on toward tKe sunset, toward Perris, leading tKe blinded 
Prince. And over us Avluela and 
Gormon sped onward, limned 
sKarply against tKe day’s last 
glow, until they climbed so High' 
tKey were lost to my sight. 
— ROBERT SILVERBERG
SFGRAM_STOP_SILVERBERG
There are iimes when a man has fo be 
careful about who shares his dreams. 
ttT dreamed I was Jung last 
night,” said Saul Betatrom* 
heavily over breakfast, showing 
his long lashes to his current mistress, as he poured cream over his 
jam puff. 
“My, what fun!” Paidie exclaimed boredly. She wanted to 
go shopping in the bazaar, not sit 
or lie with Saul all the time; this 
Indian holiday was a real freakout. 
“Yeah, I was old Carl Jung, 
beard and all,” said Saul, whipping up the mixture on his plate, 
and spooning it toward his ample 
lips. “Boy, there ! was in some 
damned church or something in 
Switzerland, and this trapdoor 
opened at my feet — ” 
“Was I there?” 
“No, you weren’t there. I was 
alone, wearing this black robe, 
see, and I’d just formulated the 
concepts of psycho-analytic theory, and then this hole opened at 
my feet . 
Her interest ceased when she 
learned that she was excluded 
from the dream. Hazy memories 
of other lovers and sexual gymnasts floated into her mind; she 
couldn’t recall a one of them that 
had ever dreamed of her. She 
looked over the balcony at the 
hone-white beach, the line of 
canted palms, and the ocean. Paidie "told herself how much this 
was all costing Saul and tried 
to feel enjoyment. 
. and tliere at tlie bottom of 
tKe lowest cellar were a couple of 
skulls, sort of mouldering and indistinct . Saul was saying. 
He was Head of tKe New York 
brancH of Zadar SmitH World; 
suddenly recollecting tKe fact, Ke 
piled on more cream and added 
sugar to tKe puff. TKe turbaned 
waiter appeared, silent at Kis elbow, and refilled Kis cup from a 
silver coffee pot 
“. altKougK I’d climbed down 
so far, someKow I couldn’t bend 
down to reacK tKose skulls. Now 
wasn’t tKat a funny tKing?” 
“YeaK, crazy. Say, are we going down to tKe bazaar today, 
Saul?” 
Licking His spoon, Ke gave Her 
a Heavy stare. “TKey got riots in 
Kerala, you know tKat? TKe manager says it ain’t safe outside tKe 
KoKday strip.” 
“OH, Saul, let’s go see tKe bazaar! We can take a car.” 
“We’ll see.” Women never listened to you, Ke tKougKt TKey 
were okay, but tKey didn’t listen. 
You could pay men to listen to 
you, but you couldn’t pay women 
to listen to you. MigKt be an 
idea wortH developing tKere . 
He switcfied on one of tKe rings 
on Kis finger and said into it, 
“You can pay men to listen to 
wKat you say but you can’t pay 
women to Ksten to wHat you say.” 
Must be a way of casffing in on a 
tKougKt like tKat 
WHEN ! WAS VERY JUNG 
“/ listen to wKat you say, Saulie,” Paidie said. 
'^Key collected tKeir gear, put 
on dark glasses and refrigerator Kats and drifted tHrougH tKe 
foyer of tKe Hotel. On tfie way, 
Saul tossed down a few dollars — 
tKis Hotel Kad no nonsense witK 
rupees — and picked up a wing 
of cKicken from a spit to cKew. 
He was lean, witH a flat stomacK — a fine Hunk of masculine 
body, sKe Kad to admit “I don’t 
know Kow you keep your figure, 
Saul. WKy, you eat just about all 
tKe time and you Hardly Have any 
tummy at all to speak of. Me, I 
just diet and diet yet look at tlie 
size of my tKigKs.” SKe knew tKey 
were wortK looking at 
CKewing, Ke sloucKed out into 
tKe sun and stood gazing across 
tKe immense spread of tKe Arabian Ocean. He meditated on 
wKetKer to botKer answering, 
slewing Kis eyes round as He did 
so, taking in tHe scene. 
TKe great Hotel sprang up out 
of tKe sand like a fortress, its array of bulging balconies forming gun-turrets tKat ceaselessly 
watcKed tKe sea. Colored umbrellas on tKe balconies, gay as deatK, 
waited to gun down tKe sun wHen 
it set. 
TKe Hotel was inviolate, an 
implacable Koliday-anniKilator. 
Round it clustered low sKoddy 
buildings, the ramsEackle bulk of 
an electric generator witH auxiliary solar-power traps, tKe staff 
living-quarters, piles of old crates, 
a small sewage plant, old cars and 
old bicycles, a goat, an Indian 
charpoy with' a man lying on it, 
rubbish in pompous containers 
and builders’ materials. 
“You want to get a Crosswell’s 
Tape, honey. That’s my secret.” 
“What’s a Crosswell’s Tape, for 
God’s sake?” 
He winced. Zadar Smith World 
had handled Crosswell’s promotion for six-seven years now, and 
this fluff had never heard of th'eir 
Tape. 
“It’s a worm. A laboratorymutated version of a beef tapeworm. Thoroughly safe. Only 
needs replacing once every decade. Lodges in the small intestine, 
causes no discomfort. Enables 
you to eat up to fifty per eent 
more and keep your figure.” 
Behind the hotel was the twenty-foot-high wire barrier. It ran 
parallel to the sea for a long distance, as far as the eye could be 
bothered to see, in one direction; 
in the other, it angled off behind 
the hotel and ran down into the 
sea. Behind the wire barrier stood 
or sat solitary figures; or sometimes there was a little family 
group. Although there were possibly several hundreds of figures 
waiting behind the wire, they 
were motionless and well spaced, 
except round the gate, and so the 
58 
effect was one of solitude, rather 
than overcrowding. 
“Do you think one of those 
tapes would Help my thighs?” 
She got her camera ready to 
photograph the Indians behind 
the barrier. There was a cute little 
girl just standing there, not a 
stitch on, about four years old — 
you couldn’t tell, really — with a 
cute little fat pot on her. Make a 
nice picture. 
'^heir car slid up with a SikH 
-*■ driver, luxuriant behind beard 
and green turban. Paidie took a 
photograph of Him. The SikH 
smiled and opened the car door 
for her. He was hairy, wow! Saul 
didn’t have any Hair at all, not 
anywhere on his body. 
Saul caught and diagnosed her 
glance at the driver. “These guys 
have lousy org-ratings, honey, 
you know that? This guy has 
probably never done better than 
seven in His life.” 
In perfect English, the Sikh 
said, “Excuse me, sir, but there 
are famine riots in the bazaar 
every day this week. It may be 
dangerous to go there.” 
“The hotel must protect us. Are 
we supposed to stay behind that 
lousy chicken wire all week?” 
“You are in front of it, sir. It 
is there for your protection.” 
“Well, you protect us in the bazaar. I take it you Have a revolver, man?” 
“Yes sir. I Have one Here.” 
“You sKoot well?” 
“I am a very good sKot, sir, or 
I do not get this job.” 
“Let’s get going, then. Bazaar, 
and step on it!” 
As the big black car slid 
through the gates, Saul tossed his 
gnawed chicken bone out of the 
window. The ragged crowd scrabbling in the dust for it reminded 
him of his dream. 
“Wonder whose skulls they 
were? Guess it must have meant 
I was exploring the unconscious 
of mankind. You know, honey, I 
am a kind of genius. I invented 
the orgasm-rating system.” 
“What a rotten road they have 
herel Say, Saul, I’d hate to live 
in India, wouldn’t you? They’re 
so dirty and poor.” 
The poor and dirty were pressing close to the car, shouting or 
waving hands. The Sikh put his 
sandalled foot down and they 
bucked along the road. 
“They’re very under-developed, 
that’s why. Yeah, the org-rating 
system was my big contribution 
to Advertising. Made my name, 
sold a thousand products. Then 
the psychoanalytical guys came 
along and discovered my concept 
Had real bedrock psychological 
truth behind it! How you like 
that?” 
“Saul, darling, do you really 
think it is safe Here? Suppose 
your dream was a warning about 
WHEN \ WAS VERY JUNG 
venturing among primitive people 
or something?” 
'^he car drew up under an avenue of tattered deodar trees, 
where dogs scuttled and people 
squatted. There were a few stalls 
here and shrill music playing. 
Saul continued his lecture. 
“. Since then research has 
proved that there are different 
levels of sexual enjoyment, just 
like different levels of sleep. FertAsia estimates that eighty-five 
per cent of the population in this 
area, male and female, neVer do 
any better than a grade seven orgasm. Mow’d you like that? And 
in India alone . .” 
SAM MOSKOWITZ 
science 
Fiction 
Du Gasilgiit 
A History and Anthology 
of Science Fiction in the 
Popular Magazines, 
1891 to 1911 
Illustrated $6.95 
® WORLD PUBUSHING 
TIM— MI WW OW ~ 
Boredom drove her out of tKe 
car. She stood under tKe trees, a 
chubby blonde in KigK-h'eeled 
sandals, wearing almost notKing. 
The scarecrows round about Her 
had eyes of coal. They all ran to 
sell her anything they had, melons, brass statues, photos of little 
prls embracing goats, jewels, clay 
figurines, dried fisH. Paidie fell 
into a panic. 
“Saul, those dream skulls! Suppose they were ours, yours and 
mine!” 
The crowd pressed closer. She 
hit out with her handbag. One of 
the beggars touched her. Then 
they fell on her. Paidie was 
screaming. 
Saul was shaking the Sikh’s 
shoulders. “Shoot, shoot, you lunatic! Or give me the gun!” He 
was vividly aware of the noise 
and the heat and the stink. 
The Sikh started up the car, 
backed it swiftly away, turned, 
raced back for the hotel. “Better 
not to shoot, sir, or we all get 
very much trouble.” 
Saul sank back into his seat, 
chewing his lips. “Maybe you’re 
right. TKe hotel can send out a 
rescue party. She wasn’t in my 
dream. There was just me, dressed up as Jung ... I hate dreaming about death or all that.” 
Inside the hotel, it was wonderfully cool and quiet. Saul ordered 
a martini to soothe his nerves. 
— BRIAN W. ALDISS 
I This Month in IF— 
I BULGE 
e : 
s by Hal Clement s 
I LIKE BANQUO'S GHOST 
I by Larry Niven : 
I LOVE CONQUERS ALL 
g by Aiack Reynolds | 
s plus many more in IF, twice running winner of the "Hugo" as best : 
I science-fiction magazine in the world. September issue on sale : 
- now — don't miss it! : 
5iiiiiiiiiiimiiiiimMiiiiiiiimuiiiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii iiiiiiiiiii i iii i „,i..,.„. 
^ GALAXY 
M y name is R. Jennings, and 
I’m the man you’re looking 
for. I’m captain, owner, and coffee programmer of a star-crackin’ 
ship, the Astrid. On top of this. 
I’m a horse-breeder. Yes, I agree 
with you, sir: this is quite a 
spread of land. One hundred 
thousand acres of the finest on 
Cuspid, at the very edge of the 
galaxy, on the “mystic edge of 
forever,” as someone before me 
called it. 
Strange events occur out here 
amongst the Rim Worlds, sir, if 
you would care to believe me. 
Ah, the drinks. Put them down 
there, my lad, the tailcone for our 
visitor. 
Yes, we may as well relax right 
here on the veranda, sir, and enjoy the sunsets. We’ll have to 
wait a bit after the second dusk 
before my bo3rs can cull out the 
distance runners and quarter 
horses you’re interested in, but 
j 
in tKe meantime let me entertain 
you witfi a story. 
It’s a strange story, I promise. 
No science. No sanity. Maybe a 
little bit of enligKtenment — but 
wKat else could one expect from 
tKe “mystic edge of forever”? So 
sit back, sir, and Have no qualms 
whatever about tKe Horses. You’ll 
buy them, for wKo could resist 
those green beauties? And you’ll 
make a fortune racing them 
around the tracks of Earth'. 
In point of fact, my story starts 
witH Horses. TKirty-one years ago, 
I owned a stable myself. Ran 
some quarter Horses at Ruidosa 
for tHe love of it and did well, 
but tKe real money and tKe real 
thrill was in my distance runners. 
And of all the thoroughbreds I 
ran, most of all I loved my tKreeyear-old Green Lace. You know 
tKe old Horseman’s saying, “A 
lean Koree for a long race”? Green 
Lace was lean, a faerie queen, and 
she was green. A breathtaking 
beauty to beKold when sKe 
stretched out. And a winner. I 
lost her and my wKole stable in a 
fire. 
That’s a sad beginning to my 
story, isn’t it? Sadder still, who 
sired Green Lace? I would Have 
started another stable witH Her 
line alone, if I could. But Green 
Lace’s sire came from another 
planet, so the story went, from 
the far planet Cuspid. 
But where the hell was Cuspid? 
62 
Nobody knew. No one cared. 
Cuspid was not its official 
name. 
I drifted into the Astro-Marine 
Service. Saved my money. Take 
a look at me thirty years later, at 
the age of seventy, as I was last 
year: goateed, trim gray Kait 
clipped neatly, gray mustache, 
chest out — the works. A blue 
and gold space uniform as I pace 
the decks of my ship, the Astrid. 
I’ve got it made! 
Except no Cuspid. 
tC^aptain Jennings,” said the 
^ woman wKo chartered my 
ship that day in Earth- June and 
Cygnus- January, “you may tBnk 
it strange that a woman, alone 
except for an entourage of secretaries, and her own personal doctor, should take a ship out into 
the clouds of the galaxy. But I 
do have a purpose. A strange one. 
I do hope you can manage not to 
reveal your doubt of my sanity 
when you Hear my story.” 
I am a gentleman, make no 
mistake about that. I bowed from 
the hips, with a gracious smile 
and a sweep of my white-gloved 
hand. 
“Dear lady, I could not Kelp 
but note the gentility of your 
bearing. WKat is sanity against 
beauty? Let us be insane together.” 
She seated Herself. 
“A proper answer,” she smiled. 
“Your attitude intrigues me. Let 
us Hope it will Hold up under tKe 
forces tHat will be brought to bear 
against it 
“Come then, let us be insane 
together. What would you say if 
you saw a face in the sky? The 
galactic sky, as big as twice your 
sky here on Cygnus?” 
“You saw such a face?” 
“Yes, I did see such’ a face. In 
this sector of the galaxy, sir, close, 
I am told, to the Rim. Ten years 
ago I saw such a face. It was the 
face of my dead husband. Shall I 
go on?” 
This woman’s name was Ruth. 
She was Mrs. Ruth Coronado — 
the richest woman in this imiverse. She was sixty-seven years 
old, and she was my future wife. 
From the moment she stepped 
into my astro-marine office, our 
relationship was assured, the cement was set. She didn’t know it 
at the time; I did. For there was 
no difficulty meeting her glance 
for glance, of looking deeply 
through her eyes into the unmeasured core of her. I adored Mrs. 
Ruth Coronado, simply, and forever. 
Like countless women before 
her, she Had enjoyed the luxuries 
of her husband’s wealth’ without 
incurring any of the hazards. John 
Coronado, tycoon extraordinary, 
owner of countless worlds, industrialist, exporter and importer the 
length and breadth of the Galaxy, 
FIND THE FACE 
died one day of a heart attack. 
“I was with him the day he 
died,” she told me, smiling with 
her Head up. Her voice lilting, 
mellow. “It was. Captain Jennings, a bad moment for me. We 
had been married twenty years. 
“You see, while His disease was 
not unusual among men of his 
forcefulness and energy, it seemed 
cruel that He should die at a time 
when for the first time in many 
years he was not actively conducting his business affairs. For 
many month's, he Had left His 
industrial and financial empire in 
the hands of trusted subordinates. 
He himself, with me, was on a 
search.” 
“A search,” I said. Half-question, half-statement; for Had I 
myself not been on a search, a 
search that, indeed. Had begun 
just thirty years ago, just about 
the time that John Coronado was 
courting Ruth? 
Memory, however, was taking 
me back ten years, to the wreck 
of a star flyer. 
“He was on a search for the 
remains of a ship and the bodies 
that might be inside?” I asked. 
“And it was in this sector of the 
galaxy, in Cygnus the Swan?” 
“In Cygnus the Swan, yes,” 
she said coolly. “Somewhere 
along its axis, close to the Rim. 
You are telling me you know 
something of this event?” 
“The wreck of the Star Maid,” 
I said. “Some flotsam was found. 
No bodies. Members of 5rour Kusi band’s family. His motUer, Kis 
!«istcr, her husband and two cKilI'dren.” 
.11 “Exactly, And His brotKer, and 
of course the crew. As a spacefaring man perHaps you would remember sucH an event.” 
She passed her Hand ligHtly 
across her foreKead, as if to remove an errant strand of rich 
grayed hair. Actually, sKe was attempting to Hide a weariness tKat 
showed in th'e pale sHadowed blue 
of Her eyes, in tKe sudden droop 
of Her shoulders. SHe sigKed deeply, but without sound. THen Her 
Head came up again, and tHe permanent smile of RutK played 
again about Her lips. 
“Forgive me,” sHe said. “I am 
tired. It is obvious to you, of 
course, tHat I Have searcHed too 
long. Nonetheless, I shall go on.” 
She now produced a photograph from a briefcase. It was 
one of the hard-to-produce cubagraphs. Looked at straight on, tKe 
face was a seven-eigKths profile. 
Looked at from any other angle, 
one saw it as though' it were a 
living face. 
“This was the face I saw from 
the observation strip of the spaceship we were flying,” she said 
simply. “My husband Had just 
died, as I knew Ke would. The 
moment was one of terrible sadness for me, I wandered away 
64 
from the death-bed as in a dream, 
and as in a dream, I found myself 
amidsHip, bodiless, almost, and 
saw my husband’s face carved 
into the clouds of stars. 
“The face was as you see it in 
this cubagraph. My Heart stopped 
when first I saw it. But then, in 
my sadness, I simply assumed 
that this was the way things were 
— the way they should be. John, 
who owned so much of the galaxy, who, indeed, loved all of 
Creation as few men ever have 
revered anything, now belonged 
to God. God had buried His soul 
out here, on the mystic edge of 
forever. 
“As I watched entranced, hypnotized if you will, the ship wasi 
moving on, and my Husband’s 
face naturally disappeared as the 
angle of my vision slowly 
changed. 
“Then I came to. 
“I knew I Had seen no such 
face.” 
She smiled sadly. “THat is, I 
knew it then. Later, I saw the 
truth. The Face actually Had been 
there. TKat was when my search 
started.” 
“And the object of your 
search?” I asked. 
“To find the Face,” she said. 
“Then to find a world under it 
where I could live out my remaining years. 
“It was my way of being with 
my Husband for Eternity.” 
A t seventy, I was and am wise 
enougH not to inject common 
sense wKere none is asked for. 
Hola! Did we not botH know tKat 
no sucH Face existed? TKerefore 
we went about tKe task of sealing 
OUT bargain. 
On tKe next morning of tKat 
cold Cygnus- January, I went 
through' tKe micro-files of tKe 
Parer’s Astrogation Library. In 
th'e past ten years, a Mrs. RutK 
Coronado cKartered tKree spaceboats, which’ crept up and down 
the axis of Cygnus tKe Swan, a 
matter of some forty million lightyears. TKe files also gave me tKe 
present address of a commanding 
officer. I called on Kim. 
“SKe’s skeeting you, Jennings,” 
this man told me. “It’s Ker way 
®f getting Ker kicks out of life. 
Look up Ker record. SKe was on 
tKe stage before sKe married John 
Coronado. Now sKe’s back on 
stage again, and a fine-looking 
women sKe always will be witK 
that everlastin’ smile. WhicK is 
all right, but don’t let Ker package you. 
“In any case, we spent a year 
®n the job. I was Kappy to take 
her money. That’s it” 
Money, wKo needs it? But I 
needed RutK, as I came to call 
her very shortly. Two Cygnusmomings later my ship, tKe elegant, the incomparable, the beauteous Astrid, lifted from Ker bertK, 
borne on Ker fire-wings. Our speed 
FIND THE FACE 
instantly was beyond that of 
light My crew of five w®ve a 
twining dance of faultless pre®i-< 
sion as they tended their ship. We 
clove space and swooped int® out 
rendezvous with the far end of 
the Swan’s axis, we speared tKe 
powdery clouds of mystic .space 
inspiring beyond compare. 
In my spacious mirrored and 
vented control room I showed 
Mrs. RutK Coronado how we 
would operate. I personally programmed the ship’s macrosticklers: John Coronado’s face waa 
fed into them by bits, his face 
becoming tKe guiding soul ®f 
this ship, 
“WKat the ship sees from moment to moment will be fed iatai 
the macrosticklers as well; should 
the ship see wKat you hope to 
find, you’ll know it: tKe alarot 
bells will shake you out of sleep.” 
This woman wKo was to be my 
wife, and knew it not, smiled hat 
gentle smile. 
“You are brave and kind to 
share my insanity. Captain,” sKe 
said. “Why is it that you do s®?” 
“Perhaps because I am on a 
search myself,” I answered, willj 
a shrug that waved my fine geld 
epaulettes. I told Ker about my 
lost planet Cuspid and its wild 
green Korses. “TKat Kas been my 
search,” I said. I looked down 
into Ker face, the smooth face of 
an older woman who Kas spent 
many years in space. Her eyes 
were lost in their pale blue shadowy hollows. I said, “But we all 
must have a search', must we not? 
It gives us our reason for ‘walking 
across th’e street.’ ” 
S he touched my hand lightly to 
show she heard, but she was 
thinking deeply. Finally, she came 
back, letting the indentations at 
the comers of her lips again receive her smile. 
“Perhaps I too have heard of 
the horse*planet,” she said. “Was 
it not in the early days of the 
Panic when nobody thought 
Earth would survive, that animals 
of every description were shipped 
across the galaxy and dumped on 
any world that might sustain 
them?” 
I nodded. “Few of those breeds 
survived. The horses of Cuspid 
adapted.” The old pain returned 
to me, and she must have seen 
it in my face, for the memory of 
the death by fire of my incomparable Green Lace was still with 
me. She clasped my hand and 
held onto it as we left the control 
room. 
“My strange Captain Jennings,” she murmured. “You 
search for horses in the sky, and 
I search for a Great Star Face. 
Perhaps on the Rim anything can 
happen.” 
“Anything!” I told her, falling 
in with her mood. “Why, Ruth, 
out here creation is still at work. 
66 
Perhaps you cannot really comprehend how close we are to the 
edge of the galaxy at this moment. Mysterious forces that we 
do not understand are shaping the 
lives of stars! Hydrogen clouds 
blow willy-nilly at speeds wellnigh impossible, and what are the 
forces that blow them? We do 
not know.” 
She smiled indulgently. “I 
comprehend little of space, 
though you could by this time 
call me a star-woman.” 
“Did you know,” I pursued, 
“that more than once a beast with 
clawed legs of fire has been seen 
in these skies, moving like a comet would move across Earth’s 
spaces?” 
“This is a true story?” 
“A true story,” I proclaimed. 
“And there are other strangenesses out here. What did you once 
call it? The mystic edge of forever? Exactly! Now think about 
this, dear lady.” And there I let 
the subject lapse, albeit with 
enough of a glint in my eye to 
leave her in more than a little 
doubt as to the authenticity of 
my tale. 
But it was authentic. I myself 
had seen such a beast! 
You do not believe me? Hukkah! Very well. Let us stay with 
the reality of green horses forty 
million light-years from Earth, 
and I shall get on with my tale 
at once. 
'^he Cygnus-days passed. They 
were wonderful da3^. My 
love and I dined by candle-light. 
We walked the spacious decks, 
the planking awash with the fantastic flickering rainbows brought 
into being by our faster-thanlight plunge through the Swan. 
Suns puffed toward us like explosions. And once we saw the 
Beast! 
“There he goes!” I cried, and 
she pressed to me endeavoring to 
sight along my pointed finger, 
and when I got over my excitement she was looking up at me 
in wonder, white starlight turned 
to blue in her eyes. 
“You really believe there was a 
Beast,” she said. 
“Yes, yes!” I cried, still searching the changing skies. “It was 
there! I saw it!” 
“You easily fool yourself, my 
strange captain. You fool yourself, for me, into believing there 
is a Face. You fool yourself into 
seeing a Beast” 
At this I was ruffled. 
Ruth did not know the tradition. 
When you say you see the 
Beast, no one differs. You must 
say, “Tell me about the Beast? 
Is it like the one I saw? Did it 
have seven legs or four?” And 
then you describe it, and everyone whispers excitedly, and a few 
others of those listening offer corroberating stories. 
FIND THE FACE 
After all! One is traveling so 
fast! 
Indeed, fast is not even a word 
that suffices, it is an Earth-word 
for Earth-spaces, suitable only for 
describing the bicycle race down 
the block. Could the word fast 
describe our speeds as the Astrid 
gobbled dimensions and ruptured 
Space? What might one not see 
in such conditions? Surely — at 
the least — a Beast! 
Mrs. Ruth Coronado in the 
rainbow light was troubled. 
“I did not mean to offend you, 
my dear captain,” she said. “Perhaps there is a Beast — too.” 
We stopped in the observation 
strip, and there we were part of 
the massive sky. 
I faced her, took her hand, 
stood looking down at it, at the 
tracery of blue veins under the 
translucent skin. It was the hand 
of an older woman who had lived 
graciously. 
I said, “Perhaps you know how 
I feel about you, Ruth.” 
“Yes,” she said. “Perhaps we 
are too old for this, however.” 
“No,” I said. “We are young. 
You and I have lived as starpeople for enough years for it to 
count. Why else our vitality? For 
we are vital, Ruth. And you are 
vital to me, necessary to my life. 
I want to marry you.” 
A shadow darkened under her 
eyes. Her hand squeezed mine 
convulsively, not in some answer
67 
ing emotion, but in pain. “Captain,” sHe wbispered against my 
jacket “You must remember. We 
are looking for my Husband’s 
galactic face!” 
I was seventy! My love was not 
of great heat, let us admit, but 
oh! the flame was steady. The 
weeks of our search passed. We 
were enclosed in curling waves of 
star clouds, we were whipped and 
hastened on in our fantasy of 
speed by great writhing rubbery 
sheets of white flame. Ruth’ and 
I talked endlessly. We knew each 
other’s lives. We walked arm in 
arm, hand in hand, fingers intertwined, along the lush decks of 
my princess ship the Astrid. Once 
we landed on a world I did not 
know, but the people, of direct 
Earth' descent, were kindly. 
Here Mrs. Ruth Coronado, 
with' a touch' of apology on my 
arm, told me she would need a 
day to take care of some business 
affairs. 
She must send some messages 
to Earth along the Leaper, and 
she must wait for replies. 
She would not tell me what 
tfiese messages were. 
She entered the Parer’s Communication Building, whicH was 
sponsored by Galactic Control, 
just as it sponsored other communication centers on thousands 
of other worlds. 
The money she would spend to 
68 
ride a single message down the 
photon-roads and to receive a reply via the same Leaper system 
was nothing to Her, but it would 
be a considerable amount, even 
though the system was subsidized. 
At the end of the day, one of 
her secretaries who stayed with 
her called me aboard the Astrid, 
informing me that Mrs. Ruth 
Coronado would be waiting. 
She emerged from the offices 
of the communication center with 
a preoccupied frown. 
“I will need another day,” she 
told me. 
I held my peace, for could I, 
even lightly, suggest that she Hold 
no secrets from me, when I rayself was guilty of a certain duplicity? 
You will understand the depth 
of my entanglement in this fantasy we both lived when I explain 
to you that I began to wait for 
the Astrid to find the Face! — 
that I began to wait for the alarm 
bells to ring! 
And the waiting was loathesome. A cubagraph of John Coronado, you see, somehow had become the soul of my ship. John 
Coronado had taken from me the 
captaincy of my ship. John Coronado was my ship, I a helpless 
pawn of his galactic whim. 
More! In my mind, try though 
I would to erase it, John Coronado became my rival. I ground 
my teeth at the mere thought of 
my ship the Astrid, my bloodhound of space, tracking down 
that improbable, sneering, challenging, hateful Face — only to 
have my love lost to me. 
Therefore, I shut off the alarm 
system. 
There would be no bells to tell 
Mrs. Ruth Coronado that her impossible search was over. 
Instead, I tuned the alarm system to a small receiver snapped 
to my wrist. 
Nervously, I, fool that I was, 
waited for it to ring. 
A t the end of Ruth’s second 
mysterious day at the Parer’s Communication Building, I 
met her, and she was smiling a 
secret smile. Her face, lined 
though it might be, was the radiant face of an inwardly beautiful woman. 
She took my hands in hers. Her 
shadowed blue eyes were full of a 
suppressed excitement. 
“Captain Jennings,” she said, 
“your search, at least, is over. I 
have the coordinates of the planet 
Cuspid!” 
I studied the space-graph the 
communications people had made 
for her. 
Cuspid’s true name was Terrano IV. It twined about the two 
units of a double-star system in 
an endless progression of figure 
eights — or, if you wish to susFIND THE FACE 
tain yourself in the magic of the 
Rim, you may think erf it as performing an endless series of infinity signs. 
I looked up from the graph. 
“Thank you,” I said. My eyes 
asked the question. 
She said, “Cuspid is a code 
name. There were many such 
habitable planets given code 
names during the Panic, for fear 
that the warriors of Earth’ would 
destroy them also. Somewhere in 
my husband’s extensive business 
files the tidbit of information was 
waiting. Many messages were 
necessary, to many worlds. Finally, the answer came. 
“Now your search ends.” 
“Yes,” I said, once more studying the chart which would lead 
me to the planet of my dreams. 
At the terminus of Cygnus the 
Swan it was, not far. I laid the 
paper aside. Impulsively I took 
Ruth’s hand in a gesture she was 
accustomed to. 
“Ruth,” I said, pleading. “Do 
not refuse me now. This is the 
sign you and I have been waiting 
for. Go there with’ me. To Terrano IV. Marry me, RutH. Will 
you?” 
She drew back, looking at me 
through’ a film of tears, blindly 
shaking her head. “Your searcti 
is over,” she whi^>ered, “but what 
about my seardi? Find die Face 
for me. Captain Jennings, find 
the Face!” 
I could say nothing. I had no 
defense. Ruth turned away with 
head bowed so that a curl of silver 
gray hair fell across her eyes, and 
she returned alone to her cabin. 
ind the face. 
I found it. I found a face. 
The situation was the same as 
when Ruth saw the Face. She was 
alone, she was deeply troubled, 
she was haunted by the powdery 
gleam of all Creation charming 
her from the open void. I saw a 
galactic face, as she did, two Cygnus-momings after she gave me 
the gift of her love, the location 
of the planet Cuspid. 
This face was spread across 
that whole sky along whose starclouded shores my elegant boat 
swam. It subtended an arc of 
130°, and that was a lot of sky. 
I stared stupidly, expecting the 
face’s drooping, star-gleaming lips 
to curl in contempt, his coal-sack 
nostrils to pinch in displeasure, 
his God-eyes, with groups of 
burning-bright stars where the 
irises were, to fume at me in cosmic anger that I should dare to 
touch his Ruth. But no, his expression, somber, frowning, distant, remained the same. How 
handsome a man, he that looked 
not down upon me but through 
me, and, indeed, seemed to have 
no interest in me. The hair, grayblack, was swept in a haughty 
wave of radiant gases over his 
70 
forehead, which in turn was so 
neatly limned and shaped by 
clouds and strings of primal hydrogen matter. Hair untidily covered the tops of his ears, whicH 
in turn were but stellar helices 
with darks and brights so deftly 
brushed in by an Artist whose 
identity I could not conceive. 
How deep and dark the empty 
spaces under his starry cheekbones. 
My head swam. “Nof” I whispered brokenly. “No!” I turned 
away, buried my head in my 
hands. I thought to myself, “How 
can I? How can I marry Ruth? 
I cannot.” 
When I again faced the observation strip, the face was gone. 
The changing angle of vision totally disrupted that giant physiognomy; the ship would have to 
return to an exact position in 
space. At this, I wheeled and witK 
a half-stumbling run made for 
the computer deck. I burst in. 
The attendant was standing over 
the macrosticklers, his jaw slack. 
When he turned toward me his 
lips worked soundlessly, and he 
started to speak. 
I cut him off. 
“The read-out sheet,” I said, 
holding out a hand that was 
shaking badly. 
The attendant faltered, “There 
— there is no read-out sheet, sir. 
The macrosticklers have not been 
scanning.” 
I was speechless, trjdng to rant, 
to swear; but cold and heartless 
within me was my true self, triumphant, scheming. The macros 
had not been scanning. Well and 
good. The Face was already dozens of light-years behind us, and 
the coordinates again were lost. 
The Face was gone, and I would 
marry Ruth. 
^^here would be no John Coronado in ponderous threat 
above us, there would be no John 
Coronado glaring down at us 
while we lived our life of love on 
Terrano IV. 
Dear God, leave John Coronado in a distant sky, back there 
where he was, dead, not living, 
sanctified in his galactic grave, 
eternalized out of who knew what 
mysterious cosmic pulse. 
“You fool,” I began thickly. “I 
programmed — ” 
He blurted, “Mrs. Coronado 
did it, sir. Not more than ten 
minutes ago. She asked me to 
remove the Coronado tapes. I refused. I suggested she speak to 
you, sir. She informed me this 
was her responsibility, hers only. 
She offered me a bribe, more than 
my yearly salary, sir. I refused.” 
“And then what?” 
He gestured. The John Coronado tapes had not been removed, 
but, rather, incinerated. 
“She had a beamer in her purse, 
sir.” 
FIND THE FACE 
I stumbled from the computer 
deck, dazed. Oh, do not consider 
me guiltless. I could have noted 
the time I saw the face. I could 
have pressed a stud in my watcH 
which would have imprinted time, 
and exact position, on the Master 
Log. Such has been my unbroken 
habit when any noteworthy event 
occurs. Compute if you will the 
inner tensions which kept me 
from that simple, well-nigh unconscious act 
Compute also, if you will, why 
I did not check the wrist alarm I 
wore. Had it rung, and if not 
why not? 
I went to Ruth’s cabin, knocked, entered quietly when her low 
voice answered. She gazed at me 
sadly, shadows under her eyes, 
her fingers nervously waving into 
each other. 
“Captain Jennings,” she sighed, 
troubledly gazing at the deck. 
“You seem very excited. Perhaps 
because I destroyed the John 
Coronado tapes?” 
“Yes, Ruth. Why did you?” 
“Because I am tired. Because 
the strain is too much. The waiting, Captain Jennings. The suspense. The waking up in the middle of sleep, waiting for the alarm 
bells to ring, to tell us my dead 
darling has been found and that 
his beloved face is out there for 
me to see. 
“I am tired. There will be no 
more searching.” 
Then she came to me, stood 
very close and slipped Her arms 
over my shoulders, and laid Her 
Head on my cHest 
“We are two old people. Captain Jennings. But I do love you, 
for your kindness, for your quick 
nature, for your love of me, and 
because you are straight of back, 
a handsome man of whom any 
woman, young or old, would be 
proud. So marry me. Captain 
Jennings. Take me to your planet 
Cuspid, and let us live out our 
lives together. 
“I give up the search. Perhaps 
because I have been searching 
only for love after all. It is aU we 
search for; John vnll understand. 
M rs. Ruth Coronado and Captain R. Jennings of the good 
ship Astrid were married the next 
planet-fall. We Had a honeymoon 
that lasted three weeks as we dove 
across those far magic skies on 
the edge of our galaxy where anything can happen. And we came 
to the planet Cuspid, whose true 
name was Terrano IV. 
Oh lovely world 1 My love twined about it like arms from my 
souL For it was green. Its green 
continents floated on green foamy 
seas, its skies were shades of green 
in the light of two hot green suns 
— and on the smaller continent 
my green Horses thrived! 
There were people here. Land 
was waiting to be claimed, and 
72 
finally we stood In the midst of 
our hundred thousand acres, contemplating the house we would 
build, the stables, the corrals; we 
saw men riding the herds, we saw 
buyers coming from all the 
worlds. 
That night we camped. My love 
and I alone put up a tent, and 
we were asleep long before this 
fast turning world spun its night 
face to the myriad stars shining 
through its misty green atmosphere. But I, I could not stay 
asleep. Mysteriously compelled to 
rise, my soul filled with the wonder of this life that Had given me 
everything I would have wished 
for in my wildest dreams, I walked the night, breathing the redflower scent, listening to the call 
of the wood-birds, making friends 
vrith curious insects who sat on 
my arms chirruping and presumably trying to talk. And then I 
stood looking into the sky and 
saw the face of John Coronado. 
It was the true face of John 
Coronado. 
That other face, that I saw 
from space, had not been. 
Whose, then? I knew. 
A triumph of elation overcame 
me when I saw the Face. And 
there was relief, a bhnd, remorseless relief, as if I had escaped a 
gallows. Indeed, all these weeks I 
was strangling in a muck of 
guilt 
And now tiSere was ^ Face. 
I went back to tlie tent, brualied lightly at my beloved’s Eair. 
She awoke. 
“Come,” I said. I led Her from 
tHe tent, faced Her so tHat if sHe 
raised Her eyes sHe would see 
John Coronado. 
“There were other members of 
your Husband’s family who died 
in the wreck of tHe Star Maid,” 
I said. “A brother?” 
She said in wonder, “A brother. 
Yes. Of course. A younger brotKer. But why do you ask?” 
“And they looked mucH alike?” 
“Yes . perhaps so.” 
I tilted up her head so that she 
was looking full into the Face. 
“It is the Face,” I said. I saw 
Her eyes dilate and shine. I felt 
Her hand in mine stiffen. I felt 
the shuddering of her shoulder 
pressed against mine. Her hand 
flew to her lips as if to stifle 
some cry. She darted me what 1 
t can only describe as a' frightened 
glance. “Oh!” she gasped. “It is 
so very strange that you should 
find him here. Perhaps some 
night even the Beast shall fly 
through our skies.” 
Then with a motion quite deliberate, she turned her back on 
the Face, and smiled the firm 
smile of Ruth. She slipped her 
arm through mine, and with' her 
other hand caressed my own face 
lightly but lingeringly. 
“Foa are my KusBand,” 
said. “Be sure of tHat THerefore 
it is time to return to our tent 
“THe nigHt will come wHen my 
dead Husband will — go away.” 
Y ou laugH? You do not believe? AH, but remember tHe 
tradition, sirl A gentleman of 
space does not doubt! But still 
you laugh? Come then, let us select the miracle Horses you wisli 
to buy. But first — turn! Look! 
John Coronado, tHe dead Husband 
of the woman I love, is rising 
swiftly in the sky! You see now 
the wild hydrogen clouds of his 
hair! Come the starry spirals of 
his giant ears, the star-gleaming 
forehead, the great blazing fumes 
of the blue-buming stars that are 
his eyes, and now the long nose 
painted with a billion suns and 
pieces of black emptiness! Then 
the lips, sir, you see them — 
squint your eyes a bit now — the 
lips, made of the hind end of a 
ring nebula. How gently they 
curve, how sweetly they seem to 
be murmuring but one name! 
There, sir, is the Face. How 
piercingly he looks down upon 
my acres on my planet Cuspid, 
and how tenderly he searches out 
my wife, my Ruth! 
Forgive me, sir. 
Ruth and I are just now learning how to walk out together at 
night. — ROSS ROCKL’YNNE 
FIND THE FACE 
by JAMES E. GUNN 
They had been listening to the stars for 
50 years. Sometimes silence can be more 
deafening than a chorus of triphammers. 
I 
“Is there anybody there?" said 
the Traveler, Knocking on the 
moonlit door .... 
he voices babbled. 
MacDonald heard them and 
knew that there was meaning in 
them, that they were trying to 
communicate and that he could 
xmderstand them and respond to 
them if he could only concentrate 
on what they were saying, but he 
couldn’t bring himself to make 
the effort. He tried again, harder. 
“Back behind everything, lurking like a silent shadow behind 
the closed door, is the question 
we can never answer except positively: is there anybody there?” 
That was Bob Adams, eternally the devil’s advocate, looking 
querulously at the others around 
the conference table. His roimd 
face was sweating although the 
mahogany-paneled room was 
cool. 
Saunders puffed hard on his 
pipe. “But that’s true of all science. The image of the scientist 
eliminating all negative possibilities is ridiculous. Can’t be done. 
So he goes ahead on faith and 
statistical probability.” 
MacDonald watched the smoke 
rise above Saimders’ head in 
clouds and wisps until it wavered 
in the draft from the air duct, 
thinned out, disappeared. But only to one sense. Although he could 
not see it, the odor reached his 
• nostrils. It was an aromatic blend 
easily distinguishable from the 
flatter smell of cigarettes being 
smoked by Adams and some of 
the others. 
Wasn’t this tHeir task? MacDonald wondered. To detect the 
thin smoke of life that drifts 
through the universe, to separate 
one trace from another, molecule 
by molecule, and then force them 
to reverse their entropic paths into their ordered and meaningful 
original form. 
All the kind’s horses, and all 
the king's men .... 
And yet life itself is impossible. 
He thought; but men exist by reversing entropy. 
Down the long table cluttered 
with overflowing ash trays and 
coffee cups and doodled scratch’ 
pads Olsen said, “We always 
knew it would be a long search. 
THE LISTENERS 
Not years but centuries. The 
computers must have sufficient 
data, and that means bits of information approximating the number of molecules in the universe. 
Let’s not chicken out now.” 
“If seven maids with seven 
mops 
Swept it for half a year, 
Do you suppose,” the Walrus 
said, 
“That they could ^t it 
clear?” 
“. ridiculous,” someone was 
saying, and then Adams broke in, 
“It’s easy for you to talk about 
centuries when you’ve been here 
only three years. Wait until 
you’ve been at it for ten years, 
like I have. Or Mac here, who has 
been on the Project for twenty 
years and head of it for fifteen.” 
“What’s the use of arguing 
about something we can’t know 
anything about?” Sonnenbom 
asked him. “We have to base our 
our position on probabilities. Shklovskii and Sagan estimated that 
there are more than 1,000 million 
habitable planets in our galaxy 
alone. Van Hoemer estimated 
that one in three million have advanced societies in orbit around 
them; Sagan said one in one Hundred thousand. Either way, it’s 
good odds that there’s somebody 
there — three Hundred or ten 
thousand in our segment of the 
universe. Our job' is to listen in 
tiSe right place or in tlie right way; 
or understand wKat we Hear.” 
A dams turned to MacDonald. 
“What do you say, Mac?” 
“I say these basic discussions 
are good for us,” MacDonald said 
mildly, “and we need to keep reminding ourselves what it is we’re 
doing, or we’ll get swallowed in a 
quicksand of data. I also say that 
it’s time now to get down to the 
business at hand — what observations do we make tonight and 
the rest of the week before our 
next staff meeting?” 
Saunders began, “I think we 
should make a methodical sweep 
of the entire galactic lens, listening on aU wave lengths — ” 
‘We’ve done that a hundred 
times,” said Sonnenbom. 
“Not with my new filter — ” 
“Tau Ceti still is the most likely,” said Olsen. “Let’s really give 
it a hearing — ” 
MacDonald heard Adams 
grumbling, half to himself, “If 
there is anybody, and they are 
trying to communicate, some amateur is going to pick it up on his 
ham set, decipher it on his James 
Bond coderule, and leave us sitting here on one hundred million 
dollars of equipment with’ egg all 
over our faces.” 
“And don’t forget,” MacDonald said, “tomorrow is Saturday 
night, and Maria and I will be 
76 
expecting you all at our place at 
d^t for the customary beer and 
bull. Those who have more to say 
can save it for then.” 
It was a joviality MacDonald 
did not feel. He did not know 
whether he could stand another 
Saturday night session of drink 
and discussion and dissension 
about the Project. It was one of 
his low periods when everything 
seemed to pile up on top of him, 
and he could not get out from 
imder, or tell anybody how He 
felt. No matter how he felt, the 
Saturday nights were good for 
morale. 
Pues no es possible que este 
continuo el atco armado ni la 
condicion y tlaqueza humana se 
pueda sustentar sin alguna licita 
recreacion.^ 
Within the Project, morale was 
always a problem. Besides, it was 
good for Maria. She did not get 
out enough. She needed to see 
people. And then .... 
And then maybe Adams was 
right. Maybe nobody was there. 
Maybe nobody was sending signals because there was nobody to 
send signals. Maybe man was all 
alone in the universe. Alone with’ 
God. Or alone vrith himself, 
whichever was worse. 
Maybe all the money was being 
1 The bow cannot always stand bent, 
nor can human frailty subsist without 
some lawful recreaUon. „ , . 
— Cervantes, Don Quixote. 
wasted, and the effort, and tKe 
preparation — all the intelligence 
and education and ideas being 
drained away into an endlessly 
empty cavern. 
Habe nun, ach! Philosoptue, 
Juristerei und Medizin, 
Und leider auch Tbeologie 
Durchaus studiert, mit heissem 
Bemuhn. 
Da steh’ich nun, ich armer Tot! 
Und bin so klug als wie zuvor; 
Heisse Magister, heisse Doktor 
gar, 
Und ziehe schon an die zehen 
Jaht 
Heraui, herab und quer und 
krumm 
Meine Schuler an der Nase 
■ herum — 
Und sehe, dass wir nichts wissen konnenP 
■poor fool. Why me? MacDonald 
thought. Could not some otKer 
lead them better, not by the nose 
but by his real wdsdom? Perhaps 
aU Ke was good for was the Saturday night parties. Perhaps it 
was time for a change. 
He shook himself. It was the 
3 Now I have studied philosophy, 
Medicine and the law, 
and unlortimately, theoloey, 
wearily sweating, yet I stand now, 
poor fool, no wiser than I was befwe; 
I am called Master, even Doctor, 
and for these last ten years have 
drawn 
my students, by the notes, up, down, 
crosswise and crooked. Now I see 
that we can know nothing finally. 
— Goethe, Foust. 
endless waiting that wore him 
down, the waiting for something 
that did not happen, and the Congressional hearings were coming 
up again. What could he say that 
he had not said before? How 
could he justify a project that already had gone on for nearly fifty 
years without results and might 
go on for centuries more? 
“Gentlemen,” he said briskly, 
“to our listening posts.” 
By the time he had settled himself at his disordered desk, Lily 
was standing beside him. 
“Here's last night’s computer 
anal3Tsis,” she said, putting down 
in front of him a thin folder. 
“Re3molds says there’s nothing 
there, but you always want to see 
it an3Tway. Here’s the transcription of last shear’s Congressional 
hearings.” A thick binder went on 
top of the folder. “The correspondence and the actual appropriation measure are in another 
file if you want them.” 
MacDonald shook his head. 
“There’s a form letter here from 
NASA establishing the ground 
rules for this year’s budget and a 
personal letter from Ted Wartinian sa3ring that conditions are 
really tight and some cuts look 
inevitable. In fact, he says there’s 
a possibility the Project might be 
scrubbed.” 
Lily glanced at him. “Not a 
chance,” MacDonald said confidently. 
THE LISTENERS 
“There’s a few applications for 
employment. Not as many as we 
used to get. The letters from 
school children I answered myself. And there’s the usual nut 
letters from people who’ve been 
receiving messages from outer 
space and from one who’s had a 
ride in a UFO. That’s what he 
called it — not a saucer or anything. A feature writer wants to 
interview you and some others for 
an article on the Project I think 
he’s with us. And another one 
who sounds as if he wants to do 
an expose.” 
IVTacDonald listened patiently. 
Lily was a wonder. She 
could handle everything in the office as well as he could. In fact, 
things might nm smoother if he 
were not around to take up her 
time. 
“They’ve both sent some questions for you to answer. And Joe 
wants to talk to you.” 
“Joe?” 
“One of the janitors.” 
“What does he want?” They 
couldn’t afford to lose a janitor. 
Good janitors were harder to find 
than astronomers, harder even 
than electronidans. 
“He says he has to talk to you, 
but I’ve heard from some of the 
luimh room staff that he’s been 
complaining about getting messages on his — on his — ” 
“Yes?” 
“On his false teeth.” 
MacDonald sighed. “Pacify him 
somehow, will you, Lily. If I talk 
to him we might lost a janitor.” 
“I’ll do my best. And Mrs. 
MacDonald called. Said it wasn’t 
important and you needn’t call 
back.” 
“Call her,” MacDonald said. 
“And, Lily — you’re coming to 
tlie party tomorrow night, aren’t 
you?” 
“What would I be doing at a 
party with all the brains?” 
“We want you to come. Maria 
asked me particularly. It isn’t all 
shop talk, you know. And there 
are never enough women. You 
might strike it off with one of the 
young bachelors.” 
“At my age, Mr. MacDonald? 
You’re just trying to get rid of 
me.” 
“Never.” 
“I’ll get Mrs. MacDonald.” Lily 
turned at the door. “I’ll think 
about the party.” 
MacDonald shuffled through 
the papers. Down at the bottom 
was the only one he was interested in — the computer analysis of 
last night’s listening. But he kept 
it there, on the bottom, as a reward for going through the others. Ted was worried, really worried. Move over, Ted. And then 
the writers. He supposed he 
would have to work them in 
somehow. At least it was part of 
the fall-out to locating the Pro
GALAXY 
ject in Puerto Rico. Nobody just 
dropped in. And the questions. 
Two of them caught his attention. 
How did you come to be named Project Director? That was the 
friendly one. What ate your qualifications to be Director? That 
was the other. How would he answer them? Could he answer them. 
Finally he reached the computer analysis, and it was just 
like those for the rest of the week, 
and the week before that, and the 
months and the years before that 
No significant correlations. Noise. 
There were a few peaks of reception — at the 21 centimeter line, 
for instance — but these were 
merely concentrated noise. Radiating clouds of hydrogen, as the 
Little Ear functioned like an ordinary radio telescope. 
At least the Project showed 
some results. It was feeding star 
survey data tapes into the international pool. Fall-out. Of a process that had no other product 
except negatives. 
AyTaybe the equipment wasn’t 
sensitive enough. Maybe. 
They could beef it up some more. 
At least it might be a successful 
ploy with the Committee, some 
progress to present, if only in the 
hardware. You don’t stand still. 
You spend more money or they 
cut you back — or off. 
Note: Saunders — plans to increase sensitivity. 
THE LISTENERS 
Maybe the equipment wasn’t 
discriminating enough. But they 
had used up a generation of ingenuity canceling out background 
noise, and in its occasional checks 
the Big Ear indicated that they 
were doing adequately on terrestrial noise, at least 
Note: Adams — new discrimination gimmick. 
Maybe the computer wasn’t 
recognizing a signal when it had 
one fed into it. Perhaps it wasn’t 
sophisticated enough to perceive 
certain subtle relationships . 
And yet sophisticated codes had 
been broken in seconds. And the 
Project was asking it to distinguish only where a signal existed, 
whether the reception was random noise or had some element 
of the unrandom. At this level it 
wasn’t even being asked to note 
the influence of consciousness. 
Note: ask computer — is it 
missing something? Ridiculous? 
Ask Olsen. 
Maybe they shouldn’t be 
searching the radio spectrum at 
all. Maybe radio was a peculiarity of man’s civilization. Maybe 
others had never had it or had 
passed it by and now had more 
sophisticated means of conomunication. Lasers, for instance. Telepathy, or what might pass for it 
with man. Maybe gamma rays, 
as Morrison suggested years before Ozma. 
Wen, maybe. But if it were so, 
II 
somebody else would Have to listen for those. He had neither the 
equipment nor the background 
nor the working lifetime left to 
tackle something new. 
And maybe Adams was right. 
He buzzed Lily. “Have you 
reached Mrs. MacDonald?” 
“The telephone hasn’t answered—” 
Unreasoned panic .... 
“ — oh, here she is now. Mr. 
MacDonald, Mrs. MacDonald.” 
“Hello, darling. I was alarmed 
when you didn’t answer.” That 
had been foolish, he thought, and 
even more foolish to mention it. 
Her voice was sleepy. “I must 
have been dozing.” Even drowsy, 
it was an eadting voice, gentle, a 
little husky, that speeded MacDonald’s pulse. “What did you 
want?” 
“You called me,” MacDonald 
said. 
“Did I? I’ve forgotten.” 
“Glad you’re resting. You 
didn’t sleep well last night.” 
“I took some pills.” 
“How many?” 
“Just the two you left out.” 
“pood girl. I’ll see you in a 
couple of hours. Go back to sleep. 
Sorry I woke you.” 
But her voice wasn’t sleepy any 
more. “You won’t have to go back 
tonight, will you? We’ll have the 
evening together?” 
“We’ll see,” he promised. 
But he knew he would return. 
80 
TV ^ acDonald paused outside the 
-^^-^long, low concrete building 
which housed the offices and laboratories and computers. It was 
twilight. The sun had descended 
below the green hills, but orange 
and purpling wisps of cirrus trailed down the western sky. 
Between MacDonald and the 
sky was a giant dish held aloft 
by skeleton metal fingers — held 
high as if to catch the star dust 
that drifted down at night from 
the Milky Way. 
Go and catch a falling star. 
Get with child a mandrake 
root. 
Tell me where all past years 
are. 
Or who deft the deviFs foot; 
Teach me to hear mermaids 
sitTging, 
Or to keep off envy's stinging. 
And find 
What wind 
Serves to advance an honest 
mind. 
Then the dish' began to turn, 
noiselessly, incredibly, and to tip. 
And it was not a dish' any more 
but an ear, a listening ear cupped 
by the surrounding hills to overhear the whispering universe. 
Perhaps this is what kept them 
at their jobs, MacDonald thought. 
In spite of all disappointments, in 
spite of all vain efforts, perhaps 
it was this massive machinery, as 
sensitive as their fingertips which 
kept them struggling with the unfathomable. When they grew 
weary at their electronic listening 
posts, when their eyes grew dim 
with looking at unrevealing dials 
and studying uneventful graphs, 
they could step outside their concrete cells and renew their dull 
spirits in communion with the giant mechanism they commanded, 
the silent, sensing instrument in 
which the smallest packets of energy, the smallest waves of matter, were detected in their headlong, eternal flight across the universe. It was the stethoscope vdth 
which they took the pulse of the 
all and noted the birth and death 
of stars, the probe with which, 
here on an insignificant planet of 
an undistinguished star on the 
edge of its galaxy, they explored 
the infinite. 
Or perhaps it was not just the 
reality but the imagery, like poetry, which soothed their doubting 
souls, the bowl held up to catch 
Donne’s falling star, the ear cocked to catch the suspected shout 
that faded to an indistinguishable 
murmur by the time it reached 
them. And one thousand miles 
above them was the giant, fivemile-in-diameter network, the 
largest radio telescope ever built, 
which men had cast into the heavens to catch the stars. 
THE LISTENERS 
If they had the Big Em for 
more than an occasional reference 
check, MacDonald thought practically, then they might get some 
results. But he knew the radio 
astronomers would never relinquish time to the frivolity of listening for signals that never came. 
It was only because of the Big 
Ear that the Project had inherited the Little ^r. There had 
been talk recently about a larger 
net, twenty miles in diameter. 
Perhaps when it was done, if it 
were done, the Project might inherit time on the Big Ear. 
If they could endure until then, 
MacDonald thought, if they could 
steer their fragile vessel of faith 
between the Scylla of self-doubt 
and the Charybdis of Congressional appropriations. 
'^he images were not all favorable. There were others that 
went boomp in the night. There 
was the image, for instance, of 
man listening, listening, listening 
to the silent stars, listening for an 
eternity, listening for signals that 
would never come, because — the 
ultimate horror — man was alone 
in the universe, a cosmic accident 
of self-awareness which needed 
and would never receive the comfort of companionship. To be 
alone, to be all alone, would be 
like being all alone on earth, with 
no one to talk to, ever — like being alone inside a bone prison, 
with no way to get out, no way 
to communicate witH anyone outside, no way to know if anyone 
was outside . 
Perhaps that, in the end, was 
what kept them going — to stave 
off the tenors of the night. While 
they listened there was hope; to 
give up now would be to admit 
final defeat. Some said they 
should never have started; then 
they never would have the problem of surrender. Some of the 
new religions said that. The Solitarians, for one. There is nobody 
there; we are the one, the only 
created intelligence in the universe. Let us glory in our uniqueness. But the older religions encouraged the Project to continue. 
Why would God have created the 
myriads of other stars and other 
planets if he had not intended 
them for living creatures? Why 
should man only be created in His 
image? Let us find out, they said. 
Let us communicate with them. 
What revelations have they had? 
What saviors have redeemed 
them? 
Theee are the words which I 
spake unto you, while I was yet 
with you, that all things must be 
fulfilled, which were written in 
the law of Mosea, and in the prophets, and in the psalms, concerning me. Thus it is written, 
and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the 
82 
third day: and that repentance 
and remission of sins should be 
preached in his name among alt 
nations, beginning at Jerusalem. 
And ye are witnesses of these 
things. 
And behold, I send the promise 
of my Father upon you: but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from 
on high. 
Dusk had turned to night. THe 
sky had turned to black. The 
stars had been born again. The 
listening had begim. MacDonald 
made his way to his car in the 
parking lot behind the building, 
coasted until he was behind the 
hill, and turned on the motor for 
the long drive home. 
'^he hacienda was dark. It had 
that empty feeling about it 
that MacDonald knew so well, 
the feeling it had for him when 
Maria went to visit friends in 
Mexico City. But it was not empty now. Maria was here. 
He opened the door and flicked on the hall light, “Maria?” 
He walked down the tiled hall, 
not too fast, not too slow. “Querida?” He turned on the livingroom light as he passed. He continued down the hall, past the 
dining room, the guest room, the 
study, the kitchen. He reached 
the dark doorway to the bedroom. 
“Maria Chavez?” 
He turned on the bedroom 
light, low. She was asleep, her 
face peaceful, h'er dark hair scattered across the pillow. She lay 
on her side, her legs drawn up 
under the covers. 
Men che dtamma 
Dt sangue m'e rimaso, che no 
tremi; 
Conosco i segni del? antica 
fiamma? 
MacDonald looked down at 
her, comparing her features one 
by one with those he had fixed in 
his memory. Even now, with those 
dark, expressive eyes closed, she 
was the most beautiful woman he 
had ever seen. What glories they 
had known! He renewed his spirit in the warmth' of his remembrances, recalling moments with 
lo\dng detail. 
C’est de quay pay le plus de 
peuT que la peuiA 
He sat down upon the edge of 
the bed and leaned over to kiss 
her upon the cheek and then upon her upthrust shoulder where 
the gown had slipped down. She 
did not waken. He shook her 
shoulder gently. “Maria!” She 
s Less than a drop o{ blood remains In 
me that does not tremble; I recognize 
the signals ot the andent name. 
— Dante, Pnrgatorle. 
4 The thing of which I have most fear 
Is fear. 
— Montaigne, Essays, 
THE LISTENERS 
turned upon her back, straightening. She sighed, and her eyes 
came open, staring blankly. “It 
is Robby,” MacDonald said, 
dropping unconsciously into a 
faint brogue. 
Her eyes came alive, and her 
lips smiled sleepily. “Robby. 
You’re home.” 
“Yo te amo,” he murmured, and 
kissed her on the lips. As he pulled himself away, he said, “I’ll 
start dinner. Wake up and get 
dressed. I’ll see you in half an 
hour. Or sooner.” 
“Sooner,” she said. 
T T e turned and went to the 
kitchen. There was romaine 
lettuce in the refrigerator and, as 
he rummaged further, some thin 
slices of veal. He prepared Caesar 
salad and veal scallopine, doing 
it all quickly, expertly. He liked 
to cook. The salad was ready and 
the lemon juice, tarragon, white 
wine and, a minute later, the beef 
bouillon had been added to the 
browned veal when Maria appeared. 
She stood in the doorway, slim, 
lithe, lovely, and sniffed the air, 
“I smell something delicious.” 
It was a joke. When Maria 
cooked, she cooked Mexican, 
something peppery that burned 
all the way into the stomach and 
lay there like a banked furnace. 
When MacDonald cooked, it was 
something exotic — French, per
83 
haps, or Italian or Chinese. But 
whoever cooked, the other had to 
appreciate it or take over all the 
cooking for a week. 
MacDonald filled their wine 
glasses. "‘A la tres-bonne, a la 
tres belief ” he said, “ ‘qui iait ma 
joie et ma sante.’ ”® 
“To the Project,” Maria said. 
“May there be a signal received 
tonight.” 
MacDonald shook his head. 
One should not mention what one 
desires too much. “Tonight there 
is only us.” 
Afterwards there were only the 
two of them, as there had been 
now for twenty years. And she 
was as alive and as urgent, as 
filled with love and laughter, as 
when they first had been together. 
At last the urgency was replaced by a vast ease and contentment in which for a time the 
thought of the Project faded into 
something remote which one day 
he would return to and finish. 
“Maria,” he said. 
“Robby?” 
“Yo te amo, corazon.” 
“Vo te amo, Robby.” 
Gradually then, as he waited 
for her breathing to slow, the Project returned. When he thought 
she was asleep, he got up and 
began to dress in the dark. 
s To the best, to the most beautiful who 
Is my joy and my well-being. 
— Baudelaire, lies Epaees. 
• When I rest. I rust. 
— German proverb. 
“Robby?” Her voice was awake 
and frightened. 
"Quetlda?" 
“You are going again?” 
“I didn’t want to wake you.” 
“Do you have to go?” 
“It’s my job.” 
“Just this once. Stay with me 
tonight.” 
He turned on the light. In the 
dimness he could see that her face 
was concerned but not hysterical. 
“ 'Rast ich, so tost Besides, 
I would feel ashamed.” 
“I understand. Go, then. Come 
home soon.” 
He put out two pills on the 
little shelf in the bathroom and 
put the others away again. 
Ill 
T he headquarters building was 
busiest at night when the radio noise of the sun was least and 
listening to the stars was best. 
Girls bustled down the halls with 
coffee pots, and men stood near 
the water fountain talking earnestly. 
MacDonald went into the control room. Adams was at the control panel; Montaleone was the 
technician. Adams looked up, 
pointed to his earphones with a 
gesture of futility, and shrugged. 
MacDonald nodded at him, nodded at Montaleone and glanced at 
the graph. It looked random to 
him. 
GAIAXY 
Adams leaned past him to point 
out a couple of peaks. “These 
might be something.” 
“Odds,” MacDonald said. 
“Suppose you’re right. The 
computer hasn’t sounded any 
alarms.” 
“After a few years of looking 
at these things, you get the feel 
of them. You begin to think like 
a computer.” 
“Or you get oppressed by failure.” 
“There’s that” 
The room was shiny and efficient, glass and metal and plastic, all smooth and sterile; and it 
smelled like electricity. MacDonald knew that electricity had 
no smell, but that was die way he 
thought of it Perhaps it was the 
ozone that smelled or warm insulation or oil. Whatever it was, it 
wasn’t worth the time to find 
out and MacDonald didn’t really 
want to know. He would rather 
think of it as the smell of electricity. Perhaps that was why he 
was a failure as a scientist “A 
scientist is a man who wants to 
Imow why,” his teachers alwas^s 
had told him. 
MacDonald leaned over the 
control panel and flidced a 
switch. A thin, hissing noise filled 
the room. It was something like 
air escaping from an inner tube 
— a susuration of surrq>titious 
sibilants from subterranean sessions of seething serpents. 
THE LISTENERS 
He turned a knob, and the 
sound became vdiat someone had 
called — Tennyson? — “the murmuring of innumerable bees.” 
Again, and it became something 
from Matthew Arnold. 
. melancholy, long withdrawing roar 
Retreating, to the breath 
Of the night wind, down the 
vast edges drear 
And naked shingles of the 
world. 
TT e turned the knob once more, 
and the sound was a babble 
of distant voices, some shouting, 
some screaming, some conversing 
calmly, some whispering — all of 
them tiying beyond desperation 
to connmunicate, and everything 
just below the level of intelligibility. If he closed his eyes, MacDonald could almost see their 
faces, pressed against a distant 
screen, distorted with the awful 
effort to make themselves heard 
and imderstood. 
But they all insisted on speaking at once. MacDonald wanted 
to shout at them. “Silence, everybody! All of you but you — 
there, with the purple antenna. 
One at a time, and we’ll listen to 
all of you if it takes a hundred 
years or a hundred lifetimes.” 
MacDonald’s hand dropped 
away from the knob'. 
“Sometimes,’* Adams said, “I 
think it was a mistake to put in 
the speaker system. You begin 
to anthropomorphize. After a 
while you begin to hear things. 
Sometimes you even get messages. I don’t listen to the voices 
any more. I used to wake up in 
the night with someone whispering to me. I was just on the verge 
of getting the message that would 
solve everything, and I would 
wake up.” He flicked off the 
switch. 
“Maybe someday somebody 
will get the message,” MacDonald 
said. “That’s what the audio frequency translation is intended to 
do. To keep the attention focused. 
It can mesmerize and it can torment, but these are the conditions 
out of which spring inspiration.” 
“Also madness,” Adams said. 
“You’ve got to be able to continue.” 
“Yes.” MacDonald picked up 
the earphones Adams had put 
down and held one of them to 
his ear. 
“Tico-tico, tico-tico,” it sang. 
“They’re listening in Puerto Rico. 
Listening for words that never 
come. Tico-tico, tico-tico. They’re 
listening in Puerto Rico. Can it be 
the stars are stricken diunb?” 
MacDonald put the earphones 
down and smiled. “Maybe there’s 
inspiration in that, too.” 
“At least it takes my mind off 
the futility.” 
“Maybe off the job, too? Do 
you really want to find anyone 
out there?” 
“Why else would I be here? 
But there are times when I wonder if we would not be better off 
not knowing.” • 
“We all think that sometimes,” 
MacDonald said. 
In his office he attacked the 
stack of papers and letters again. 
When he had worked his way to 
the bottom, he sighed and got up, 
stretching. He wondered if he 
would feel better, less frustrated, 
less uncertain, if he were working 
on the Problem instead of just 
working so somebody else could 
work on the Problem. But somebody had to do it Somebody had 
to keep the Project going, personnel coming in, funds in the 
bank, feathers smoothed. 
Maybe it was more important 
that he do all the dirty little work 
in the office. Of course it was routine. Of course Lily could do it 
as well as he. But it was important that he do it, that there be 
somebody in charge who believed 
in the Project — or who never 
let his doubts be known. 
Like the Little Ear, he was a 
symbol — and it is by symbols 
men live, or refuse to let their 
despair overwhelm them. 
T he janitor was waiting for him 
in the outer office. 
“Can I see you, Mr. MacDonald?” the janitor said. 
“Of course, Joe,” MacDonald 
said, locking the door of his office carefully behind him. “What 
is it?” 
“It’s my teeth, sir.” The old 
man got to his feet and with a 
deft movement of his tongue and 
mouth dropped his teeth into his 
hand. 
MacDonald stared at them with 
a twinge of revulsion. There was 
nothing wrong with them. They 
were a carefully constructed set 
of false teeth, but they looked too 
real. MacDonald always had 
shuddered away from that which 
seemed to be what it was not, as 
if it were treacherously false. 
“They talk to me, Mr. MacDonald,” the janitor mumbled, 
staring at the teeth with what 
seemed like suspicion. “In the 
glass beside my bed at night, they 
whisper to me. About things far 
off, like. Messages, like.” 
MacDonald started. It was a 
strange word for the old man to 
use, and hard to say without 
teeth. Still, the word had been 
“messages.” But why should it be 
strange? He could have picked it 
up around the offices or the laboratories. It would be odd, indeed, if he had not picked up 
something about what was going 
on. Of course, messages. 
“I’ve heard of that sort of thing 
happening,” MacDonald said. 
“False teeth accidentally constructed into a kind of crystal set, 
THE LISTENERS 
that pick up radio waves. Particularly near a powerful station. 
And we have a lot of stray frequencies floating around, what 
with the antennas and all. Tell 
you what, Joe. We’ll make an 
appointment with the Project 
dentist to fix your teeth so that 
they don’t bother you. Any small 
alteration should do it” 
“Thank you, Mr. MacDonald,” 
the old man said. He fitted his 
teeth back into his mouth. 
“You’re a great man, Mr. MacDonald.” 
MacDonald drove the ten dark 
miles to the hacienda with a vague feeling of unease, as if he 
had done something during the 
day or left something undone that 
should have been otherwise. 
But the house was dark when 
he drove up in front, not emptydark as it had seemed to him a 
few hours before but friendlydark. Maria was asleep, breathing 
peacefully. 
IV 
^^he house was brilliant with 
-*■ lighted windows that cast long 
fingers into the night, probing the 
dark hills, and the sotmd of many 
voices stirred echoes until the 
countryside itself seemed alive. 
“Come in, Lily,” MacDonald 
said at the door, and was reminded of a winter scene when a Lily 
had met the gentlemen at the 
door and Helped tfiem off with 
tlieir overcoats. But that was anotlier Lily and another occasion 
and another place and somebody 
else’s imagination. “I’m glad you 
decided to come.” He had a can 
of beer in his hand and hie waved 
it in the general direction of the 
major center of noisemaking. 
“There’s beer in the living room 
and something more potent in the 
study — 190 proof grain alcohol, 
to be precise. Be careful with that. 
It will sneak up on you. But — 
‘nunc esf bibendum!’ 
“Where’s Mrs. MacDonald?” 
Lily asked. 
“Back there, somewhere.” MacDonald waved again. “The men, 
and a few brave women, are in 
the study. The women, and a few 
brave men, are in the living room. 
The kitchen is common territory. 
Take your choice.” 
“I really shouldn’t have come,” 
Lily said, “I offered to sj>eU Mr. 
Saunders in the control room, but 
he said I hadn’t been checked 
out It isn’t as if the computer 
couldn’t handle it all alone, and 
I know enough to call somebody 
if anything unexpected should 
happen.” 
“Shall I tell you something, 
Lily?” MacDonald said. “The 
computer could do it alone. And 
1 Now's the time for drinking! 
— Horace, Odes, 
t Who strives always to the utmost, him 
you and the computer could do 
it better than any of us, including 
me. But if the men ever feel that 
they are unnecessary, they would 
feel more useless than ever. They 
would give up. And they mustn’t 
do that” 
“Oh, Mac!” Lily said. 
“They mustn’t do that Because 
one of them is going to come up 
with the inspiration that solves 
it all. Not me. One of them. We’U 
send somebody to relieve Charley 
before the evening is over.” 
Wet immer strebens sich bemuht. 
Den konnen wit erlosen.* 
Lily sighed. “Okay, boss.” 
“And enjoy yourself!” 
“Okay, boss, okay.” 
“Find a man, Lily,” MacDonald muttered. And then he, too, 
turned toward the living room, 
for Lily was expected last 
H e listened for a moment at 
the doorway, sipping slowly 
from the warming can. 
“ — work more on gamma 
rays — ” 
“Who’s got the money to build 
a generator? Since nobody’s built 
one yet, we don’t even know what 
it might cost” 
“ — gamma ray sources should 
be a million times more rare than 
radio sources at twenty-one centimeters — ” 
“TKafs wKat Cocconi said 
nearly fifty years ago. The same 
arguments. Always the same arguments.” 
“If they’re right, they’re right.” 
“But the hydrogen emission 
line is so uniquely logical. As 
Morrison said to Cocconi — and 
Cocconi, if you remember, agreed 
— it represents a logical, prearranged rendezvous point. ‘A unique, objective standard of frequency, which must be known to 
every observer of the universe,’ 
was the way they put it.” 
“ — but the noise level — ” 
MacDonald smiled and moved 
on to the kitchen for a cold can 
of beer. 
“ — Bracewell’s ‘automated 
messengers’?” a voice asked querulously. 
“What about them?” 
“Why aren’t we looking for 
them?” 
“The point of Bracewell’s messengers is that they make themselves known to us!” 
“Maybe there’s something 
wrong with ours. After a few million years in orbit — ” 
“ — laser beams make more 
sense.” 
“And get lost in all that star 
shine?” 
“As Schwartz and Townes 
pointed out, all you have to do 
is select a wavelength of light that 
is absorbed by stellar atmospheres. Put a narrow laser beam 
THE LISTENERS 
in the center of one of the calcium 
absorption lines — ” 
In the study they were talking 
about quantum noise. 
“Quantum noise favors low frequencies.” 
“But the noise itself sets a lower limit on those frequencies.” 
“Drake calculated the most favorable frequencies, considering 
the noise level, lie between 3.2 
and 8.1 centimeters.” 
“Drake! Drake! What did he 
know? We’ve had nearly fifty 
years exp>erience on him. Fifty 
years of technological advance. 
Fifty years ago we could send 
radio messages 1,000 light-years 
and laser signals 10 light-years. 
Today those figures are 10,000 
and 500 at least.” 
“W^at if nobody’s there?” Adams said gloomily. 
Ich bin der Geist der stets verneint.^ 
“Short-pulse it, like Oliver suggested. One hundred million billion watts in a ten-billionths of a 
second would smear across the 
entire radio spectrum. Here, Mac, 
fill this, will you?” 
And MacDonald wandered 
away through the clustering 
guests toward the bar. 
“And I told Charley,” said a 
woman to two other women in 
B I am Ihe aplrlt that always donles. 
— Goetne, Faust. 
the comer, “if I had a dime for 
every dirty diaper I’ve changed, I 
sure wouldn’t be sitting here in 
Puerto Rico — ” 
“ — neutrinos,” said somebody. 
“Nuts,” said somebody else, as 
MacDonald pomed grain alcohol 
carefully into the glass and filled 
it with orange juice. “The only 
really logical medium is Q 
waves.” 
“I know — the waves we 
haven’t discovered yet but are going to discover about ten years 
from now. Only here it is nearly 
fifty years after Morrison suggested it, and we still haven’t 
discovered them.” 
TVTacDonald wended his way 
-*-^-*-back across the room. 
“It’s the night work that gets 
me,” said someone’s wife. “The 
Idds up all day, and then he 
wants me there to greet him when 
he gets home at dawn. Brother!” 
“Or what if everybody’s listening?” Adams said gloomily. 
“Maybe everybody’s sitting there, 
listening, just the way we are, 
because it’s so much cheaper than 
sending.” 
“Here you are,” MacDonald 
said. 
“But don’t you suppose somebody would have thought of that 
by this time and begin to send?” 
“Double-think it all the way 
through and figure what just occurred to you would have occur90 
red to everybody else, so you 
might as well listen. Think about 
it — everybody sitting around, 
listening. If there is anybody. Either way it makes the skin creep.” 
“All right, tiien, we ought to 
send something.” 
“What would you send?” 
“I’d have to think about it. 
Prime numbers, maybe.” 
“Think some more. What if a 
civilization weren’t mathematical?” 
“Idiot! How would they build 
an antenna?” 
“Maybe they’d rule-of-thumb 
it, like a ham. Or maybe they 
have built-in antenna.” 
“And maybe you have built-in 
antenna and don’t know it” 
MacDonald’s can of beer was 
empty. He wandered back toward 
the Idtchen again. 
“ — insist on equal time with 
the Big Ear. Even if nobody’s 
sending we could pick up the normal electronic commerce of a civilization tens of light-years away. 
The problem would be deciphering, not hearing.” 
“They’re picking it up now, 
when they’re studying the relatively close systems. Ask for a 
tape and work out your program.” 
“All right, I will. Just give me 
a chance to work up a request — ” 
MacDonald found himself beside Maria. He put his arm 
around her waist and pulled her 
close “All right?” he said to her. 
“All right.” 
T T er face was tired, though, 
* MacDonald thought. He 
dreaded the notion that she might 
be growing older, that she was 
entering middle age. He could 
face it for himself. He could feel 
the years piling up inside his 
bones. He still thought of himself, inside, as twenty, but he 
knew that he was forty-seven, and 
mostly he was glad that he had 
found happiness and love and 
peace and serenity. He even was 
Willing to pay the price in youthful exuberance and belief in his 
personal immortality. But not 
Maria! 
Nel mezzo del cammin di nostra 
vita 
Mi ritrovai per una selva oscura, 
Che la diritta via era smarri
ta.^o 
“Sure?” 
She nodded. 
He leaned close to her ear. “I 
wish it was just the two of us, as 
usual.” 
“I, too.” 
“I’m going to leave in a little 
while — ” 
“Must you?” 
I" middle of the Journey of our 
life r came to myself In a dark wood 
where the straight way was lost. 
— Dante, Inferno. 
THE LISTENERS 
“I must relieve Saunders. He’s 
on duty. Give him an opportunity 
to celebrate a little with the otBers.” 
“Can’t you send somebody 
else?” 
“Who?” MacDonald gestured 
with good humored futility at all 
the clusters of people held together by bonds of ordered sounds 
shared consecutively. “It’s a good 
party. No one will miss me.” 
“I will.” 
“Of course, querida." 
“You are their mother, father, 
priest, all in one,” Maria said. 
“You worry about them too 
much.” 
“I must keep them together. 
What else am I good for?” 
“For much more.” 
MacDonald hugged her with 
one arm. 
“Look at Mac and Maria, will 
you?” said someone who was having trouble with' his consonants. 
“What God-damned devotion!” 
MacDonald smiled and suffered himself to be pounded on the 
back while he protected Maria in 
front of him. “I’ll see you later,” 
he said. 
As he passed the living room 
someone was saying, “Like Edie 
said, we ought to look at the longchain molecules in carbonaceous 
chondrites. No telling how far 
they’ve traveled — or been sent — 
or what messages might be coded 
in the molecules.” 
As Ke closed tBe front door behind him, the noise dropped to a 
roar and then a mutter. He stopped for a moment at Hie door of 
the car and looked up at the sky. 
E quindi uscimmo a riveder le 
stelleP
The noise from the hacienda 
reminded him of something — the 
speakers in the control room. All 
those voices talking, talking, and 
from here he could not understand a thing. 
Somewhere there was an idea 
if he could only concentrate on 
it hard enough'. But he had drunk 
one beer too many — or perhaps 
one too few. 
V 
\ fter long hours of listening to 
the voices, MacDonald always felt a little crazy, but tonight it was worse than usual. 
Perhaps it was all the conversation before, or the beers, or something else — some deeper concern 
that would not surface. 
But then the listeners had to 
be crazy to begin with — to get 
committed to a project that might 
go for centuries without results. 
Tioo-tico, tico-tico . 
Even if they could pick up a 
H And thence we Issued aut, again to 
see the stars. 
— Dante. Infonio. 
message, they still would likely 
be dead and gone before any exchange could take place even with 
the nearest likely star. What kind 
of mad dedication could sustain 
such perseverance? 
They're listening in Puerto Ri-‘ 
CO . 
Religion could. At least once 
it did, during the era of cathedral 
building in Europe, the cathedrals 
that took centuries to build. 
“What are you doing, fellow?” 
“I’m working for ten francs a 
day.” 
“And what are you doing?” 
“I’m laying stone.” 
“And you — what are you doing?” 
“I am building a cathedral.” 
They were building cathedrals, 
most of them. Most of them had 
that religious mania about their 
mission that would sustain them 
through a lifetime of labors in 
which no progress could be seen. 
Listening for words that never 
come . 
The mere layers of stone and 
those who worked for pay alone 
eliminated themselves in time and 
left only those who kept alive 
in themselves the concept, the 
dream. 
But they had to be a little mad 
to begin with. 
Can it be the stars are stricken 
dumb? 
Tonight he had heard the 
voices nearly all night long. They 
kept tT3dng to tell him something, 
something urgent, something he 
should do, but He could not quite 
make out the words. There was 
only the babble of distant voices, 
urgent and unintelligible. 
Tico-tico, tico-tic . 
He had wanted to shout “Shut 
up!” to the universe. “One at a 
time! . You first!” But of 
course there was no way to do 
that Or had he tried? Had he 
shouted? 
They're listening with ears this 
big! 
Had he dozed at the console 
with the voices mumbling in his 
ears, or had he only thought He 
dozed? Or had he only dreamed 
he waked? Or dreamed he dreamed? 
Listening for thoughts just like 
their own. 
There was a madness to it all, 
but perhaps it was a divine madness. And is not that madness that 
which sustains man in his terrible 
self-knowledge, the driving madness which demands reason of a 
casual universe, the awful aloneness which seeks among the stars 
for companionship? 
Can it be that we are all alone? 
* I ^Ke ringing of the telephone 
half-penetrated through the 
mists of mesmerization. He picked up the handset half-expecting 
that it would be the universe calling, perhaps with' a clipped BritTHE LISTENERS 
ish accent. “Hello there, MacU 
Hello. Hello. I say, we seem to 
have a bad connection, what? Just 
wanted you to know that we’re 
here. Are you there? Are you listening? Message on the way. May 
not get there for a couple of centuries. Do be around to answer, 
will you? That’s a good being. 
Righto . .” 
Only it wasn’t. It was the familiar American voice of Charley 
Saunders saying, “Mac, there’s 
been an acddent. Olsen is on his 
way to relieve you, but I think 
you’d better leave now. It’s Maria.” 
Leave it. Leave it all. What 
does it matter? But leave the controls on automatic; the computer 
can take care of it all. Maria! 
Get in the car. Start it Don’t 
fumble! That’s it Go. Go. Car 
passing. Must be Olsen. No matter. 
What kind of accident? Why 
didn’t I ask? What does it matter 
what kind of acddent? Maria. 
Nothing could have happened. 
Nothing serious. Not with all 
those people around. Tiil desperandum.^ And yet — why did 
Charley call if it was not serious? 
Must be serious. I must be prepared for something bad, something that will shake the world, 
that will tear my insides. 
I must not break up in front 
u There's no cause tor despair. 
— Horact^ Odes. 
of tiiem. Why not? Why must I 
appear infallible? Why must I always be cheerful, imperturbable, 
my faith unshaken? Why me? If 
there is something bad, if something impossibly bad has happened to Maria, what will matter? 
Ever? Why didn’t I ask Charley 
what it was? Why? The bad can 
wait; it will get no worse for being unknown. 
What does the universe care for 
my agony? I am nothing. My 
feelings are iKrthing to anyone 
but me. My only possible meaning to the universe is the Project. 
Only this slim potential links me 
with eternity. My love and my 
agony are me, but the significance 
of my life or death is the Project. 
HIC SITUS EST PHAETHON CVRRVS AURIGA 
PATERNI 
QVEM SI NON TENVIT 
MAGNIS TAMEN EXCIDIT AVSIS^ 
going home. All seemed normal. 
Saunders met him at the door. 
“Doctor Lessenden is here. He’s 
with Maria.” 
T he odor of stale smoke and the 
memory of babble still lingered in the air, but someone had 
been busy. The party remains had 
been cleaned up. No doubt they 
had all pitched in. They were 
good people. 
“Betty found her in the bathroom off your bedroom. She 
wouldn’t have been there except 
the others were occupied. I blame 
myself. I shouldn’t have let you 
relieve me. Maybe if you had 
been here . But I knew you 
wanted it that way.” 
“No one’s to blame. She was 
alone a great deal,” MacDonald 
said. “What happened?” 
“Didn’t I tell you? Her wrists. 
Slashed with a razor. Both of 
them. Betty found her in the 
bathtub. Like pink lemonade, she 
said.” 
By the time he reached the hacieda, MacDonald was breathing 
evenly. His emotions were under 
control. Dawn had grayed the 
eastern sky. It was a customary 
hour for Project personnel to be 
U Here Phaeton lies: In Phoebus’ car he 
tarebL And thouj^ he greatly tailed, 
more greatly dared. 
— Ovid. Metamorphoses. 
It Ploroed to the depth of my heart by 
a blow unforeseen — and mortal. 
— CoroeUIe, I« Old. 
Perce jusgues au fond du coeur 
D’une atteinte imprevue aussi 
bien que mortelle?^ 
A fist tightened inside MacDonald’s gut and then slowly relaxed. Yes, it had been that He 
had known it, hadn’t he? He had 
known it would happen ever since 
the sleeping pills, even though he 
had kept telling himself, as she 
had told him, that the overdose 
had been an accident. 
Or had he known? He knew 
only that Saunders’ news Had 
been no surprise. 
Then they were at the bedroom door, and Maria was Isdng 
under a blanket on the bed, 
scarcely making it moimd over 
her body, and her arms were on 
top of the blankets, palms up, 
bandages like white paint across 
the olive perfection of her arms 
— now, MacDonald reminded 
himself, no longer perfection but 
marred with ugly red lips that 
spoke to him of hidden misery 
and untold sorrow and a life that 
was a lie ... 
Doctor Lessenden looked up, 
sweat trickling down from his 
hairline. “The bleeding is stopped, but she’s lost a good deal 
of blood. I’ve got to take her to 
the hospital for a transfusion. The 
ambulance should be here any 
minute.’’ He paused. MacDonald 
looked at Maria’s face. It was 
paler than he had ever seen it. It 
looked almost waxen as if it were 
already arranged for all time on 
a satin pillow. “Her chances are 
fifty-fifty,” Lessenden said. 
And then the attendants pushed their way past him with their 
litter. 
“Betty found this on her dressing table,” Saimders said. He 
handed MacDonald a slip of paper folded once. 
THE LISTENERS 
MacDonald unfolded it: Je 
m’en vay chercher tin grand Peutetre.^ 
VI 
E veryone was surprised to see 
MacDonald at the office. 
They did not say anything, and 
he did not volunteer the information that he could not bear to sit 
at home, among the remembrances, and wait for word to 
come. But they asked him about 
Maria, and he said, “Doctor Lessenden is hopeful. She’s still unconscious. Apparently will be for 
some time. The doctor said I 
might as well wait here as at the 
hospital. I think I made them 
nervous. They’re hopeful. Maria’s 
still unconscious . .” 
O lente, lente currite, noctis 
equi! . .^6 
The stars move still, time runs, 
the clock will strike .... 
Finally MacDonald was alone. 
He pulled out paper and pencil 
and worked for a long time on the 
statement, and then he balled it 
up and threw it into the wastebasket, scribbled a single sentence 
on another sheet of paper, and 
called Lily. 
15 I am eolmr to seek a great pcrtiaps. 
— Rabelais on hJs deathbed. 
16 Oh slowly, slowly run, hoisee •! the 
night! . , 
— Marlowe, Br. Vanstas. 
GALAXY 
THE LISTENERS 
She came in almost immediately. 
“Send this!” 
She glanced at it “No, Mac, 
I can’t" 
“Send it!” 
“But—” 
“It’s not an impulse. I’ve 
thought it over carefully. Send 
it” 
Slowly she left, holding the 
piece of paper gingerly in her fingertips. MacDonald pushed the 
papers around on his desk, waiting for the telephone to ring. But, 
without knocking, unannounced, 
Saunders came through the door 
first. 
“You can’t do this, Mac,” 
Saunders said. 
MacDonald sighed. “Lily told 
you. I would fire that girl if she 
weren’t so loyal.” 
“Of course she told me. This 
isn’t just you. It affects the whole 
Project.” 
“That’s what I’m thinking 
about.” 
“I think I know what you’re 
going through, Mac — ” Saimders 
stopped. “No, of course I don’t 
know what you’re going through. 
It must be hell. But don’t desert 
us. Think of the Project!” 
“That’s what I’m thinking 
about. I’m a failure, Charley. Everything I touch — ashes.” 
“You’re the best of us.” 
“A poor linguist? An indifferent engineer? I have no qualifica98 
tions for this job, Charley. You 
need someone with ideas to head 
the Project, someone dynamic, 
someone who can lead, someone 
with — charisma.” 
A few minutes later he went 
over it all again with Olsen. 
When he came to the qualifications part, all Olsen could say 
was: “You give a good party, 
Mac.” 
It was Adams, the skeptic, who 
affected him most. “Mac, you’re 
what I believe in instead of God.” 
Sonnenbom said, “You are the 
Project. If you go it all falls 
apart. It’s over.” 
“It seems like it, always, but it 
never happens to those things that 
have life in them. The Project 
was here before I came. It will be 
here after I leave. It must be 
longer lived than any of us, because we are for the years and it 
is for the centuries.” 
After Sonnenbom, MacDonald 
told Lily wearily. “No more, 
Lily.” 
None of them had had the 
courage to mention Maria, but 
MacDonald had considered that 
failure, too. She had tried to communicate with him a month ago 
when she took the pills, and he 
had been imable to imderstand. 
How could he riddle the stars 
when he couldn’t even understand 
those closest to him. Now he had 
to pay. 
Meine Ruh’isi hin, 
Meine Herz ist schwer?-'^ 
What would Maria want? He 
knew what she wanted, but, if she 
lived, he could not let her pay 
that price. Too long she had been 
there when he wanted her, waiting like a doll put away on a shelf 
for him to return and take her 
down, so that he could have the 
strength to continue. 
And somehow the agony Had 
built up inside her, the dreadful 
progress of the years, most dread 
of all to a beautiful woman growing old, alone, too much alone. He 
had been selfish. He had kept her 
to himself. He had not wanted 
children to mar the perfection 
of their being together. 
Perfection for him; less than 
that for her. 
Perhaps it was not too late for 
them if she lived. And if she died 
— he would not have the heart to 
go on with work to which, he 
knew now, he could contribute 
nothing. 
Que acredito sa ventura, 
Morir querdo y vivir loco?^ 
And finally the call came. 
“She’s going to be all right, Mac,” 
Lessenden said. And after a moment, “Mac, I said — ” 
“I heard.” 
“She wants to see you.” 
“I’ll be there.” 
THE LISTENERS 
“SKe said to give you a message. ‘Tell Robby I’ve been a little crazy in the head. I’ll be better 
now. That great perhaps looks too 
certain from here. And tell him 
not to be crazy in the head, too.’ ” 
A T acDonald put down the telephone and walked througH 
the doorway and through the outer office, a feeling in his chest as 
if it were going to burst. “She’s 
going to be all right,” he threw 
over his shoulder at Lily. 
“Oh, Mac—” 
In the haU, Joe the janitor 
stopped him. “Mr. MacDonald—” 
MacDonald stopped. “Been to 
the dentist 3^t, Joe?” 
“No, sir, not yet, but it’s not — ” 
“Don’t go. I’d like to put a tape 
recorder beside your bed for a 
while, Joe. Who knows?” 
“Thank you, sir. But it’s . 
They say you’re leaving, Mr. 
MacDonald.” 
“Somebody else will do it.” 
“You don’t understand. Don’t 
go, Mr. MacDonald!” 
“Why not, Joe?” 
“You’re the one who cares.” 
MacDonald had been about to 
move on, but that stopped him. 
IT l/ly peace Is trone. 
My neart Is neavy. 
— Goethe, Fanst. 
18 For If he like a nuulinan lived. 
At least he like a wise one died. 
— Cervantes, Don Quixote. 
Ful wys is he that kan Hymselven knowe! 
He turned and went bade to 
tlie office. “Have you got tSat 
sKeet of paper, Lily?” 
“Yes. sir.” 
“Have you sent it?” 
“No, sir.” 
“Bad girl. Give it to me.” 
He read the sentence on the 
paper once more: I have great 
confidence in the goals and ulti
mate success of the Project, but 
for personal reasons I mast submit my resignation. 
He studied it for a moment 
Pigmaei gigantum humeris impositi ptusquam ipm gigantes vident?^ 
And Ke tore it up. 
— JAMES E. GUNN 
l» A dwarf standing on the shoulder of 
a Riant may see farther than a giant 
himself. 
— Lucan* De Belle ClTlUe 
Be sure to watch for 
WORLDS OF FANTASY 
The magazine you asked fori All-new stories of adult fantasy and 
great tales of sword-and-sorcery. Edited by Lester del Rey and 
featuring such fine writers as: 
L SntAGUE DE CAMP & UN CARTER 
JOHN JAKES 
ROBERT E. HOWARD 
MACK REYNOIDS 
ROBERT SILVERBERG 
J. R. R. TOLKIEN 
Volume 1, Number 1 on safe SOONI 
Don't miss !tl 
Newsstand Only 
for 
BY WILLY LEY 
Mission 
To A Comet 
Tt is one of the by-products of the 
Space Age that comet fear, 
still rampant in 1910-11 at the 
latest appearance of Halley’s 
comet, is a thing of the past But 
while hardly anybody is afraid of 
comets any more, the old curiosity, possibly wnth a very faint 
tinge of awe, has remained. We 
still want to know everything that 
can be known about a comet. 
Since telescopes, astronomical 
cameras and spectroscopes have 
done everything they could, it is 
quite natural to look in the general direction of the latest astronomical tool, the space probe. 
Have we progressed far enough 
to send a mission to a comet? The 
answer is yes; we can and we 
should, if we can find a suitable 
comet, one that is well behaved. 
To find out what constitutes 
good behavior on the part of a 
comet, we have to consider first 
that we are going to shoot from 
a moving platform: our earth. 
102 
The earth moves in its orbit at 
the rate of 18^2 miles per second. 
The distance from the sun is virtually uniform; during the first 
week of January it is 91 million 
miles and during the first week 
of July it is 94J4 million miles, a 
difference of only 3 per cent. 
When the earth is closest to the 
sun (perihelion) it must, in accordance with Kepler’s Second 
Law, move somewhat faster than 
at the time when it is farthest 
from the sun (aphelion), but 
again the difference in orbital 
velocity is minor. 
As distinct from the nearly circular orbits of the planets, the 
orbits of comets are quite elon
GALAXY 
o 
O) 
■o S 
• s 
£ a 
e 
o 
“■=5 
I 
a. 
o 
Z 
'gi 
b K 
0^0) 
i ^ E 
0 3* 
a 
w 
o> 
3 
< 
5 
O' 
■: ^ 
!k 
e o 
l« 
tS o 
R 
o 
o 
t> 
o 
00 
s> 
Os 
o 
c 
M O 
K 00 
O ^ Os 
^ t; c 
D 
>^0)0 
o 
U) 
& 
s 
o 
u 
Q 
o 
s 
III 
o. 
fit 
o 
X 
V) 
ca 
< 
u 
e S 
o a 
|1 
s o 
w ^ 
TJ 5 
e < 
o 
d 
h 
o 
Os 
o * 
o * 
CS N 
o o* 
e 
o 
O 
K 
CO Tt 
d 
d 
CO 
r* 
d 
• 
K 
CO 
Os 
CO 
o!S 
*o 
R 
o 
K 
a* 
d 
o o 
d 
d 
to so 
r: «o 
00 in 
d o 
0 ’ 
*0 lO Os r
JO p ^ CN 
S> K V> 00 
o d d d 
O c 
§ 
K 
CO 
S 
s 
£ ® 
«o 
*o 
00 
CO 
'O *o 
V) 
s? 
*o 
'O 
*s 
€) flu 
d 
d 
d 
d 
pj 
Q.< 
*Q VI 
.2 g 
a. ^ 
3.3 
6.24 
q 
6.42 
4.91 
«o 
6.32 
6.16 
00 sa <) 
•I *1 w 
03 lo — 
d 
00 
CO 
o 
Os 
q 
d 
V) 
JO 
'O 
d 
d 
to 
q 
r~ 
f" 
«r> 
o 
E 
o 
z 
o 
u 
w U 
■J. 
-o ^ 
p ® 
o 
c 5 o ,5 c •£: 
lu UL O O N O 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
®J -g 
09^ ^ 
.2. C 
JK o 
«0 X 
e 
■s 
. ® 
•)> E 
*2 
 . „ s-iji8 
:S S I I Is 
gated, with one notable exception. 
Fig. 1 shows a diagram of the 
orbit of Halley’s comet; it is correct as far as it goes; we’ll discuss 
later what this diagram fails to 
show. The more elongated the 
orbit of a comet, the greater the 
difference of its orbital velocity 
at perihelion and aphelion. 
For a mission to a comet we 
would like to find one which has 
an orbit with aphelion or perihelion close to the earth’s distance 
from the sun. The “ideal” comet 
for a probe would be one that 
orbits the sim inside the orbit of 
the earth, with’ aphelion near the 
earth’s orbit. If there were such 
a comet, it would have an orbital 
velocity at aphelion not very different from the earth’s orbital 
velocity. However, no such’ comet 
is known, so we have to look 
around for the next best thing. 
That next best thing is a comet 
with its perihelion near the earth’s 
orbit, where the comet will move 
faster than the earth. But if the 
orbit of the comet is not excessively elongated, the difference 
between the comet’s and the 
earth’s velocities would be manageable. Here nature has provided a fairly large selection; four 
such comets are shown in Fig. 2. 
At first glance, the least suitable 
of the four is comet Encke, because it crosses the earth’s orbit 
and the velocity difference is 
considerable. 
T>ut a diagram is not good 
enough to show what is going 
on; figures are needed. They were 
assembled in a table by J. C. Lair 
half a dozen years ago — but this 
table is by no means a complete 
listing of all the known comets 
with orbital periods of a dozen 
years or less. There are at least a 
score of others. 
Now with this table as a guide, 
we can go to work, eliminating 
the difficult cases and retaining 
the more promising ones. Going 
first by the proximity of the 
comet’s perihelion to the earth’s 
orbit, comets Gale, GiacobiniZinner, Poos-Winnecke, Schaumasse, Tuttle and Tuttle-Giacobini all look fine. None of them 
is more than 20 per cent farther 
from the sun than the earth’s orbit. But they all have rather elongated orbits, a fact that is expressed by the figure for the eccentricity in the third column. A 
comet with an orbit of high eccentricity will move very fast at 
its perihelion. Let us assume that 
we have two comets, both’ with 
perihelia at the orbit of the earth, 
or one A.U. (astronomical imit) 
from the sun. One of these two 
comets has its aphelion five A.U. 
from the sun, but the aphelion 
of the other is ten A.U. from the 
sun. The one with’ the aphelion 
farther away, the one with the 
longer ellipse, will move much 
faster at its perihelion than the 
one witK the shorter ellipse. 
So let us say, somewhat arbi* 
trarily, that we reject comets 
with an orbital eccentricity of 0.7 
or larger. This leaves only two: 
Pons-Winnecke and Tuttle-Giacobini. Now we’ll progress to the 
next point, the inclination of the 
comet’s orbit to the ecliptic. The 
ecliptic is the plane of the orbit 
of the earth; something moving 
in the same plane would be said 
to have an inclination of zero. 
Something moving in an orbit 
with its plane at an angle to the 
ecliptic is said to have an inclination of so and so many degrees 
of arc. A mission to a body moving in an inclined orbit is more 
expensive in terms of fuel and 
generally more difficult; the higher the inclination the more difficult the out-of-ecliptic mission. 
Looking at our two comets 
Fig. 2, The Orbits of four short-period 
comets. Comet Encke is the only 
known short-period comet with its 
perihelion inside the orbit of 
Mercury. 
with Otherwise reasonable orbits, 
we find to our dismay that just 
these two show rather high inclinations, 21 *.7 and 13® .8 respectively. The sad result is that none 
of the comets of our original list 
has an orbit that would be easy 
to reach. 
At the same time, a glance at 
the table immediately reveals 
two comets with low inclination, 
namely comets Forbes and Kopff. 
Both also have low eccentricities 
— about 0.55 in both cases — but 
the perihelia of both are rather 
far away, about 1.5 A.U. — a little farther than the orbit of Mars. 
If a choice had to be made now, 
it would consist of a careful 
weighing of a number of points 
not yet mentioned — as for example, the question of how well 
the orbit of the comet is known. 
It might be that the orbit of 
Tuttle-Qiacobini is far better 
known than that of Kopff (I believe this is the case) so that 
better knowledge would overcome 
the general unhappiness caused 
by high inclinations. Or the choice 
may be influenced by the fact 
that one of the two comets happens to be observable in the sky 
for a few months prior to the 
date of departure of the mission. 
Then a good orbit could be established just before the mission gets 
underway. 
Somewhat ironically, the comet 
1«5 
with the best-known orbit, namely Encke, which Has been under 
observation since 1786 and has 
the shortest orbital period of any 
comet, has a particularly imsuitable orbit for interception. Its orbit is too eccentric; the velocity 
with which it crosses the earth’s 
orbit is too high; its perihelion is 
far inside the earth’s orbit, and its 
velocity at perihelion is such that 
a probe would have difficulty 
matching it. 
Instead of trying for Encke’s 
comet, it might be better to get 
a precise orbit determination for 
comet Forbes or comet Kopff. 
The latter is due back at its perihelion in October, 1970; the former has just passed through' its 
perihelion and is due back in 
July, 1974. Of course, it is known 
that things can easily go wrong 
with' comet orbits. Since the comets themselves have so little mass, 
they are easy victims of the gravitational fields of the larger planets. About a century ago the 
small comet Biela was even tom 
in two. Unless a comet orbit is 
very well known, it is impossible 
to predict the orbital changes a 
passage near a major planet will 
produce. But even with an imperfectly known orbit, it is at 
least possible to compute whether 
the comet will come close to a 
major planet. In other words, 
even with an imperfectly known 
orbit one might be able to say 
106 
that orbital changes are unlikely 
because the comet, on this particular trip around the sun, will not 
come near a planet. 
J ust what is a mission to a 
comet supposed to find out? 
The currently accepted idea of 
the nature of a comet is the one 
conceived by Fred L. Whipple a 
few decades ago; a comet consists of frozen gases. Solid matter, namely cosmic dust, is indubitably imbedded in these frozen gases, but it is only a minor 
constituent. When the comet 
comes within a certain distance 
of the sun, somewhere between 
the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, 
the frozen gases begin to evaporate, forming the so-called coma 
(literally: head of hair) around 
the comet’s body, called the nucleus. Soon the radiation pressure 
of the sun “blows” some of the 
coma away so that it streams behind as a taU. 
Measuring the length of the 
tail and the diameter of the coma 
by astronomical observations is 
no problem, if we disregard the 
question of whether the tail as 
well as the coma may have invisible portions of very low density. Estimating the diameter of 
the nucleus is already difficult, 
and calculations of the mass of a 
nucleus show a wide divergence. 
The same goes for estimates 
about the density of the coma. 
A probe flying through a comet’s tail and its coma, moving 
with nearly the same velocity relative to tiie sun as the comet it- , 
self, would answer these questions. Though the mass of a 
comet is small compared to that 
of a planet, it is gigantic compared to that of the probe. The 
probe would therefore be deflected from its pre-calculated course; 
from the degree of this deflection 
the mass of the nucleus could be 
calculated with great accuracy. 
The chemical nature of the gases 
that make up a comet could be 
established more completely than 
it can be done from observations 
from the ground. 
And then there is a problem 
left over from the nineteenth century, when French, German and 
Russian astronomers gave it a 
great deal of thought and attention. Astronomical books, then as 
now, said that comets were visible 
by reflected sunlight. But when 
these observers tried to establish 
the luminosity of a comet, they 
repeatedly found that a comet 
emitted more light than could be 
accounted for by mere reflection 
of sunli^t Some guessed that 
chemical reactions in the coma 
and tail produced this extra luminosity. Others said that it was 
more likely to be electrical in nature. The problem of the extra 
luminosity was never solved; it 
was slowly forgotten. The general 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
Fig. 3. The portion of the orbit of Holley's 
comet near Hs perihelion. The 
"nodal line" is the line connecting 
the two points where the comet's 
orbit goes through the ecliptic. 
lack of bright comets during the 
twentieth century probably contributed to the lack of interest. 
True, the observers of the nineteenth century did not really 
measure a comet’s luminosity but 
estimated it visually with the 
backing of much' experience. It 
may have been just a collection 
of mistakes, but we caimot be 
sure. At any event, a probe would 
clear this up. 
Tl^hile all the thinking about a 
’ ’ suitable comet for such a 
mission was going on, several 
people, living thousands of miles 
apart and not knowing what the 
others were thinking, asked themselves: why not go after the big 
one, namely Halley’s comet? It is 
due again in the Spring of 1986. 
Here we have a large comet with 
a reasonably well-known orbit 
The uncertainties now existing 
about the precise date and so 
forth of its next approach could 
be established by observation a 
few months before the event — 
obviously a large comet can be 
observed for a longer time than 
a small one. But while Halle 3 r’s 
comet is what is called an easy 
object for observation, it is anything but easy as a target for a 
probe. 
This is the point where facts 
have to be added to the information contained in Fig. 1. The diagram shows that Halley’s comet 
is retrograde: it moves around the 
sun in a direction opposite to the 
motion of the planets. This by 
itself makes life difficult, because 
it looks as if comet and probe 
must pass each other like two 
jets flying in opposite directions. 
The period during which useful 
measurements can be taken will 
be very brief indeed, even with 
very sophisticated instrumentation. To make it all still worse, 
Halley’s comet Kas an orbit with 
the rather high inclination of 
16°.5, so it would have to be in108 
tercepted by the probe when it 
passes through the ecliptic (Fig. 
3.) 
Let us have a few figures about 
its orbit now. Aphelion is beyond 
Neptune’s orbit at a distance of 
35.3 A.U. from the sim — it was 
passed in 1948. Orbital velocity 
at aphelion is about 2.33 miles 
per second. The perihelion is at 
0.59 A.U., or between the orbits 
of Mercury and Venus; orbital 
velocity at perihelion is just a 
shade below 34 miles per second. 
The calculated time of the next 
perihelion passage is Wednesday, 
February 5, 1986, at 3:50 A.M. 
(EST), with an unknown factor 
of uncertainty at the moment. 
However, at its previous appearance the comet was first photographed when it was at a distance 
of 3.2 A.U. from the sun, 221 
days prior to perihelion passage. 
It was seen first with the naked 
eye (by Prof. Max Wolf of the 
Koenigstuhl Observatory of the 
University of Heidelberg), 68 
dajrs before perihelion passage. 
We can expect that it will be 
spotted photographically at a 
longer distance than 3 A.U. next 
time, possibly as much as 10 A.U., 
so that there will be ample time 
for correcting the orbit calculations. 
B ecause the perihelion passage 
is still 18 years in the future, 
our thinking about a probe to 
Halley’s comet need not be restricted to today’s rockets, today’s instnimentation and today’s methods of launching a 
space probe toward a distant target. For some time now, space 
experts have been talking about 
pomething they call “swing-b}^” 
or "swing-around” missions. None 
has been performed yet, but the 
principle is to utilize the gravitational field of a planet to alter 
the direction of a space probe to 
accomplish something that could 
not be done directly. 
It so happens that the planet 
Saturn will be available for a 
swing-by maneuver when Halley’s comet passes it about 900 
days prior to its next perihelion 
passage. On a flat diagram it 
looks as if comet and planet will 
come fairly close to each other at 
that time; in reality, because of 
the high inclination of the comet’s orbit, they will be far apart. 
But the important point is that 
both planet and comet vrill be in 
about the same direction in the 
sky as seen from the earth. If we 
sent a space probe to Saturn in 
1973, it would get to Saturn’s 
orbit at the right time, at a point 
not far from the position of the 
planet. Because of its inertia, the 
probe would overshoot the orbit 
of Saturn (Fig. 4), but its original 
fairly straight path would be bent 
into a large hairpin curve by the 
planet’s gravity. If the position 
of the probe relative to the planet 
were properly chosen, the probe 
would make a return flight to the 
sim that would parallel the orbit 
of the comet and slowly approach 
it in the course of 400 days, fi
Fig. 4. A totalled twingdjy mluion for a probe fo Hallo/t Comet. Tbe twlng4iy b 
occomplkhed by etlUzing the gravitational field of Saturn t* bend the probe'* 
orbit into the desired path. 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
nally coming close enough so that 
a soft landing of the probe on the 
comet’s nucleus would be a distinct possibility. 
Right now, in 1968, such a mission is beyond the state of the art, 
except for the rocket itself. The 
Satum-V, with suitable upper 
stages, could provide the necessary lift and velocity. The difficulties are at the electronic end; 
signals will have to be sent over 
distances so great that the signal 
will need up to 13}4 hours to 
reach the probe; the return signal will, of course, take just as 
long. However, the probe will not 
have to leave imtil five years 
from now, so there is time to 
think and work around tire difficulties. 
— WILLY LEY 
★ ★ ★ ★ ★ 
FORECAST 
Next month Is our eighteenth birthday, and the guests at the party 
include some very old friends — ^ and some new ones. 
For openers, there's a story called The Villains from Vega IV by 
Gold. Well, not exactly by Gold. It's by two Golds — H.L., who was 
Galaxy's founding editor, and E.J., who happens to be his son. 
Obviously genes will tell; and obviously Gene Gold's genes carry some 
handy literary traits. 
Now that we think of it, this may be the only father-son collaboration in all of science fiction. Anybody know of another? 
In the same issue Christopher Anvil gives us Behind fhe Sandrat 
Hoax, Kris Neville takes us to Thyre Planet and Mack Reynolds tells 
us about a Criminal in Utopia. Which presents a problem for his 
criminal. Think about it: Here you are, a bright young man with larceny 
in your heart, living in a society where money is just a quaint old 
memory from the dark ages and ail transactions are handled by unirersal credit cards. What do you steal? How do you keep what you 
have stolen? 
There's more of course — Willy Ley's For Your Information, Algis 
Budrys's book reviews, a "non-fact" article by Larry S. Todd called 
The V/arbots. Interesting piece. It's a history of armored warfare, for 
the next 12,000 years, illustrated by the author himself. 
GALAXY 
NON-FACT ARTICLE 
Come take a trip with Galaxy 
to the ends of the Earth — the 
end of the Earth as we know it! 
this issue, Galaxy’s Va~ cation Magazine supplement takes you to some of the 
world’s newest and most unusual 
travel spots in this year of 1988. 
Our first stop this month will 
be the Sahara Desert. In search 
of a whipping boy, the public is 
blaming this on DeGauUe. Of 
course, le bon General did not invent the Bomb. 
But he did pick the Sahara for 
a target area. Who wouldn’t? It 
seemed a logical spot. How could 
the French scientists have known 
that those big dunes weren’t just 
sand, but sand-covered cliffs; 
white chalk and limestone cliffs 
like the ones they’re so enthusiastic about at Dover? 
And that’s all it took limestone, 
sand and heat of the last bomb 
they set off. After the dust cleared, so to speak, there they were 
i 
with' a desert that was really useless. Because it had cooled and 
annealed. Into glass. 
'^h'e entire Sahara hadn’t been 
affected — just about a thousand-mile radius reaching out 
from around the target site. But it 
couldn’t be classified as a desert 
any more, could it? They wanted 
to re-name it, but as there was 
not exactly any precedent to 
guide them, the public has solved 
their dilemma by calling it the 
Sahara Glass Flats. 
After the shock (and the radiation) wore off, the French 
thought this would be the eighth 
wonder of the world. A fantastique 
tourist attraction. It took just one 
expedition t» show them how 
wrong they were. Tour groups 
through this land of glass have 
been discontinued until someone 
develops buses with foam-rubber 
tires that won’t puncture. 
You see, this is primitive glass. 
It’s not tempered or treated with 
any of your modem this and thats 
so it won’t shatter or crack or 
break when you drop it. They 
thought it would’ve aimealed into a solid mass. But it didn’t. It’s 
stratified like most areas of rocky 
land are. Oh, a few of the dunes 
are solid — like icebergs. But 
that’s worse yet 
The only way to go in is by helicopter. If you do go, don’t forget your heavy hoots, 3rour 
112 
smoke-glass sunglasses and asbestos gloves. 
The boots? So you’ll have feet 
left after walking over the glass , 
— crunch, shatter, tinkle, crash, ■ 
scnmch. And the glasses? That ^ 
stuff reflects the sun. It catches it 
beautifully and throws it back * 
prismatically from every angle. 
Then the gloves — if y»u think 
the sun heated up the sand that 
was there before, you should feel 
what it does to miles and miles 
of glass! 
You’ll have to fly in every 
morning and drop down by ropes. 
No landings. No campates. It 
would make one hell of a place 
for a bedroll — glass splinters 
and slivers who knows where. 
And do leave those dunes alone. 
It’s one thing to pick-axe your 
way up a berg or glacier, but a 
hot iceberg? Forget it If you so 
much as bmsh an arm or leg 
against the edge, presto, seconddegree bums. You’d need asbestos clothing, and then you’d pass 
out from the heat 
But don’t forget your cameras. ^ 
You can fly across at different 
times of the day and see the „ 
whole place for the first time each' 
time. When the sun rises, the glass 
is one color; when it sets, it’s 
turned yet another. 
That’s the clear glass. Wait till 
you see the areas of colored glass. 
There’s one strip, about two 
miles long and a mile wide, of 
green glass that looks like an oasis 
from a chopper. There’s emerald 
apple green and kelly and nile, 
, chartreuse and p>ea and hundreds 
of green and blue-green variations. All it took for green glass 
was a little copper in the mix. 
*■ Then there are acres of cr3rstal, chunks of it, good-sized rocks 
and boulders. Heavy, shimmering, 
captive prisms of crystal. That’s 
glass with lead in it. 
And the red glass! Patches of 
it all over that desert. From the 
air it looked like a wounded giant 
walked along scattering drops of 
blood. In some spots there are 
huge smears where the giant must 
have stopped to rest. But red glass 
doesn’t come from blood. It comes 
from gold! And some of those 
drops of gold-bearing blood are 
a hundred yards across. 
There’s one field where the red 
glass mixed with the lead crystal. 
It’s fantastic to walk through 
there, kicking those red prisms. 
There are no rubies like it in the 
•• whole world, and your cameras 
can’t do it justice. (Provided you 
remember to bring all the neces^ sary filters.) 
'^he whole place is a psychedelic 
delight. Pick up one of those 
crystal rocks and look through it 
at the other glass. It’s better than 
any artificially induced state. Except, of course, you are with your 
heavy boots and insulated gloves, 
THE WONDERS WE OWE DEGAULLE 
walking crunch’, scrunch over the 
poor fragile stuff. 
There’s still the question of 
what to do with miles of broken 
glass. Maybe there’s a whole new 
industry about to spring up, a 
fortune waiting for someone. 
All that gold waiting to be melted out. Plus the copper, and you 
should see the stretches of black 
glass! Layers of it, exotic, shiny; 
it looks like obsidian. That’rf colored with iron, and some of it 
might have silver in it, too. There 
are miles of it. Then there are the 
fields where the sand fused with 
manganese and turned purple, 
violet, amethyst, A sunset over 
these areas is unbelievable. 
But forget the idea of selling 
the choice pieces of crystal as 
souvenirs. Of what? The biggest 
blunder anyone’s made on Earth 
so far? Besides, if you’ve seen one 
rock made of crystal, you’ve seen 
them all. It can be ground and 
etched; it works up into beautiful paperweights, but that’s all. 
But how much can they dispose 
of this way? People collect rocks 
all over the globe, and I don’t 
think they’ve gotten too far along 
in depleting the earth of its supply of rocks. 
So here it sits — most of the 
Sahara Desert. If anyone ever 
figures a way to get tours in and 
out economically it could be a 
greater natural (or unnatural) 
wonder than the old Grand Can
113 
yon was. But till they do. I’m 
not sure you’ll want to go unless 
you’re wild about looking at 
broken glass. 
Maybe the French should have 
a contest Send your entries in, 
folks, the best idea we receive for 
disposing of our glass wins an allexpense paid tour of the Sahara 
Glass Flats. Plus a lifetime supply of broken fragments. And the 
ruimers-up will get five tons of 
glass, their choice of color, plus 
the General. 
Not that there’s much demand 
for those any more. But be fair. 
After all, how could DeGauUe or 
anyone else have known about the 
deep sub-crustal fault right under 
that part of the Sahara? And if 
anyone had, who cotild have 
guessed that the seismic energies 
unleashed could bring about the 
Great Pacific Tilt? 
N ow let’s travel back to the 
General’s favorite country, 
the good old USA. Which is not as 
old as it used to be, now that the 
quakes had stopped. We’re head^ for the West Coast — the new 
West Coast — for a pack trip 
down the San Andreas Canyon. 
Of course, it’s a shame about 
the old Grand Canyon. It’s still 
spectacular, if not as large. And 
the geysers and hot springs spouting up from the Colorado River 
make it even more interesting 
than before. 
But so many people Have seen 
it, and this trip is for the more 
adventurous. They haven’t built 
any hotels yet — just in case the 
quakes start up again — so we’ll 
be on our own. Just us and the 
Parks Guides. 
If you’ve got the time, fimds 
and intestinal fortitude, I would 
advise starting out at Fairbanks 
or Jimeau and making your way 
down to what’s left of Baja California. But from one who’s done 
it, let me tell you that’s a long 
trip to make on a mule’s back. 
The tour areas the Parks Department is setting aside include 
some of the finest features of the 
San Andreas Canyon, and they 
defy verbal description. 
The Canyon is so new they 
haven’t had time to blast any 
trails down to the floor. So our 
trip will start on a comic note. 
You haven’t seen anything until 
you’ve seen a trussed-up mule 
being slimg with ropes down to 
the floor of the San Andreas Canyon. Unless it’s yourself imdergoing the same indignity. 
We’ll start out from Crater 
Lake, which is wider now and not 
as deep as it used to be. The landscape was flooded, but not ruined 
too badly. The hotels are still 
here, so take advantage of them. 
It’s the last night you will spend 
in bed for a while. 
There’s not much to say about 
the mechanics of the trip — jog
GALAXY 
ging along on tKe mules, eating 
around campfires, sleeping on the 
ground in sleeping bags. Don’t 
worry about wild animals. The 
only ones down here are fossilized. 
But I must warn you — especially the ladies — sanitary facilities 
do not exist! 
Lest this cause undue alarm 
let me add that the guides are 
courteous and imderstanding. Let 
me also add that you needn’t 
bother bringing your transistor 
radios — unless they happen to 
be equipped with mile-long antennas. 
But the scenery is beautiful. If 
we were to compare San Andreas 
with the Grand Canyon, it would 
win hands down because of size 
alone, but that is only the first 
consideration. 
The colors in the layers of uncovered rock are far more spectacular than those of the Grand 
Canyon. What makes them so 
much more interesting of course is 
the fact that they’re new; they 
haven’t even begun to erode. They 
should stay that way for a few 
thousand years, so you’ve got 
plenty of time to enjoy them. 
The vegetation has already begun to take over. There are wild 
roses and buttercups, asters, daisies and even dandelions growing 
out of every niche they can find. 
In another twenty years, when 
the pines are tall enough, it’ll be 
really gorgeous. For now there’s 
THE WONDERS WE OWE DEGAULLE 
just a good enoxigli overgrowtii of 
weeds and grass to hide the scarred land. (And enough bushes 
growing up to provide necessary 
privacy.) 
Of course, if you don’t feel that 
you can take three whole weeks 
on a mule, you can climb up 
near Stockton and take a bus over 
to the town of New San Francisco. There’s a Parks Dept ferry 
that leaves twice a week for a 
tour of the ruins of the old city. 
There are decent accommodations 
on the island and if it seems a 
little macabre it is none the less 
interesting. 
We’ll jog along, however, past 
the new capital, Fresno, past 
Bakersfield, the present movie 
center, down to where Los Angeles used to be. If you’re a skindiver, you can leave the tour here 
and explore the underwater ruins. 
If you think Disneyland used to 
be a fun place, you should see 
whafs it like under the sea. 
Otherwise you can continue 
for the last two days of our trip 
to its finish at Mexicali. There’s 
a short side trip to the edge of the 
Pacific where you can lean over 
the cliffs and peer sadly down at 
what’s left of Tijuana. 
'^hen we’ll drive back to the 
jetport outside of Bakersfield 
and catch a plane which is going 
to take us further west, to the remains of the Far East We’re 
Headed for DeGaiiUe’s otHer major contribution to world tourism: 
New Lemuria, 4,000 miles southwest of California. 
As Japan sank slowly into tHe 
sea, Lemuria began rising up. It’s 
still not the safest spot in the 
world to be sure. But even New 
York City has been trembling 
lately — you remember the PanAm Building’s fate — so you’re 
not safe anywhere. 
What did the most damage in 
Pacific areas, even before the last 
devastating earthquakes hit, were 
the tidal waves that were a direct 
result of the California quakes. 
The Japanese Have really been extremely fortunate. Due to the 
many warnings their scientists 
were able to give them, they 
were able to migrate with much 
of their personnel and equipment 
in time. 
They don’t feel any more insecure on New Lemuria now than 
they did on the old land, which 
had been shaking for a couple of 
generations anyway. New Lemuria seems to be fairly stable, bar 
the occasional tsunami when another volcano pokes its head 
above sea-level. 
But the UN, whicK still controls the islands, isn’t allowing 
anyone on the smaller ones and 
the inhabitants have wisely built 
only in the centers. Even the fishermen live inland. When they’re 
working they carry powerful ra116 
dios on their boats so they’ll be 
able to receive warnings in time. 
The scenery here is also too 
new to have achieved any of the 
spectacular beauty that, say, Hawaii had before Mauna Loa went 
off. But the Hawaiians have already got orchid farms in full 
bloom, and their new pineapple 
plantations are well under way. 
The beaches wUl need a few millenia before the rocks and dirt 
turn to sand, but when there are 
no tsunamis the water is warm 
and blue. And they say that the 
surf off the new beaches at Tarawa is magnificent. 
Of course there are no miles of 
beachfront hotels. You’ll have to 
ride to the beach every day from 
one of the fine hotels inland at 
Waikiki. They’ve reconstructed 
the old Imperial on the main island, now called New Tokyo. 
They were able to salvage most of 
the old place. You can’t tell the 
difference until you look out the 
window. 
The Japanese have started 
landscaping the beaches, hopefully. The next tsunami will undoubtedly wash the gardens away, 
but they’ll rebuild them and 
meanwhile they are charming. 
If you’d like, you can charter 
a private jet to Indonesia where 
you’ll get a bang out of what old 
Krakatoa’s been doing. This activity has been the main cause of 
the tidal waves at Lemuria. 
B ut if you don’t want to go i»land-h'opptng tHere’s enougH 
to be seen outside your Hotel 
window. If you stay for two weeks 
you’ll definitely catch a tidal 
wave rolling in. From the safety 
of your hilltop hotel, there’s nothing more awesome. The tsunamis 
act as though they were endowed 
with minds of their own pounding, roaring full-speed ahead at 
the beaches, with the noise and 
velocity of a cross-country freight 
train. With all the fury and destruction they represent, they’re 
the biggest attraction of Lemuria. 
The second biggest attraction 
is also to be seen from your hotel; 
the mountains of Oceania. If you 
thought the glass dunes of the 
Sahara were fascinating and dangerous, wait until you see the 
coral-topped Oceanias. If ever a 
mountain range deserved the 
name of Razor-back Mountains, 
this is it! 
Most of the coral is white and 
the peaks look from a distance 
like they’re snow-capped. Or they 
did look like they were covered 
with snow — they’re mostly tattle-tale gray now. The Lemurians 
assure me that when the spring 
storms come the mountain tops 
will be washed clean again. Visit 
Lemuria, folks, the only country 
in the world with washable mountains! 
Of course, not all the islands 
were formed from earthquakes. 
THE WONDERS WE OWE DEGAULLE 
Some of the atolls turned cut to 
be the coral-covered cones of ancient volcanoes. When they rose, 
the lava and coral fused together 
and there are now coral-topped 
mountains whose entire slopes are 
shiny black obsidian. 
So much ^for the Black and 
White Mountains. Our final 
words about New Lemuria are 
being written from the terrace of 
the Imperial, where your adventure-reporter sits sipping sake, 
watching the sun set on the highest peak of the Oceanias. You see, 
not all the coral is white. The 
homesick Japanese started to call 
this peak Mt. Fuji, but by more 
popular demand the name that’s 
been put on the maps — the name 
for this fantastic mountain that 
we’re watching the orange rays of 
the sun set on fire — is Blushing 
Mountain. — LISE BRAUN 
YOM POsrMAsnR swicsrs : 
Mike ThoseW^i^ Connections 
HAIL EARLY m THE BAT I 
• 
llluilrcted by GAUGHAN 
A SPECTER IS 
by FRin LEIBER 
Tli«‘ro Jiro «»iily <\v«» lliiii^s in y«ui <*jhi 
li«‘ Miro «»f: lloalli and Tiwiis. 
— Old Toxiaii provorli 
HAUNTING TEXAS 
What Has Gone Before 
Alter a nuclear world war, 
Texas engulfs the USA and, except for the black nations of California and Florida, dominates 
North America from Guatemala 
to a fluctuating Russo-Texan 
boundary in the Yukon. The 
T exans take a hormone which 
makes them 8 or more feet tall, 
towering above their servile Mexes, Injuns and poor whites. 
For 100 years Earth’s nations 
have banned contact with Circumluna, a self-sustaining moonsatellite, which refused to join in 
the Great Atomic War. It is chiefly inhabited by Russian and 
American scientists and engineers, 
along with various hippie and artistic types living in a duraplastic 
annex called the Sack. 
When relations are resumed between Circumluna and Terra, the 
first Sackabond to drop down the 
gravity well is Christopher Crockett La Cruz, known as Scully, a 
young actor seeking funds to save 
his father's theater in the Sack by 
asserting a family claim to the 
Lost Crazy-Russian Pitchblende 
Mine near Yellowknife. 
Scully is an Syi foot Thin — 
mos< of his muscles are too weak 
to function in Terran gravity. So 
he wears a battery-powered titanium exoskeleton. (His jaws, fingers and toes alone are abnormally strong.) By accident he is land120 
ed in Dallas, Texas, Texas — 
heart of the Lone Star Continent 
— where he is befriended by 
Elmo Oilfield Earp, a garrulous 
minor politician. 
Through Elmo he meets Governor Lamar of Texas, Texas and 
is innocently used by LamaYs 
clique in the successful assassination of President Austin of Texas. 
On the same day Scully falls 
in love with (1) Rosa Morales, 
called La Cucaracha, and (2 ) 
Rachel Vachel Lamar, theaterminded daughter of the governor. 
The two girls induce him to join 
the Bent-Back Revolution, a Mex 
revolt against the Texans. 
There is a greaser legend that 
one day the dread figure of Death 
(El Esqueleto, or for short Esquel) will come striding from nowhere to lead the revolt against 
the gringos. With his cadaverousness, black suit and gleaming exoskeleton, Scully is a natural for 
the part. He enjoys portraying 
Death and making revolutionary 
speeches, but his chief reason for 
turning rebel is his desire to get 
to Amarillo Cuchillo (Texan for 
Yellowknife), where it is planned 
the “revolutionary tour" will end. 
After brushes with the Texas 
Rangers, the tour gets underway, 
led by El Toro, an amiable young 
Mex. With them also go the two 
girls; a priest. Father Francisco; 
Cassius Krupp Fanninowicz, an 
unbalanced Texo-German scien
GALAXY 
tist who has a monomaniac interest in Scully’s exoskeleton; and 
Guchu, a black Zen Buddhist, 
who is an agent of the Pacific 
Black Republic. They travel in 
kacks — elusive combo air-cushion and copter vehicles. 
A mystery develops as to what 
industrial enterprise the Texans 
are carrying out inside certain 
closely guarded huge towers scattered across the land. Working in 
the towers are hordes of temporarily cyborged Maxes, whose 
memory for their work is artificially blacked out. 
At Kansas City, Missouri, Texas, the revolutionary company 
barely escapes by river submarine 
from a surprise raid by the Rangers on one of their big meetings. 
Three days later they are encamped in an abandoned coal 
mine near the atomized ruins of 
Evansville on the Ohio River. 
In tKe Coal Mine 
Cijnfierno de los diablos!" El 
Toro cursed genially but 
seriously behind me in the silvery 
dark. “What are you doing up 
here, Esquel? Hvmting for Texas 
owl-planes? I assure you, they 
will spot you first. Your exo will 
stand out in their radar like a 
metal tree.” 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
I did not remove th’e borrowed 
binoculars from my orbits, but 
lowered tKeir electronic gain best 
to observe the dark-and-glinting 
siieck somewhere between my 
eyes and Luna’s bright, crinkled 
border. When the almost pointtiny spangle had climbed a low 
mountainside and off the moon, I 
knew for certain it was Circumluna and the Sack in transit. I 
shifted my field to the stars 
around Luna. From the pale few 
I could see — so different from 
the multitude of the Sack’s blazing nights — I recognized Taurus 
by the doubles around Aldebaran 
on one side of the moon and the 
Pleiades on the other. That meant 
that for the Sack, Terra lay at the 
heaven’s antijxjdes in Scorpio, 
beneath my feet. 
El Toro pounded lightly with 
his fist against my leg, just above 
my knee-motor. “I understand 
now, Esquel,” he said. “It is the 
first night the weather has let you 
see the cold silver sun around 
which your little world revolves.” 
I nodded, but the point seemed 
to me that he couldn’t possibly 
understand, not to any degree. 
For instance, my almost painful 
surge of relief at knowing the real 
date, not this grotesque Spindletop fourth, but the real date: 
sunth of Leo, terrantK of Scorpio, 
luntK of Capricorn. 
The scientific Circumlunans 
still measure time by Greenwich 
— an invisible line a quarter million miles away eartHward and 
infinity away starward. But we 
Sackabonds depend primarily on 
tKe times it takes sun, earth’ and 
moon to move across one of the 
twelve constellations of the zodiac — sunth, terranth and luntH. 
Our lunth is about half an eartKhour, making our sackday about 
six earth-hours long, the time it 
takes Circumluna to orbit the 
moon. Twelve lunths make a 
sackday, ten sackdays make a 
terranth, twelve terranths make a 
sunth (earth’s month), twelve 
sunths make a starth, our Sack 
name for year. It’s an impossible 
system if you try to make it precise, but okay and highly esthetic 
if you’ve grown up with it. WKo 
needs minutes and seconds? — 
except in the clutches, and then 
you need only speed. Besides, any 
good actor can count stage-seconds perfectly in his head. 
Or what could El Toro know 
about the momentary shivering 
illusion of free fall I felt as I permitted myself a final glimpse of 
the dark sequin that was my 
home? 
T lowered my binoculars and 
surveyed Terra’s horizon from 
the low hillock where I stood: 
Southward, the alent Ohio River, 
gleaming like a black nebula; 
Eastward, the blackened steel and 
masonry stumps of Evansville 
122 
thrusting up through the undergrowth; Northward, prairie; 
Westward, the ruined works of the 
abandoned coal mine which was 
our camp. 
Rapping again above my knee, 
El Toro said, “Come on now, Esquel. You’ve tempted the Texan 
bull long enough, and we have a 
job for you.” 
I looked down at his swarthy, 
handsome face. A wide grin showed the pearls of his teeth. I envied 
him his chunky vigorous body 
that stood its full four foot ten 
with ease in the killing terragrav, 
while my eight foot six sagged in 
its frame. I nodded and started 
down through the dusk, taking 
short careful steps. 
“You are tired, Esquel,” he 
said. “Your exo stands straight, 
but sometimes you hang from it 
— God pardon me — like the 
Crucified One.” 
“I am neither a religious nor 
secular hero, not even of the dubious revolutionary breed,” I told 
him somewhat brusquely. “In fact 
I spit on all such. I am just an 
actor working his way toward 
Spaceport Yellowknife. As for 
yokes, your cyborged coimtrymen must carry theirs. Mine carries me. Who is the better off? If 
you have to work out your somewhat grandiose sympathies — you 
really belong in grand opera! — 
light me a reefer.” 
I was sharp with him because 
GALAXY 
my support bands truly were cutting me cruelly. The three days 
since Kansas City Had marked 
and drained me. To a person imused even to one lunagrav, six 
play hob with the gut, packed into the belly like a length of limp 
pipe the Creator did not even 
bother to coil. Kansas City, Columbia, St. Louis, Carbondale — 
four revolutionary one-night 
stands without a layoff. Surely 
Terran actors of the Nineteenth 
and Early Twentieth Century 
must have been a hardy breed. 
Columbia. My memories of our 
brush with the Rangers at KC 
had made me shake so that my 
exo rattled — until I made my 
entrance. 
St. Louis. A gargantuan, halflived-in graveyard, its skyscrapers a cemetery of melted behemothian tombs from the Atom 
War. But the biggest audience 
yet. 
Carbondale. A whistlestop, except for a host of cyborgs working in two of the gigantic towermasked drilling rigs, from each of 
which a twisting trail of giant 
rock-laden trucks centipeded day 
and night, to build a wall somewhere north — Diana knows why ! 
Or most likely she doesn’t. 
A long a path that zigzagged 
through undergrowth, El 
Toro and I felt our way to the 
ramp leading down into the shalA SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
low, worked-out coal mine. Ahead 
and below, a small, squat rectangle of light glowed, I sipped my 
stick, drinking deep of the evergreen smoke and holding it in my 
lungs, but although our footsteps 
began to syncopate, there was no 
soothing of pain. 
El Toro said, “You draw apart 
from us, Esquel. You hug your 
hurt and loneliness. The girls in 
particular are distressed. I am 
sure that if you spoke a few gallant and sugary zeros into the 
ear of either — well, we have a 
saying that one night’s sleep with 
is more restorative than a week’s 
sleep without. That is, if a man 
can imagine the latter.” 
I did not tell him of Rachel’s 
and Kookie’s trick of the one interrupting us whenever I was 
alone with the other, nor of my 
determination to hold out against 
them both until one or the other 
surrendered unconditionally. 
I said instead, harshly, “For me 
this is a business trip, not a romance, either with giddy, easilywon females or the Bent-Back 
Revolution, which appears to be 
killing a hundred Mexes for every 
Tex. And acting, done in professional fashion, is the most tiring 
business.” 
I unintentionally kicked a bit 
of gravel that clattered down the 
slope. Instantly a near-blinding 
searchbeam shot up from the 
depths. Around it I made out the 
blurs of armed guards. I was botK 
reassured and irked by this evidence of revolutionary preparedness. 
El Toro observed, using hand 
to shade his eyes from below, “It 
is odd to think that even Death 
should become weary.” 
“So my performances are falling off,” I replied, quick to catch 
at any hint of criticism. “Soon, 
instead of firing your revolution, 
I shall be a cold rocket-tube that 
coughs once and dies forever, 
reeking of hydrazine.” 
“No, no, nol” he protested, a 
little too much. “Why, only last 
night I was admiring your new 
chiste — I mean, gag — of pretending a duel with Ranger Hunt 
and President Lamar.” 
■fTTe’d had certain news that 
’ ' Governor Lamar had been 
made president of Texas in a 
hurry-up inauguration. RachelVachel had said this advancement 
of her Daddy meant certain doom 
for the Lone Star Republic. I was 
doubtful. Apart from his idiot involvement with his daughter and 
his compulsive lint-picking, Lamar had seemed to me a shrewd 
man and suave for a Texan. 
El Toro went on eagerly, “The 
gag made my mind buzz. How 
would it be if we h'ad two tall 
dummies representing el presidente y el jeie? Inside the empty 
clotbes of eacH would be a nimble 
124 
comrade moving the hated head 
on a pole. Besides providing extra 
realism, they would give the audience something to throw things 
at!” 
“Not a bad idea,” I told him, 
breaking it gently. From what I 
had seen of the marksmanship of 
most Mexes, they would be hitting me as often as the dummies. 
“// you can figure out a foolproof 
way for the men inside to see out 
uninterruptedly, so they don’t fall 
off the stage. And if they’ll follow 
my directions to the letter. And if 
you have foamed plastic or even 
papier-mache to make the heads. 
And if you have a good caricaturist sculptor.” I did not mention 
that I was an expert at the last. 
“Enough ifs!” El Toro protested. “You always drown anyone 
else’s ideas — especially if they 
involve you sharing the stage 
with another.” 
I looked down at El Toro. It 
was the first even mildly spiteful 
remark I had ever heard him 
make. Had he caught acting in 
only a week? But it is a most infectious profession, and with' it go 
its vain and gossipy habits. Besides, a star must alway expect 
jealousy. 
“Not so,” I told him mildly. “I 
have already suggested that the 
Senoritas Lamar and Morales — ” 
“And I have told you why that 
is impossible!” he shot back. 
“Women on the stage! Unheard 
of. oil, in tSe comic or erotic perliaps, but tliis is serious revtdutionaiy drama I” 
“Serious revolutionary farce,” I 
corrected. “Also, there is one fatal objection to your excellent 
idea. The dummies of Lamar and 
Hunt would have to wield swords 
back at me, else it would be only 
cruel slaughter.” 
“But my people enjoy cruel 
slaughter. Consider the bullfight.” 
“The bull has Homs,” I reminded him. 
“Nevertheless I could manage 
it. Observe!” he retorted, striking 
a position. “With my left hand I 
hold the headed pole upright, so,” 
he continued with great earnestness. ‘With my upstretched right 
I manage my sword, which is 
lashed to the end of a pole. While 
my eyes peer through a large oneway transparent window in the 
middle of Lamar’s robe. Hunt 
could be played by El Tadto,” 
he added, mentioning a Mex who 
acted as my bodyguard, though’ 
tonight I had eluded him. 
Oomeone laughed — Guchu, it 
was — and I was myself hardput to avoid grinning at the image of El Toro as the working 
mechanism of a giant puppet. We 
were now past the guards and 
searchlight, which had been turned off, and in a vast gallery of the 
mine, so low I had to dude a 
A SPEaER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
little, and dotted with massive 
crunch-ended posts of andent 
wood supporting spooky megatons of solidity. 
“You mentioned a job for me,” 
I reminded El Toro. 
The acting-light died in his 
eyes. He pointed at two stringily 
muscular bent-backs, one old, one 
older, crouching by Guchu and 
regarding me with considerable 
apprehension. 
He said, “Here are two who 
have worked in the great towers 
which you — and we too — want 
to know about. Perhaps you will 
try your hypnotic skills on them, 
as you did on Pedro Ramirez.” 
I moved toward them, curving 
my lips in a friendly smile. I noted, in the ears of both', the callosities of the cyborged. Their ragged clothing revealed many bumscars — some pale and stretched, 
others lumpy and twisting. 
Death is not the ideal figure 
for a hypnotist, though’ he eventually summons each of us offstage 
with a mesmeric command. Few 
find his presence sjunpathetic or 
reassuring. 
I got the old man under, but I 
was unable to get past the block 
on his memories of the work he 
did in the towers, except that He 
began barely audibly droning an 
unintelligible chant in the same 
rhythm as tiie two “dig and 
ddve” lines I Had got out of Pedro Ramirez. He kept it up faint
125 
ly even wKen I told him to sleep. 
Perhaps the older man, being 
closer to Death himself, was not 
so intimidated by me. Perhaps he 
even felt a certain curiosity. At 
any rate, he eyed me bravely and 
when I questioned him about his 
work in the great towers, his 
mouth eagerly formed words. 
But no sounds accompanied 
them, and none of us, including 
El Toro, could lip-read them. 
I had broken the block for his 
upper-speaking parts, but not for 
his vocal cords and lungs, perhaps because of a literal interpretation on the part of his unconscious mind of some prior hypnotic command such as “keep silent.” He could form words, because he wanted to, but he could 
not make a noise. 
'^hen I had an inspiration. I 
quietly said to him, “When I 
say, ‘Go,’ Federico, do the things 
you would do on a working day 
in one of the great towers. Perform each action fully, but move 
on to the next action when I say, 
‘Next’ Begin at the doorway to 
the tower. Go!” 
He got to his feet, his bent 
spine more noticeable now, the 
muscles of his torso and legs stiffening a little as if from the weight 
of the yoke, and he took three 
steps in a straight line. 
“Next,” I said as he was making the fourth step. 
Federico made a quarter turn 
and stopped, gazing respectfully 
at emptiness. Then he straddled 
his legs, held out to either side his 
arms with hands hanging limply, 
and opened his mouth wide. It 
occurred to me that he might be 
submitting himself to a medical 
examination or more likely a 
search. 
He turned in tKe direction lie 
had first been going. Guchu 
guiided him deftly past a post. 
We all followed. It was an eerie 
performance in the low-ceilinged, 
dim-lit forest of dead tree sections. 
This time I said “Next,” on his 
fifth step. He stopped and stood 
relaxedly, right hand lightly gripping something at shoulder level. 
At first I thought it a tool, then 
as he made no further movement, 
except to sag apathetically, I decided that it was a support by 
which he steadied himself. 
Yet he was making other movements — tiny squirmings and 
himching, as if accommodating 
himself to other beings moving 
past and next to him. 
Gradually his legs pressed together and his elbows close to his 
sides — the imaginary support 
was almost at his shoulder now. 
I saw him as one of a tightpacked crowd of beings. Texomex 
cyborgs like himself, I presumed. 
I could almost hallucinate them, 
so strong was the illusion. 
Without warning hie straightened up, his neck stretched, and his 
head was thrown back a little. At 
the same time he stood almost on 
tiptoe. And yet he seemed to exert no muscular effort to do all of 
this, or somehow the effort was 
cleverly masked. Truly the body’s 
memory can do wonderful, perhaps miraculous things under 
hypnotic suggestion. It can create 
illusions. 
T knew what the illusion was at 
once, for I know free fall when 
I see it. Inside the great tower 
his imagination had recreated, 
Federico was falling — and almost certainly with a group of 
others in an elevator accelerating 
downward swiftly. Probably almost at a terragrav, for the illusion was strong that he almost 
floated, right hand loosely linked 
around invisible grip. 
I realized I did not know how 
long he had been falling, and I 
was pleased to see an associate of 
El Toro, one Carlos Mendoza, 
holding a wristwatch between 
himself smd Federico. 
Suddenly Federico’s feet were 
flat on the groimd, his knees 
bent, the extensor muscles of his 
legs bulged. His free arm clapped 
across his guts, his other dragged 
heavily oa the imaginary support. 
His jaws — his whole face — 
clenched’ together. 
It was an over in not much 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
more than a second, yet I think 
all of us wdnced with him at the 
strain of that illusionary deceleration. 
“A mile and a quarter,” Carlos 
Mendoza announced softly. 
I looked a question at this 
comarado I hardly knew. 
“That he fell,” Mendoza replied. “Or his cage.” 
Meanwhile Federico was nonchalantly marching again. When 
I said, “Next,” he lightly gripped 
another support and sagged. 
The whole pantomime of rapid 
descent and sudden deceleration 
was repeated. This time I remembered to stage-count. The fall 
took 20 seconds. That worked 
out to a distance of two kilometers, I calculated, dredging from 
the depths of my boring physics 
instruction the formula of distance equals one-half times six 
lunagravs (one decameter) multiplied by time in seconds squared. 
“Again a mile and a quarter,” 
Mendoza whispered, agreeing well 
enough with my calculation. 
Once more Federico marched, 
grasped, and fell for twenty seconds. This time his face and body 
broke out in sweat, and he gasped 
for breath. 
“It becomes hot three and 
three-quarters miles underground,” Mendoza said tersely. 
Or six kilometers, I thought, 
translating. I frankly felt frightened at the thought of penetrat
127 
ing so far into solidity. What it 
implied about the vast solid mass 
of Earth' horrified me, as it would 
anyone knowing only life in free 
fall. At last the blank datum, 
“Earth has a diameter of almost 
thirteen thousand kilometers” became terrifyingly real to me. 
'"T^his time old Federico showed 
a new behavior. Crouching, 
he lowered his hands and lifted 
slowly one foot, then the other. 
Next his hands gripped something 
and moved slowly upward. Clearly he was drawing on a heavy suit 
of some sort. One could see his 
arms working into gloved sleeves. 
Next there was pantomimed zipping. Finally he lifted something 
invisible onto his head. 
“It is like a spacesuit,” I whispered. 
His breathing changed. He inhaled through tinily puckered 
lips, exhaled through his nostrils. 
“And the suit is refrigerated,” 
Mendoza whispered beside me. 
I caught his point. Old Federico had stopped sweating. The 
beads were evaporating. 
I waited with interest. Now we 
would see the actions involved in 
his underground work and perhaps be able to interpret its nature. 
He marched until I said, 
“Next,” then grasped an invisible 
handhold and again dropped two 
kilometers. 
And again and again and 
again, taking him fourteen kilometers below the surface of the 
Earth! And each time he dropped, he seemed almost to float. 
We all watched with intense, 
even horrified interest. Nearby 
the intent faces of El Toro, Guchu, Mendoza, El Tacito and a 
couple more. I was sure each was 
pale under his shade of brown. 
Farther off, Rachel Vachel, La 
Cucaracha and Fanninowicz with’ 
his guards. Only the German’s 
expression jarred — he wore a 
sneer of incredulity and contempt. 
I suppose that for an outsider 
my having the appearance of a 
tall and stooping Death might 
have added to the eldritch atmosphere. 
The other old Mex, still in hypnotic sleep, continued his rhythmic drone. That was the only 
sound. 
Environment added to the horror. That we should be in a dimlit, oppressively low-ceilinged coal 
mine, its great close-set pillars 
marked by the strain of the 
weight they bore — all these 
things intensified the horror of the 
thought of a mine going already 
one hundred times as deep. 
And yet it was all in the kingdom of the imagination! We half 
dozen amateur actors (including 
one thoroughgoing professional) 
were witnessing a pantomime, 
based only on muscular and phy
GALAXY 
siological memory, wEicfi created 
an illiision far more gripping tlian 
any oi us could have managed — 
perfaiaps even I! 
Federico repeated the drop 
eighteen more times — until by 
my calculation He was forty kilometers below Terra’s surface, 
which' agreed well enough with 
Mendoza’s twenty-five miles. 
“Madte de Dios!” the latter exclaimed softly. “That is the thickness given for earth’s crust. He 
must be near the molten mantle.” 
i 
j At last Federico changed his 
I act. Hoisting up a heavy 
something, he directed it downward between his feet Bracing 
his forearms against his belly and 
hips, he began to shake in a taut 
violent way, so that his hard 
sandals beat a tattoo against the 
rock floor. 
As if that sound had been a 
signal, the other old Mex’s drone 
, became louder and changed into 
execrably pronounced and accented English words, which it took 
me three or four repetitions wholly to understand: 
Every day, two Hours times 
twelve, 
A million yokemen dig and 
delve. 
In your earplugs comes the 
boss’s yell, 
“You’ll keep on drilling ’til you 
get to Hell.” 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
So drill, you yohemen, drilll 
Drill, you cyborgs, drilll 
It’s drill blacked out in heat 
and pain 
For your women and rum and 
mary jane! 
And blast! And fire! 
As I was listening. Hypnotized 
myself, to the fifth’ repetition of 
that eerie chant, old Federico 
swayed, stopped shaking, paled, 
swayed again and collapvsed on 
the rock before any erf us could 
catch him. 
Perhaps the weirdest thing for 
me was that, as I swiftly moved 
to stoop beside him, I made a 
point (rf stepping over the drill 
that wasn’t there. 
We assured ourselves that Federico was suffering from no more 
than exhaustion. I brought both 
him and the chanting Mex out of 
their trances. We saw them comfortably at rest. 
And then we talked. 
“Hombre!” El Toro asked for 
us. “What can the Texans be 
wanting with mines twenty-five 
miles deep?” 
“Gold and sHver,” El Tadto 
suggested romantically, for once 
belying his name of The Silent 
One. “Diamonds big as kacks.” 
“They seem to be on the verge 
of creating artificial volcanoes,” 
Mendoza said soberly. “But why, 
I ask, why?” 
La Cucaracha said excitedly, 
“Texans already Eave big winds, 
big heats, big colds, tornadoes, 
floods, hurricanes, tidal waves. 
Now they want volcanoes and 
earthquakes too. Everything big.” 
I could agree with her on the 
last. The whole thing seemed like 
delirium. But then I had always 
felt horror at the thought of the 
innards of planets, the lair of 
gravity. 
Rachel Vachel said, “I wish I’d 
spied on this more while I was 
with Daddy.” 
/^uchu suggested, “Maybe they 
building a Doomsday Machine. Gonna stuff those deep 
holes with H bombs. If they start 
losing to Russia or China, or the 
mood hits ’em, they blow up all 
Texas like one Alamo. Maybe 
blow up the world. ‘Taking your 
enemies with' you,’ I think it’s 
called.” 
El Toro extended a menacing 
arm at Fanninowicz. “You should 
know about them,” he asserted. 
“What is their pmpose?” 
The German laughed harshly. 
“I do indeed. What you call the 
great towers merely house bigger 
drilling rigs, designed to probe for 
petroleum at depths of ten to 
twenty kilometers. Oil is being 
foimd in rock hitherto thought 
azoic. But this notion of great 
mines forty kilometers deep is 
nonsense. They would collapse 
from the pressures. And can you 
130 
imagine anyone using a handdrill, even in a refrigerated suit, 
at temperatures of 1800 to 2000 
degrees Fahrenheit? Ridiculous! 
No, my dear sirs, you have let 
yourselves be deceived by an amateur hypnotist and a subject who 
kept on repeating an action that 
impressed you. While your theorizations are all laughable.” 
I could tell from El Toro’s expression that he was mightily 
tempted to use force on the exasperating Teuton, but persuaded 
from it because of the latter’s 
usefulness in regard to my exoskeleton and other mechanical 
matters. Besides, I believe we 
were all impressed by his logic. 
Germans are most convincing 
maniacs. There had already begun to seem something fabulous 
in the ideas Federico’s behavior 
had generated. 
My only thought was what an 
unesthetic clot — worse than a 
Circumlunanl — the professor 
was, not to have appreciated the 
theatric grandeur of Federico’s — 
and my — performance. 
To tell the truth, I wasn’t having many thoughts by then. I was 
too tired. In fact, I was more than 
tired. Supervising Federico’s performance had taken me out of 
myself, but now I was feeling 
nothing but terragrav’s horrible 
drag, as if I were perpetually in 
the agony of sudden deceleration 
Federico had portrayed at the end 
of eacii of his two-kilometer 
drops. 
Rachel VacKel and La Cucaracha smiled at me side by side, 
inviting me to gossip with them, 
but threesome, not twosome. I 
was having none of that. 
Signing to El Tacito, I walked 
to my quarters and was asleep 
before my headbasket thudded 
softly into my pillow. 
Slumstorming 
'^he next two days I continued 
weary of body, heavy of 
mind, empty of emotion. Old 
Federico’s pantomime, in fact the 
whole coal-mine episode, seemed 
more a haunting, heavy-h'ued 
nightmare than a reality. 
The Ohio Valley turned out to 
be a miserable region. The general population has more short 
than tall Texans, and some of the 
former are in the Revolution. 
Poor whites. They are refused the 
hormone because they don’t make 
enough money to support the extra poundage that goes with 
greater height. They say they 
don’t want the hormone. Sour 
grapes in most cases, I think. 
Some of them are dwarfed enough 
to go through Mex doors, though 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
the law forbids that. Most Mexes 
accept them as fellow revolutionaries, though it frightens me to 
think how they must increase our 
security risks. 
The cities are as dwarfed as the 
people — ragged rings around 
atom-glazed wastes on which new 
building has only recently begun. 
I have taken to writing another 
new script to fill in time. Our 
show must somehow be improved. 
For instance, El Toro thinks he is 
learning acting from me, but is 
doing worse than when I began 
teaching him. 
The first night we gave a rotten 
performance in Louisville. The 
second, a worse one in Cincinnati. 
Even I was lousy, both shouting 
and turning a silent back on audience to get their attention. At 
the end they filed out silently. I 
doubt we sparked a single streetcomer disturbance. I know who 
was at fault — me. But an actor 
cannot play a role like Death 
night after night without emotional fuel. 
Accordingly I waited until Rachel and Rosa were together and 
then somewhat somberly invited 
them to my brick cabin in out 
quarters in a deserted motel beside a rusty-fenced freeway crossed by great gullies. 
I waited until they were comfortably seated, had lit up, and 
were gazing at me curiously. 
Then, ad-libbing all the way, 
for I had resolutely planned no 
set speech', I poured out my feelings to them. 
1 described the vast loneliness of 
a freefall being on a gravity 
planet and in a strange culture. I 
explained the desolation of an 
actor playing a big role, especially an anti-h'uman one sucH as 
Death. I revealed my petty foibles and cKildisK self-pity. 
In short, I spoke nothing but 
the truth. It was a great relief to 
me and it almost broke me up. 
But not quite. An actor remains 
an actor. 
Next I praised them both lavishly, telling them how I couldn’t 
have made it without their imaginative help and comfort I hinted 
at my further emotional and physiological needs. I ended by assuring them that I loved both of 
them greatly — and equally. 
Only then did I remember that 
I had told them exactly the same 
thing in the church and they had 
both called me crazy. 
This time they were kinder. 
Perhaps. Rosa patted my knee 
and said, “Poor bones-man. I am 
inuy simpatico.” 
“Yeah, it’s sure tough on you, 
Scully,” Rachel agreed, patting 
my other knee. “But now let’s get 
down to this bigamy thing you’re 
trying to set up, if I read you 
right,” she went on. “Which of us 
girls comes first?” 
T32 
“Indeed yes,” Rosa seconded, 
crossing her arms and beginning 
to tap the floor with the toe of 
her slipper. 
“That is for you to decide,” I 
answered, not loftily, but with 
great simplicity and sincerity. 
Then I crossed my arms. 
“Sure you really don’t like one 
of us more than the other?” Rachel asked. “And are trying to be 
kind to the loser?” 
“Kind!” Rosa spat. 
“No!” I said and then went on 
to explain how various forms of 
polygamy, from the linear to the 
complex marriage, are found in 
the Sack. Likewise for love affairs. 
“Well, that may work up in the 
sky,” Rachel responded when I 
paused for breath, “but down 
here we’re not used to it.” 
“Indeed no!” Rosa agreed. “I 
have no intention whatever of becoming a ‘sociable secretary’ to 
you, amado. My heart is involved.” 
“Goes for me too, Scully dear,” 
Rachel echoed with a sigh. “I’m 
too serious about you, see, to play 
around. Sure the balance don’t 
teeter just a little bit more one 
way than the other?” 
I did not trust myself to speak. 
“Well then that’s that,” Rachel 
said. She looked at Rosa. “Shall 
I tell him. Miss Morales?” 
“Yes, you tell him. Miss Lamarl” 
Scully,” Rachel be’ * gan, leaning forward a 
little, elbows on knees, while Rosa 
sat up straight, “us girls figured 
you might conceivably take that 
insane attitude, and so we worked 
out our answer beforehand. Which 
is: you got to decide wHicK one of 
us you want, and then speak out 
in the. presence of both of us, so 
there’s no chance for tricks.” 
“But don’t you see what you’re 
demanding of me?” I burst out. 
“You’re asking me to insult one 
of you unforgivably!” 
“That one’ll be able to take it,” 
Rachel replied serenely. “You see, 
Scully darling. Miss Morales and 
I have come to understand eacK 
other on this tour, because of our 
mutual admiration of and attachment to you.” 
“St, querido!” Rosa put in almost excitedly. “Whatever happens, whichever one of us you 
choose, you have created a friendship between us which can never 
be broken. We who were as cat 
and dog, are now as lamb and 
lamb. You can always pride yourself on that, amado.” 
“But don’t you see that makes 
a threesome even more workable?” I demanded somewhat bewilderedly. 
“No, dearest,” Rachel said with 
great convfction. 
Rosa said sharply, “Our undying friendship — you have that 
already. But as for love, if must 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
be one, or the other, never both!” 
“Yeah, Scully, you got to make 
up your mind. It^s the only way 
you’ll ever have either of us.” 
Once more I could only trust 
myself to shake my Head. This 
time I added an unrehearsed 
shudder — at the insanity of their 
behavior, at the torment to my 
own feelings, at the merciless perversity of the universe, 
“Scullyl” Rachel asked with 
sudden concern, “Have you really 
got that gravity sickness? We get 
to thinking of you as tireless and 
superior to all mortal ills, because 
you’re the star and work by electricity. Haven’t let your batteries 
run low?” 
“I know what!” Rosa said with 
certainty. “The bees-bonnet has 
been sleeping in his skeleton!” 
“And what if I Have?” I growled back at Her. “We’re revolutionaries. We’ve got to be ready 
for emergencies. Weapons close at 
hand. Skeleton — on!” 
“You should Have told us! We 
would Have nursed you. We still 
will.” 
“YeaH, Scully, Rosa’n I’ll be 
only too happy to help you off 
with your skeleton and tuck you 
in for the night, and help you on 
with it in the morning. And any 
other little thing you need. Worked fine back in the cave.” 
lyTaybe then I made my big 
mistake. If I Had gone along 
with their gag, one or the otKer 
would have been irreastibly 
tempted by my Helplessness. 
Maybe. 
But I had no intention of finger-crawling across any more patio floors. Even ones carpeted 
witli ermine. 
“I do not want either of you as 
a nurse,” I decreed. “Or both of 
you, for that matter. My wants 
run in entirely different directions.” 
Rachel nodded sadly. “Well, I 
guess he’s given us our walking 
papers, Rosa.” 
La Cucaracha agreed with an 
emphatic nod and with an upward look at a universe apparently as perversely incomprehensible as my own. 
“But let’s not make it so much 
like a funeral,” Rachel said. 
“No, to a bones-man that would 
be far too cruel,” Rosa agreed. 
“Let’s pass around a good-by 
reefer,” Rachel suggested. “Rosa?” 
So, mostly in silence, we smoked a long stick of grass together, 
and then another. It was a gesture for which I was deeply grateful. It calmed my ruffled nerves 
and vanity. A little. 
But contrary to many stories, 
the mild drug does not result in 
libidinous orgies, except for those 
who greatly desire such. So when 
I had taken the last sip and 
punched out the tiny butt of a 
134 
third, the girls rose and I lifted 
a hand in somber farewell. 
In the doorway they turned. 
Rachel said, “Scully, I’m sure I 
speak for both' of us when I say 
that it’s a rare privilege to work 
in the same company with a great 
actor such as you. We also think 
you’re doing more for the revolution than anyone since J*ancho 
Villa and Zapata and Cesar Chavez. We know the little things 
you’re doing, too. The voice lessons you’re giving Toro, though 
we’ll never mention them. The 
way you put up with Father 
Francisco and play along with 
Guchu and humor that maniac 
Fanninowicz. And — jokes about 
electric skeletons aside — the way 
you’re plumb knocking yourself 
out to do ever3Tthing you can for 
the show.” 
“But in that case surely — ?” 
I left the question unfinished 
while I looked at them in naked 
yearning. 
They slowly shook their heads 
and softly closed the door. 
It stayed closed. 
It was still closed when the first 
glow of dawn glinted from cobwebs and dust-grains on the windows. 
The dawn-glow also showed me 
my hideous visage in a mirror appropriately spotted brown with 
age. 
I decided I was through with 
all women. 
Yes I was. PerKaps forever. 
Even Idris McIUwraith. 
If she Had loved me even a 
little, she would have come to nje 
across the cold quarter-million 
miles, by flower-powered selfteleportation. 
'^hings always change. And infallibly, thank Diana, they 
change for the better when they’re 
at the worst. On the next day, 
Spindletop eighth, we gave a great 
show at Indianapolis. I could 
have taken ten curtain calls, but 
Death is humble. Death is the 
friend of every man, his comrade 
throughout life, reminding him to 
waste no moment but live to the 
full. And if man has any comrade 
at all when life is ended, that 
comrade is Death. 
After our flop in Cincinnati, 
the Committee had seen reason 
and given me a free hand with my 
new script and the cast, making 
me director. 
Results: Father Francisco, 
wearing chest mike, was audible 
at last as he spoke his modernized, punchy prayers. 
Guchu stayed in the spotlight, 
and his psychedelic ravings all 
led to good revolutionary conclusions. He was an impressive figure, symbolically bringing to the 
Revolution the mighty support of 
Africa (his race) and Asia (his 
religion). 
Rachel had at last a short but 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
effective part as Wife of Death, 
reminding me as I go off to work 
on Earth to take good care of my 
health, avoid chills, get enough to 
eat and so on. She wore a skintight black suit with wide silver 
seams on the outside of her arms 
and legs to indicate bones. Other 
silver lines followed exactly her 
lower ribs, but went into whorls 
around her breasts. She had a 
narrow silver spine, girdle and 
collar bones. Over this she wore a 
black cloak, while her platinum 
hair was tightly braided and coiled to suggest a helmet. 
El Toro’s oration was topped 
by a shorter but snappier one by 
Rosa. I knew that girl had talent! She wore a red Phrygian 
freedom cap, from under which 
her dark hair flowed; red boots; 
and a short red dress on which 
were scattered in black the Isis 
cross and a S3unbol I did not 
know: a circle with a three-armed 
Y in it. 
Then, while El Toro sang the 
old version of La Cucaracha, with 
its homely references to cockroaches, marijuana and the Mexican revolutionary tradition, Rosa 
did a still snappier dance. Next: 
El Toro went into La Muerta 
Alta. I returned to stage with Rachel, and soon we had the whole 
audience standing and singing 
with us. 
If our audience didn’t rush out 
to riot, at least they departed in a 
V 
cocky mood, suffused with revolutionary enthusiasm, ready to 
assert themselves and use their 
wits, determined to take no crap 
from anyone. 
Later El Toro, who has a good 
if untrained singing voice, asked 
me to give him lessons in grand 
opera. Why not? 
Of course, I was careful to 
make Rosa’s and Rachel’s parts 
equal and keep my relationship 
with them coolly professional. 
"C'ather Francisco and El Toro 
rationalized the girls being in 
the show by explaining to me that 
this far north there is a weakening of the Latin prejudices. True 
enough, there were as many short 
Texans and “stay-behind” blacks 
in the audience as Mexes. 
There were reports by A.M. 
revolutionary radio of big Ranger 
raids in Columbus, Cleveland, 
Pittsburgh. We had dodged back 
west just in time. 
Next night we had another 
smasheroo. It was in Chicago, a 
largely new yet big city situated 
west of Chicago Bay, where devastation bombing let in the waters of Lake Michigan and where 
rust-boned, melted, still-radioactive sksrscrapers dream deep below. 
Flying up to Chicago in our 
kack, I noted, in its transparent 
plastic, small stamped medallions, the print on which had been 
138 
obliterated. I found one the file 
had missed and saw the familiaf 
C3rrillio characters spelling out 
“Novy Moskva, C.C.C.P.” For a 
moment I thought I was back in 
Circumluna, which remains stubbornly bi-lingual. 
Guchu readily admitted the 
kack had been manufactured iu 
Russia and only passed along by 
the Black Republic to the Revolution. “We’re not up to those 
technologies, and neither is the 
Florida Democracy,” He told me. 
“And we don’t want to be. Outside of atoms to desalt our water 
and give us electricity, we operate 
by flower-power. We don’t Have a 
big population. The unfit die 
yoimg. What protects us from the 
Texans is the deserts and mountains, the free Injuns and AfroRussian aid, chiefly in atoms, 
which are getting hard to come 
by — the fissionable and fusionable ones, I mean.” 
Novy Moskva — New Moscow 
— is near Lake Baikal, He tells 
me. Siberia Has become the Russian “Texas.” 
I was l3dng down at the time 
and also downwind of the other 
passengers, so far as the uncertain 
drafts inside the kack permitted. 
T log as much horizontal time as 
-*■ I can. I am troubled by Heart 
palpitations, splitting Headaches, 
diarrhea and varicose veins. Lying down distributes the gravity 
One thing I’ll soy for labour (the British Labor Pari^, and that Is that it 
isn't as offensive as the corresponding mutatory force which now 
threatens culture in America. I refer to the force of business as a domi* 
nating motive in life, and a persistent absorber of the strongest creative 
energies of the American people. This intensive commercialism is a 
force more basically dangerous and anti-cultural than labour ever has 
been, and threatens to build up an arrogant fabric which it will be very 
hard to overthrow or modify wth Civilized ideas. 
— H. P. Lovecraft, T929 ^ 
strain which' abets, I believe, all 
these symptoms. The last time I 
unzipped my tights from calf and 
ankle, I was sickened by the purple varicosities, which grew larger as I watched. Since then I have 
not opened my tights except minimally for sanitary reasons, and 
even then I glimpse a varicosity 
of the superficial femoral vein. 
To tell the truth, I have not 
been out of my carefully-mended 
sack suit and also my exo-skeleton — Rosa guessed right — since 
they raided us in Kansas City. So 
I have not had a complete bath’ 
for well over a week. So I stink 
and keep away from people, or at 
least downwind, when I can. 
I also have taken to rum, with 
which El Tacito, my bodyguard, 
supplies me. I intentionally spill 
some of the rum on me, but 1 
drink as much as I can carry too. 
It is a good analgesic as well as 
an acceptable male perfume. 
I refuse to take off my exoskeleton partly from resentment 
— at the girls, Fanninowicz, all of 
them — but chiefly from sheer 
panic fear. I know the support 
bands are producing rashes and 
small hemorrhages, chiefly subcutaneous. But I cannot bear the 
thought of the helplessness I experienced in the patio. I am 
haunted by dreams of the Rangers finding me away from my 
lively titanium bones. 
Or perhaps it is simpler. Per
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
haps I am just afraid of gravity, 
as men once were of “empty 
space.” 
I have also developed — from 
the soupy atmosphere, I should 
think — a deep, hacking cough, 
which I can barely control on 
stage. The lum helps that a little, 
too. 
Thinking such thoughts as we 
took off from Chicago, I drifted 
into a horror dream. I was trapped amidst the crushed and dying in a crumpled subway car in 
a collapsed tuimel in Old Chicago. I struggled helpless for an 
eternity. Then the boiling water 
rushed in and seared me awake. 
A dream? A gravity nightmare? I 
know nothing of subways, but I 
suppose I may have nm across 
them in History study-materials. 
But how could I see crumpled advertisements so clearly? Atomin, 
the Pain-Reliever that Penetrates 
Your Every Molecule. Coca-Cola. 
Kurb Kinky Kurls. Prepare Yourself for the Future with LaSalle 
Extension Courses. Double Your 
Pleasure, Double Your Fun, With 
Doublemint, Doublemint, Doublemint Gum. 
Moonlight showed choppy 
whitecaps in black water below 
as we raced north' across Chicago 
Bay. 
Later I had chills and thought 
I was getting a fever. The explanation was much simpler, one I 
knew but had not kept in mind. 
140 
On Terra it gets colder as one 
moves toward either pole. 
A fter we played Milwaukee and 
Minneapolis, where we camped in an old hotel, it became clear 
that I must change to my winter 
clothes. I swore El Toro and El 
Tacito to secrecy and had them 
give me a bath. I did not permit 
them to remove my sack suit until I was in the hot water, with 
thought that its pressure might 
work somewhat as that of the 
suit, controlling varicosities. Being out of my exo produced in me 
spasms of fear hard to conceal. 
When they saw the shape I was 
in, El Toro exclaimed, “Madre de 
Dios!” El Tacito, true to his 
name, permitted himself only a 
grudgingly sympathetic grunt. 
I directed my gentle but thorough soaping, rinsing and drying. 
El Toro wanted to call in a doctor — and also Fanninowicz! — 
but I reminded him of his oath. 
After my various surfaces had 
been powdered, salved antiseptically and analgesically, and most 
smoothly bandaged, they eased 
me into my cold-weather suit, 
which is black and very like the 
other, but thicker, and containing 
a spiderweb of heating elements 
working off my batteries. Also it 
has a hood snugly covering my 
skull, neck and chin. Mask and 
gloves are available. The two 
Mexes helped me into my exo
GALAXY 
skeleton, and I lay down to rest. 
I tKanked and dismissed tliem. 
But El Toro persuaded me to 
take a slug of rum, poured a glass 
for himself, and stayed behind. 
“What do you think of our 
Revolution?” Ke asked me. 
“I am earning my ticket to Amarillo Cuchillo,” I replied, not at 
all inclined to bandy either platitudes or deep thoughts. I was relieved that I stank no more and 
that I felt less svirface pain, but 
the bath had exhausted me. 
He nodded. “There have been 
risings everywhere, even to the 
north'. The news of El Esqueleto 
has gone ahead of us.” Yet he did 
not sound enthusiastic. 
“Many dead bent-backs?” I 
asked. 
He grimaced. 
“And in Texas, Texas, the Revolution has been crushed?” 
He said, “Badly battered, 
though not extinct. It ha$ not 
been conquered, but it Has been 
countered. The Texans Have pacified many of my people with 
shorter working hours for the cyborged, with more fiestas and 
bullfights, with free rum and 
Coca-Cola and with free reefers. 
But I asked you what you 
thought of our Revolution?” 
I finally answered, “I believe it 
is necessary, but that does, not 
mean I enjoy it.” 
“Fo compiendo, camarada,” Ee 
said and left me alone. 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
■fT^ith 'Winnipeg, Texas, we ar” * rived in an area where tall 
Texans are a tiny elite; managers, engineers, foremen, the police, 
the Rangers, and their wives and 
sometimes their children. The few 
short Texans are all embittered 
Canadians — they remember and 
use that name, though it is forbidden. 
The numerous Mexes there are 
all cyborged workers — miners 
and farmhands and lumberjacks 
— shipped north with their cooks 
and women. 
Our meeting — I can Hardly 
call it a show — was Held in a 
supposedly forgotten atomic shelter, which the Mexes reached by 
a short tunnel from one of their 
compounds and which we entered by a longer tunnel, part of a 
disused drainage system. I Had to 
go stooping, looking I suppose 
like a Huge black bug. At the 
meeting there was little laughter. 
There was much hate. Midway 
there was a raid, and all but one 
of us actors escaped because our 
entrance tunnel had not been 
known to the Rangers. I do not 
know what casualties our audience suffered. 
Now our chief is Carlos Mendoza, whom I hardly know. And 
I am no longer giving grand opera lessons. Next time I shall not 
be the first man to run — at least, 
such is my present boast. El Toro 
bought it 
/^ur next stop, on Spindletop 
17th', was Victory, Texas, 
once Saskatoon, but renamed 
when the Rangers routed an Anglo-Russian army in the Battle of 
Saskatchewan, We held our meeting by a windbreak in the wheat 
fields. 
Here the Mexes live in a 
shack city. No need for fenced 
compounds. Where could they 
run? 
Tall Texan elite smaller, but 
tougher. No women or children. 
The deeply-hated engineers and 
cyborg foremen. The Rangers. 
Almost no short Texans, but 
some Indians, who do not cyborg 
well. They generally take their 
lives after their first experience of 
the yoke. 
Mendoza, who is something of 
a book-man, told me that one 
reason this area has remained uncolonized and unexploited, except 
for wheat and wood and ores, is 
the growing world shortage of 
high-grade radioactives. Earth’s 
oil is almost gone, her remaining 
coal hard to come by, while the 
Atomic War actually increased 
Terran man’s dependency on nuclear power. Even our kack, for 
example, is powered by atomic 
batteries. 
Fanninowicz Heard Mendoza’s 
little lecture and favored him 
with a contemptuous and knowing grin. Typical German arrogance only? 
^T^wo days after Victory, we arrived at Fort Johnson, Alberta, Texas. Once Ft. Murray, 
Much like Victory, except timbering again replaces wheat-farming, and the Indians are more numerous. Here, I was told, is stationed a company of Rangers 
with a red dress rmiform, survival 
from the fabulous Canadian 
Mounties. 
The only uniforms, however, 
which I saw — from a safe distance, using electro-binoculars — 
were white fatigues. Toward evening I discovered the reason for 
them — camouflage. Snow fell 
and everything turned bright 
white. 
Terra’s weird natimal phenomena still rouse in me a sense of 
wonder, despite my punished 
body and wearying mind. In the 
long silvery twilight, the flakes 
were like a ghostly Milky Way 
falling past a wheeling spaceship. 
I donned my gloves and mask. 
The latter, with its silver arabesques, makes me look like 
Death the Witchdoctor. 
Through the electro-binox I 
watched another of the huge towers, in which cyborged Mexes do 
their m 3 rsterious work. I recalled 
Federico’s pantomime and the 
“dig and delve” chant, and I 
found myself shivering at being 
near a 40-kilometer Hole up which 
— my childish imagination insisted — the dragon of gravity might 
crawl and come to hunt me down, 
suck me from any hiding place 
and cnisH me flat against him. 
Not that I believed in sucK a 
Hole. My mind shrank from the 
idea, and Fanninowicz’s arguments Had been telling. Still, it 
seemed unlikely that the Texans 
would be drilling for oil here, 
where Mendoza tells me the sedimentary layers are thin and the 
last glaciation has often exposed 
the underlying igneous rock: basalt, obsidian, feldspar, tufa, pumice, granite, pitch'stone and their 
hideous confreres. 
But if not for oil, what? 
Whatever work is done in the 
towers, I could see that it produced much heat. This one 
steamed amidst the fallings snow 
and remained stubbornly black, 
like a giant finger protruding 
from inner earth. 
The Gusher 
A fter twilight had darkened into 
night we took off on what I 
hoped would be the last lap of 
my Terran hegira. Our company 
was reduced to one kack and its 
occupants. Besides Guchu and 
myself, there were Carlos Mendoza, El Tacito, Father Francisco, 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
Fanninowicz and Rachel and Rosa. The other two kacks were 
headed south', their ultimate destination Denver. Our tour was 
breaking up. 
The snow had stopped falling. 
It lay in a blanket a half meter 
thick on the stunted evergreen 
forest below. 
The night was very clear, but 
the twinkling stars were dimmed 
by Luna riding low in the east 
and waxing again toward full. I( 
had spent almost a month on 
Terra. I looked with tired longing 
at my mother satellite, tethering 
point of the Sack and Circumluna, cosmically so near and yet 
so far. 
Luna was not the only rival to 
the stars. Ahead, ghostly green 
flames burned up toward the 
zenith — the northern lights, another remarkable Terran sight. 
After about a half hour, Rosa 
noted that the stars had a third 
rival, a purple glow on the southern horizon, directly astern. It 
was not so much a point of light 
as a small hemispherical shining. 
It appeared to originate near or 
at Fort Johnson. We speculated 
unsatisfactorily as to wh'at it 
might be. A fire? Some part of 
the search for us? Even an atomic bomb was suggested, though 
that was contradicted by the 
steadiness of the glow. Besides, 
no sound or shock-wave caught 
up with us. 
Fanninowicz contributed to 
this intercKange a knowing sneer. 
I said, “I wonder if tKe glow 
has anything to do witH the drilling tower at Fort Johnson?” 
The German’s sneer wavered 
toward a scowl. 
“Grand Emperor of Mechanics,” I addressed him, “are you 
merely contemptuous of us? Or 
are you carrying a secret about 
the great towers?” 
“Secrets!” he said, the sneer 
back in full. “I am forced to carry 
thousands in this company, simply because my mind holds a vast 
number of matters beyond your 
understanding. Especially in the 
intellectually inclined Teuton, the 
directional hormone produces 
taller bodies. I feel no more contempt for you all than I do for 
chattering apes, I assure you.” 
I gave him up as a bad German 
job. I tucked away in my memory the point that the Texas 
growth-hormone was directional, 
whatever that jargon might mean. 
Then I incuriously watched the 
purple glow until our steady 
northward flight put it under the 
horizon. 
My earlier symptoms of gravity sickness Had been replaced 
with a general lassitude which 
could not merge unaided into rest 
because of the pains of my deep 
bruises, rashes, and varicosities. 
The other passengers went to 
sleep. With the aid of rum, I fol144 
lowed them there — and found 
only nightmares of cyborged fiery 
dragons pursuing me through redhot tunnels which by degrees 
melted my titanium. 
Xl^hen I awoke unrefreshed, 
’ ^ sunrise was reddening the 
eastern horizon. El Tacito had replaced Guchu at the controls. 
The snow-roofed forest below 
had become dwarfier. 
The groimd below was without 
any but the smallest hills. There 
was no sign of human occupation. 
Our largely transparent kack 
made the situation seem like a 
nothingness crossing a desolation. 
Except for my pains, I would 
have felt disembodied. 
After we had breakfasted, each 
meagerly yet according to his 
taste, Rosa said, “May this one 
address you, Senor La Cruz?” 
So it has come to Senor, I 
thought. “Most certainly, Senorita Morales,” I replied. 
“How do you propose to depart 
into the sky after we reach Amarillo CucHillo?” 
“By the way of the spaceport 
there,” I told her. “If one of Circumlima’s ships is not in, I will 
have to wait.” 
“Ah yes, the spaceport,” she 
answered with a dubious nod. 
“But how do you propose to wait 
in Amarillo CucHillo, which is little more than a Texan workingencampment?” 
V^en !he Twentieth Century was only fen days old, Texas ushered In 
with a black skyward sweep the Age of Petroleum, the era of fast cars 
and the big trucks that would lick the railroads, the mighty tanks and > 
lets that would dominate subsequent wars. With a roar that was heard 
around the Industrial world, a tumult mighty as Krakatoa's but mean- ' 
Ingful, at the sleepy town of Beaumont, near the coast where De Soto's 
men had noted oil seepage three hundred and thirty-eight years before, the Discovery Well at Spindletop blew in. Within six months, the 
price of Beaumont land had risen a thousandfold. OH was three cents 
a cask, water five cents a cup. Within sixty years, one Texan In eight 
was with an oil company, and one out of every seven barrels of worldoil caine fr^m Texas. -i-Texas In Brief and Big, Houston 
House, Chicago, Texas 
“I Have counted on the help of 
the Revolution in this matter,” I 
told her anxiously. “That was my 
understanding from oizr talks in 
Dallas.” 
“Ah' yes,” Rosa replied. “But 
Dallas is Dallas. And also what is 
said in Dallas. While Amarillo 
Cuchillo is another thing. Carlos, 
what are our contacts there?” 
“Among the Cree Indians,” 
Mendoza replied. “They are wanderers, though some live in encampment outside the town. And 
of course among the cyborged, 
but such have no station or influence. As for town-dwellers, I 
know of none. Perhaps — ” He 
broke off with a sharp h'eadshake. 
I guessed that he had been 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
about to say, “Perhaps El Toro 
knew, but neglected to inform 
me.” Another matter occurred to 
me. 
( t'^here is also the Lost CrazyRussian Pitchblende Mine,” 
I said. “Though I know some of 
you think it a fable,” I added 
with a glance at Rachel. “Nevertheless, my sole reason for coming 
to Earth was to find it and lay 
claim to it if I can. To achieve 
the latter, I had hoped to make 
use of well placed local revolutionaries as intermediaries. But 
even if there are none such, I 
must still make a full effort. Perhaps in making the claim, I can 
use my Texan disguise, which 
workei} well enougH for me in the 
Kansas City Plaza los Toros.” 
RacEel interrupted witK, “But 
Senor La Cruz, How will tHe matter of making tHe claim ever come 
up, since we know you don’t Have 
even tHe map witH you?” 
So sHe was senoring me too! “I 
Have tHe map Here,” I told Her 
icily, toucHing my Head. “THat 
was one thing about Terra I 
memorized in complete detail 
while still in tHe Sack. If tHe mine 
exists, I can find it.” 
“Yes, and you may Have tHe 
claim in your Head too, all perfectly memorized,” RacHel rejoined. “But a claim in tHe Head isn’t 
a document. It isn’t seals and signatures.” 
“I carry the claim here,” I told 
Her, laying my Hand on my cHest 
over my Heart. “And as to How 
I propose to assert tHat claim — 
tHat is my business, Senorita Lamar!” 
SHe sHrank back a little witH 
tipped sHoulder, pretending to be 
witHered. I could Have kicked 
Her! I caught Rosa quirking a 
grin. There was occupation for 
my otHer foot! 
Mendoza said witH mild argumentativeness, “But if you truly 
have the claim, I do not see the 
need eitHer for map or mine-Eunt. 
A claim describes tHe exact location of a mine.” 
“This one does not,” I asserted. 
Then before any or all could ac146 
cuse me of insanity, I went on, 
“However, tHe original crazy 
Russian, who sold it to the Cree, 
who sold it to the Aleut, who sold 
it to my ancestor — tHat crazy 
Russian, wHose name by tHe way 
was NicBolas NimzovitcH Nisard 
— He, before disappearing forever, 
deposited witH tHe tHen-Yellowknife Registry of Mining Claims, 
in an envelope bearing His signature, samples of tHe unique mixture of pitchblende, syenite, pitcHrock, and granite from His mine. 
On tiie basis of tHose samples. He 
was granted a provisional claim. 
If anyone can produce matcHing 
samples, plus a verifiable description of tHe mine’s location, plus 
the provisional claim, tfien tHe 
claim becomes absolute.” 
“THe Russian was crazy like a 
fox,” Mendoza observed, nodding 
his Head wisely. “He was afraid 
tHat tHe Registry, agent of capitalist government, migHt jump His 
claim.” 
I said, “So all I need now is 
your Help in finding tHe mine. I 
know you carry radioactivity detectors as standard safety equipment. WHile tHis kack is tHe perfect vefiicle in whicH to Himt for 
the landmarks of the mine: three 
large low outcroppings of rock 
forming the apexes of an equilateral triangle witH sides a kilometer long. THe outcroppings to 
nortB and south are of pale granite, but tHe one to tHe west is 
of darker Hue — and tEere lies tSe 
pitchblende.” 
Mendoza nervously sHook His 
Head. “I fear I Have not tKe autHority to detacH a revolutionary 
veHicle for sucH an individualistic 
enterprise.” 
“Is true,” Rosa supported Him. 
“TEe Revolution comes before all 
else.” 
RacEel said, “I tEink it’s a mercy not to encourage Senor La 
Cruz in His delusions about this 
non-existent mine.” 
Kicking, I tEougHt, is mucE too 
good for those two abominable 
females. However, I found myself too weary and dispirited to 
indulge even in sadistic fantasies. 
I deserve all this, I thought. To 
put my trust in a gang of utterly 
selfish traitors such as constitutes 
any revolutionary committee — 
Fanninowicz’s cackle of sardonic mirtH was th'e final stab to the 
deflating balloon of my ego, flattening it completely. 
T T owever, the cold laughter was 
followed by a warm chuckle. 
GucEu, whom I Ead thought to be 
asleep, Ead opened His bloodshot 
eyes and now lifted up on an 
orange-robed elbow. 
“Aw, give the stupid square a 
$quare deal, I say. At first I 
agreed with you all — we’d use 
Him and now was tHe time to 
dump Him, along with Professor 
Fanninowicz. But then Ee told Eig 
A SPECTER !S HAUNTING TEXAS 
story and, man, it was so crazy 
that my sympathies were aroused 
in spite of msrself! Loco Rusaan 
to a Cree Injun to an Aleut to 
Eis bombed-out ancestor! Man, 
oH man!” Again came the warm 
chuckle. “Not tfiat we owe Him 
ansdJiing as Senor La Cruz from 
the sky. First principle of being a 
black is that Ee can’t ever owe an 
ofay anything. Ofays are a doomed breed, and its a kindness to 
Help them along toward extinction — and tHat goes for you too. 
Miss Lamar. But taking La Cruz 
just as an actor — pure ham, but 
at least lively and Hard-working 
— I think we owe Him a little 
Help hunting this crazy mine of 
Eis.” 
El Tacito looked back from the 
controls and nodded once. 
Mendoza looked around, shrugged, and nodded too, albeit unwillingly. 
I gazed at GucEu and opened 
my moutH to thank Eim. 
But the words that came out 
were, “Thank you for nothing, 
you bloodthirsty black, more besotted with your race than even 
Fanninowicz Here! I imagine tHe 
first act of your so-called Pacific 
republic was to slaughter every 
miserable white in California, giving priority to women and children.” 
Guchu’s answering chuckle was 
as warm and rich as either of his 
earlier ones. I Hadn’t touched His 
ego, I Hadn’t got witBn a ligKtyear of it 
“TEats not true, Scully,” He 
said. “Most ot tKem we made 
Honorary blacks.” 
Not trusting myself to speak to 
him, or so mucH as look at the 
girls, I crawled forward beside El 
Tacito. 
“You Heard wKat tKey said,” I 
told him gruffly. “Please approach’ Amarillo Cuchillo on a 
soutK-nortK line, ten kilometers 
to tKe east. That is a trifle more 
than six miles.” 
Once again He nodded. 
Tj'xcept for changing tKe bat^ teries of my exo, I spent tKe 
rest of the long day Horizontal 
there, occasionally peering north 
— not Kimgrily, but witK a definite tHough' very small appetite. 
After a tiny eternity, tKe flat 
blue of Great Slave Lake edged 
reluctantly into view. To tKe west 
I could make out low forest; to 
the east, the barrens. 
Then for a time land retreated 
in all directions as we crossed the 
lake. To me it was as if we were 
crossing one of those unimaginable oceans. 
TKe sun was low wKen tKe barrens reappeared ahead. 
GucKu took over the controls. 
WKen tKe barrens Had been below us for Half an Hour, the sun 
was setting. Its horizontal, deep 
yellow light was just right to 
148 
show me, a little to the west, three 
long shadows traveling east from 
the apexes of an equilateral triangle with sides about a kilometer long. 
My teeth were chattering as I 
pointed out the miraculous sight 
to Guchu. I chiefly wanted him 
to confirm what I saw. It was 
impossible that I should find the 
mine so easily. There must be a 
catcH somewhere. 
If there was, GucKu didn’t tell 
me. He just grunted appreciatively and swung the kack west and 
down. 
TKe shadows of the two eastern 
outcroppings were about a half 
kilometer long. But that of the 
western one, where the mine was, 
seemed to stretch east forever. 
I snatched up binoculars. There 
was indeed a catcK. The long 
shadow was cast by one of the 
now-familiar huge towers. 
My mine had been discovered 
and was being worked by the 
Texans. 
that didn’t make sense. 
Surely the huge rigs scattered down across Texas at least as 
far as Dallas were not for mining 
surface deposits of pitchblende. 
I focused more carefully and 
upped the magnification and electronic gain. Now I could see a 
great door standing open in the 
eastern side of the tower. Before 
it, figures tinier than ants were 
slowly milling about. I saw th'e 
Hairline red needles of laser 
beams. A revolutionary rising? I 
wondered, pulse quickening. 
I scanned west of tfie tower. I 
saw notEing wHatever besides tHe 
monotonous landscape of tHe barrens, until tHere came into view 
tHe narrow, dark-gold sHeen of a 
river, dark sHort dasHes of two 
bridges crossing it, and just beyond tHem tHe Huddled low buildings and narrow streets of wHat 
must be Amarillo CucHillo. 
THe tops of a few of tHe buildings still caugHt svmligHt. Elsewhere, twilight was gathering. 
Northeast of tHe tiny city I 
spotted an airfield witH two Huge 
Texan cargo jets and a narrow 
shaft, its upper quarter sun-gilded, wHicH might well be the Tsiolkovsky or Her sister sHip, tHe 
Goddard. 
I lowered the binoculars to rest 
my eyes. THere was shadow 
around me. THe kack Had dropped out of sigHt of the sun. 
Without warning, Amarillo CucHillo became tHe center of a spiderweb of tHread-thin, rulerstraight beams of light, Some of 
them, red, shot up toward infinity or lanced across tHe barrens. 
Others, green, originated in the 
sky or in tHe northwest distance, 
and ended around the city in incandescent points from which 
sparks fountained upward. 
Some of the red beams ended 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
similarly in points beyond Amarillo CucHillo, two of them in the 
sky. 
The kack rocked and a blinding green flare flashed across the 
thick plastic a foot above my 
head. 
That convinced me that the 
Rangers Had found us at last. 
Though why they Had to sHoot 
up the whole sky and landscape 
to down one miserable little ship 
of actors, I couldn’t grasp. Sheer 
Texan exuberance, perhaps. 
By the time I got my sight 
back, GucHu was landing the 
kack behind tHe southernmost of 
two eastern outcroppings. Near at 
Hand the rocky Hillock looked almost impressive — a glaciersmootHed bump of granite ten 
meters HigK. 
I could see the brown furrow 
which the green laser beam Had 
melted in the plastic, not quite 
cutting through. The furrow was 
barely three decimeters wide, 
testifying to tHe photonic weapon’s fantastic “choke” at a distance over ten miles. 
THere was a soft bump and 
my wrists were twisting. I realized 
that we Had touched down and 
that Mendoza was trying to 
wrench the binoculars away from 
me. 
I saw Rachel drop recklessly 
down from the kaclds trap to the 
snowy carpet below. I too was 
seized by the desire to know what 
was going on. Jerking the binoculars away from Mendoza, and upping my p>ower, though’ not as 
much as I had for the duel, I followed her. 
Offstage, the Revolutionary 
Ramblers are an3rthing but a well 
disdplined company. 
T he snow was barely ankle 
deep. The wind of nly movement instantly began to chill my 
face and hands. But I did not 
pause to put on gloves and mask, 
or even to turn up my suit’s fieat, 
until I was crouched beside Rachel on a rough granite ledge and 
peering over the hillock’s top. 
There were no more little red 
laser flashes from the foot of the 
tower, before the great door. 
The earth’s curvature now Kid 
Amarillo CucHillo, but the green 
and red laser beams continued 
their battle. I could no longer see 
the incandescent Kits, tKougK 
there were brief ghostly white 
glows here and there along the 
horizon’s rim, and also long-lasting deep orange glows which I 
took to come from flames. Several times too I saw brief glares and 
later heard the distant boom of 
explosions, but for the most part 
the battle was so silent that it 
seemed more like one more natural display — the northern lights 
reduced to a weird, bright geometry — rather tlian a human 
conflict. 
Somewhere along the line I had 
decided that the laser display was 
not directed at us, that I and my 
fellow actor-revolutionaries had 
merely been struck one accidental 
blow and become witnesses of 
some much larger conflict. 
Though when one green ray 
flashed a half kilometer overhead, 
I flinched. 
I turned up my heating a notch, 
put on gloves and mask and looked around me. Rachel was using 
my binoculars. Mendoza Kad 
found another pair and was peering through them. Rosa and Fanninowicz and Father Francisco 
Kad also come down. And El Tacito too, his pistols out, stolidly 
watching Fanninowicz and myr 
self rather than the battle. 
There were two battles, I remembered then. I snatched the 
glasses from Rachel with no more 
than a growled, “I want them!” 
in answer to her challenging, “I 
beg your pardon?” 
I focused them carefully on the 
western tower a kilometer away, 
upped magnification and electronic gain to maximum and 
gradually made out the details. 
Slowly I interpreted a sight 
that I am sure will never stop returning to me in nightmares. 
The huge tower loomed darkly 
against the twilight sky. Facing 
me, two doors thirty meters high 
and ten wide stood open. 
The inside of the tower showed 
GALAXY 
a single great room. WitK one 
exception, the central space was 
empty. To either side, a purplish 
glow showed me sections of great 
tall machines. One reminded me 
of one of those big gantries a 
rocket needs on a gravity satellite. 
The reason it reminded me of 
a gantry was that I saw, standing 
in the center of the tower, a 
gleaming violet rocket taller than 
the door. It must be lit by invisible banks of floodlights, I 
thought. I fancied it quivered, as 
if it were anxious for the tower’s 
roof to lift aside, so it could take 
off. 
By Diana! — I thought — Texas is preparing a new conquest of 
space. I must warn Circumlunal 
<<T)etter be ready to come arunning, children,” Guch’u 
called from behind us. “The geiger shows a little activity from the 
direction of the purple tower. 
Nothing dangerous. As of now.” 
Then, through the rocket, I 
dimly made out more machines 
behind it. I realized, at first with 
relief, that the rocket was only a 
shaft of violet light shining up 
like a giant laser through a Bole 
in the floor or ground and beating 
against the tower’s ceiling, to be 
reflected as the purple glow. 
The purple glow, fanning out 
through the door showed me 
many bodies lying at random on 
the snow. Little bodies, the bodA SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
ies of bent-backs. I think ! saw 
stains beside some of th'eni. At 
any rate, they did not move. 
But there were many more 
Mexes moving about freely, seen 
blackly in silhouette. Some stood 
in groups. Others moved singly. 
When a group did move, there 
was a surge about it which I did 
not like. I do not know whether it 
reminded me of half-disciplined 
soldiers, or packs of animals, or 
what. I only know I did not like 
it. 
Also, to one side of the door, 
there was what I took to be a 
small stack of big logs, bigger 
than the stems of any of the trees 
I Had seen growing in the Land 
of Little Sticks. 
If El Toro had been with us, 
he might have led us toward the 
tower. I only know that Carlos 
Mendoza did not, and that I had 
no desire to go there, and that I 
twice caught Father Francisco 
crossing Himself. 
My glasses kept going back in 
fascination to the violet pillar of 
light. I fancied that it pulsed and 
vibrated. It seemed a living thing. 
I marveled with a shudder at the 
Mexes moving freely in its glow, 
the crescent edges of their silhouetted heads like anodyzed aluminum, or mercury vapor lashed by 
electrons. 
I wondered about the source of 
the violet light A huge vat of 
molten metal just below the floor? 
— for there was heat there; the 
lengthening fan of dark ground 
before the door, where the snow 
had melted, showed that. 
Or great filaments? Or a sea of 
thin vapor, conceivably mercury, 
electrically blasted into fluorescence? 
Somehow I felt th'e source was 
deeper tKan tKat. I pictured a 
great ahaft going down, and down, 
and down, until I felt vertigo. 
Federico’s sKaft, but witK all tKe 
elevators removed and the change 
points smoothed out, imtil it was 
an uninterrupted 40-kilometer 
hole. 
I lowered my glasses, blinking 
my smarting eyes and shaking 
my head to get rid of that illusion of dizziness. 
I looked toward Amarillo CucHillo. The lasers still lanced 
there, though I saw more greens 
than reds. 
I was just handing my binoculars to Rachel, when I heard 
Mendoza, whose own binoculars 
were still fixed on the purple tower, give a sibilant hiss. 
Ignoring Rachel’s angry protests, I snatched back the glasses 
and put them to my eyes. 
I am sometimes sorry I did so, 
yet it is perhaps better that I saw, 
than she. 
T?ight Mexes were returning 
^ from the violet beam. A gang 
of eight others rushed with that 
152 
unpleasant surge toward the log 
stack, which seemed slightly 
smaller than before, hoisted a log 
between them, surged with it to 
the center of the tower and cast 
it into the violet light, where it 
was brightly and lividly visible 
for a moment before dropping into the hole whence the light came. 
During that cinema-bright moment I saw that it was not a log, 
but a tall man with legs bound 
together and arms to his sides, a 
big man made bigger by the ropes 
swathing him from neck to ankles. 
I watched that action repeated 
six times more, imtil the stack 
was gone. Although several attempts, which rocked me, were 
made to drag the binoculars away 
from me, I held onto them with 
the maximum strength of my 
hands and exoskeleton — held 
onto them and fought to keep 
them focused continually on the 
base of the violet column. 
I do not think I wanted to 
watch. I believe I hated to. I 
know it tore me inside. One moment I felt like a snarling animal, next like a compassionate 
man, next like a maniac, next like 
a camera frozen in ice. 
Yet I had to watch, I had to 
witness. I had each time to try, 
unsuccessfully yet desperately, to 
catch the expression on the face 
of the bound Texan falling into 
the brilliant hole. 
Meanwfiile I was Hearing a 
faint wailing tKat rose and fell 
irregularly. I told myself it was 
tKe wind rising. I told myself it 
was wolves. I told myself it was 
not tKe screaming of men, eitKer 
in ultimate terror or murderous 
fury, or tKe two mixed. 
BuddKists Kave mucH to say 
about karmic burdens and duties, 
karmic works and acts, karmic 
moments wKen all of tKe moral 
past of a being and perKaps tKe 
future too, is laid bare, is nakedly 
seized and known. TKat perKaps 
comes closest to describing wHat 
I felt and wKy I Kad to feel it. 
Besides, was I not DeatK? 
TKe glasses slipped from my 
hands, I don’t know to whom. I 
stood tKere a long time, with head 
bowed. Or perhaps it only seemed 
a long time. 
TKen among many unnoticed 
remarks, I Heard someone, I do 
not recall who, say, “Yes, the 
cyborgs are all gone. TKe eight 
last threw something down the 
hole. Yes, a thing, not a man.” 
I looked up. The sky was dark. 
Toward Amarillo Cuchillo, a few 
lasers still lanced, all green. 
I Heard someone — again I do 
not recall who; can it Have been 
that in my peculiar state I was 
hearing not voices, but meanings? 
— at any rate, I heard someone 
say matter-of-factly, “Well, the 
Russians have licked the Texans 
this time, that’s for sure.” 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
Until that moment, except for 
the brief period when I thougEt 
the Rangers were chasing us, I 
hadn’t the faintest idea of wBo 
was fighting whom at the Battle 
of Amarillo CucKillo. 
A nd then I began to hear it — 
no, not the shrill wailing 
again, thank Mars! — though it 
was even fainter than that to begin with. It was a sound that was 
lilting, and rhythmic, and deep, 
and — one Kad at last to recognize — both musical and Human. 
It was coming out of the dark, 
across the white waste, from the 
direction of Amarillo CucKillo, 
and it was slowly getting stronger. 
For a long while I tried to convince m5rself it was an illusion — 
perKaps something generated deep 
in my mind to erase those dreadful screams — but then I realized 
that all those around me were motionless and listening too. And 
then I saw the first white form 
appear in the dark like a ghost, 
small at first, but growing taller. 
I heard GucKu come up behind 
us and begin to whisper harshly, 
“You all better — !” 
I think he was going to say 
“ — beat it back to the kack!” and 
then seeing How far the situation 
had developed, changed his mind. 
For he finished, “ — Hold damn 
still! Tacito, dig your gun in the 
Professor’s guts.” 
By that time all tKe marching 
men had appeared from the frosty murk. There were a scant dozen of them. They were in white 
fatigues and they carried their 
lasers at the slope, or hanging 
farther over-shoulder with muzzle down, or casually under-arm. 
They all stood tall and now I 
could make out all the words of 
the march they were singing soft 
and low to 'a hauntingly familiar 
tune: 
From the hills of Guatemala 
To the frozen Arctic sea 
Texas Rangers fight the battles 
In the name of liberty. 
We have kicked the Russki and 
Chinee 
Until his butt is sore. 
We’re the Lone Star’s guts and 
guns and fists, 
We’re the Texas Ranger Corps. 
At first I assumed they were 
headed for the tower, to hunt 
down the revolted cyborgs. Then, 
with a spasm of fear, I thought 
they were coming for us. 
It turned out they were simply 
marching south between us, 
though much nearer us than the 
tower. They halted less than a 
hundred yards away. We all held 
dead still indeed. With blown 
snow half coating us, we were 
hard to see. At least I hoped so. 
In the lull of the wind, I Heard 
a gruff voice say, “Wal, Custer 
154 
done wuss,” and another reply, 
“And so did Lyndon, bless ’im,” 
and a third comment, “Yup, the 
mysterious east weren’t never 
meant for human man to meddle 
with.” 
I heard nothing else coming 
from the northwest, but the 
Rangers must have, for now they 
scattered and knelt in a long 
curve, their lasers pointing back 
along the line of their retreat. 
What came out of the northwestern murk wasn’t a band of 
pursuing Russians, but a big long 
white vehicle, which moved silently across the snow, weaving 
like a snake. 
It halted by the Rangers and 
I heard a hoarse voice command, 
“Jump aboard, boys.” 
They obeyed, though they 
didn’t move as fast as the voice 
had demanded. Then the huge 
vehicle was slithering south. 
I thought I heard again, very 
faintly, the two lines: 
Texas Rangers fight the battles 
In the name of Liberty! 
Perhaps I should Have felt contemptuous, or at least sardonic. I 
didn’t. Something deep inside me, 
which I had never suspected was 
there, was touched. 
"IT^e had started back for the 
kack when the roaring began. It came first through the 
rock we trod, making it vibrate 
and sliake. We staggered and reeled. 
TKen tKe roar became deafening as tlie pxirple tower blew up. 
First tKe violet beam grew mucK 
brigKter and burst tKrougK th'e 
roof, shining toward tKe zenitK as 
if exultantly boimd for tKe stars. 
TKen great gouts of bright pxirple 
molten stuff were mixed with it 
TKen tKe walls of tKe tower were 
driven outward. In a few moments, where the tower and great 
machines Kad been, there was 
only a cone of bright purple, viscous, semi-solid lava, Kugely 
squirming and swiftly growing 
taller. 
The roaring died down, tKougK 
the rock still vibrated underfoot. 
GucKu yelled, “Back to the 
kack! TKe geiger’s gone crazy!” 
Fanninowicz broke away from 
the group and ran lumberingly 
up the hillock. El Tacito drew a 
bead on Kim. I forced down Kis 
pistol, saying, Uno momentol For 
favor!" and took out after the 
German. RacKel and Rosa followed me. 
Fanninowicz stopped at tKe 
summit of the rocky Kummock. 
He was batKed in bright purple 
light, while we wKo followed lum 
stayed in the hummock’s shadow. 
Shaking Kis fist alternately at 
the purple pyramid and at us, Ke 
roared out, “Yes, the dirty Russians have won a battle, but now 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
they will lose two, ten, a hundred! 
With his back to the wall. Hitler 
created the V-1 and the V-2! Now 
the Texans, sole heirs of tKe virile Germanic spirit, Kave won tKe 
means to throw back and conquer 
the jealous world! Faced by the 
shortage of radioactives, they 
Kave Kad the the vision and daring and heavy technology to tap 
pockets of radioactive magma under Earth’s crust! Across their 
great land, at every likely spot, 
they have with' admirable secrecy 
created the mohole mines! The 
Lost Crazy-Russian Mine was the 
clue that led to the new Spindletop! Everywhere the ultimate 
gusKers are coming in, as at Fort 
Johnson last night, though you 
fools Kad not the wit to read the 
meaning of tKat glow! They will 
make Texas all-powerful!” And 
facing the glow with’ fist held 
high, Ke shouted, “Sieg Heil!” 
and again, "Sieg Heil!” 
Perhaps I should have been 
touched by that too. I wasn’t. All 
I could think was that Germans 
were maniacs and that the grandiose Texans were giving poor old 
atom-scarred Terra another 
Korse-size dose of deadly radioactivity. 
Meanwhile I Kad grabbed Fanninowicz’s ankle and jerked. He 
came tumbling heavily down. RacKel and I each grabbed him by 
a shoulder and rushed him toward the kack. When he didn’t 
move fast enough, Rosa kicked 
him viciously from behind. 
As we scrambled aboard Guchu yelled, “You dumb ofays are 
crazy-lucky I waited for you. 
Now Kang onl” 
The kack took off straight east, 
hugging the groimd to get the 
most protection out of the hillock’s low shadow. We traveled 
east many miles before we began 
the long circle north and west to 
find the tents of the Crees. 
Zhawlty NawsH 
F anninowicz continued euphoric in the kack. He discoursed 
to us like a paranoically Insane 
schoolteacher in his grandiose 
phase. He sprayed spittle like my 
father acting Macbeth, and his 
voice often rose with a lago’s or 
Richard the Third’s evil glee. 
“It is a commonplace,” he began, “that common men never 
perceive the wonders of science 
and technology until the rockets 
roar, until the nuclei give up their 
energy at interior solar heat, or 
until the rich’ tKor-uranic lava 
spouts from a moKole, Now you 
have seen, and the secret is out. 
So, attend me, children.” 
El Tacito made as if to club 
156 
him with the butt of his rifle, but 
Mendoza shook his head. 
“It has long been known, even 
to oafs like you,” Fanninowicz 
continued on without notice, “that 
Terra has a crust of solid rock as 
much as seventy kilometers thick. 
Below that is the mantle: three 
thousand kilometers of molten 
rock under increasingly vast pressure. 
“Once it was thought that the 
mantle was slowly cooling and 
shrinking. 
“But as early as the twentieth 
century, the preponderance of 
evidence indicated that the Keat 
of the mantle was steadily maintained by cells of rich radioactives in it. 
“These deep cells produced 
slow convection currents in the 
mantle, leading straight up to the 
crust, spreading sideways there 
and then descending. The Dutchman Veneg-Meinez first suggested that. Which is to say that a 
German first developed the theory, for despite their reputation 
for peacefulness, the Dutch were 
the ancestors of the brave and 
long-moumed-for Boers, which 
proves the Dutch to have been 
subconscious Prussians. 
“Up the slow convection currents rode the rich radioactive 
ores, bit by bit. They were the 
hottest and most expanded of all 
the materials in the current, since 
they were the source of its heat. 
“EacH current melted a dome 
in tKe solid crust above it. Some 
of ttie radioactives moved sidewajrs witK tKe current to its areas 
of descent Himdreds of miles 
away. But otKers accumulated in 
an ever-ricKer pocket inside tKe 
dome. 
“So pockets of molten radioactives are marked by mantle 
domes, somewKat as oil is associated witK salt domes. 
“TKe Texans—” 
“I was waiting for tKem,” GucKu muttered from tKe pilot’s 
seat. ^ 
“Silence! By tKeir ability to 
tKink big and to do big, the Texans provided the skill and unceasing industry to dig tKe roomy 
shafts.” 
“Lies!” Rosa interjected. “Our 
cyborged men provided that.” 
Tpanninowicz continued unperturbed, “TKe lower courses of 
the shafts were lined witK woven 
molecular-ribbon ferro-ceramics 
of great strength, tKrougH wKicK 
the radioactives migKt gusH upward, depositing on earth’s surface great cones of tiior-uranic 
ores. TKe PKaraoKs built limestone pyramids in wHicK they 
buried themselves witK a little 
gold and a few soft gems. But tKe 
Texans have cajoled Nature into 
creating hundreds of radioactive 
pyramids, eacH worth hundreds 
of billions of dollars!” 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
“A few Texans got bxiried today in one of their hot pyramids,” GucKu put in. 
“While we Texo-Germans,” 
Fanninowicz continued modestly 
but unshaken, “merely provided 
all the general theory and also the 
means to locate mantle domes.” 
“Which is?” Mendoza asked 
after a few seconds. He was still 
interested. Myself, I Kad become 
sickened by all this horrible talk 
of oceans of molten rock megameters deep. A planet is Hell with 
a crust! Then it occurred to me 
that my nausea might be the first 
symptoms of a dose of radioactivity. 
When Fanninowicz, prior to an 
elaborate yawn, brushed His hand 
through his short Kair, I was 
pleased to see that none fell out. 
“OK,” he said tantalizingly, “we 
have Kad some success vwth 
counts of anti-neutrinos coming 
through the earth at night from 
the sun. But cluefly we have located mantle domes by the same 
method the Great Fuehrer’s naval 
command located, battleships in 
the Atlantic — that is, by dowsing 
over maps of Texas! Ho-ho, I see 
I have startled you. I see you are 
prepared to sneer. Do so, if you 
wish. It will not alter the fact that 
we Germans are the andent and 
original spiers-out of metals, the 
ultimate chemists, the chthonic 
race, the wise old kobolds, as the 
names of the elements testify!” 
I did not listen to the discussion which followed, in which 
words like “cobalt” and “cuckoo” 
were bandied about. I was thinking that if only one dab of ferric 
ore were left in all Terra, a German would find it and forge from 
it an Iron Cross. My mind was 
also invaded by a compulsive, 
nightmarish vision in which’ a parade of Germans and Egjrptians 
wound among vast, blue-lit pyramids, the hair of the marchers 
falling out on the way and their 
flesh' shredding off and they slowly turning to shining blue skeletons topped by eerie animal 
Heads and spiked gray Helmets. 
I was not aware tHe kack Had 
landed until someone guided me 
from it, my exoskeleton jigging 
and shimmying from sHiver- jerks 
in my chilled ghost muscles. I 
dimly noted puckered, blackeyed, leathery faces framed in fur. 
I smelled old Hides, unwasfied live 
ones, burning fat and cold machine oil. I glimpsed leather walls 
with shadows reeling across them. 
Then I felt coarse fur beneath 
me. I Heard a faint shivery rattle, 
and realized just as I fell asleep, 
that it had come from my exo. 
T spent the next two days in tHe 
encampment of the Crees, recuperating. Which, to a man witH 
gravity sickness on a gravitybody, means no improvement at 
all, only a bitter Hanging on to 
158 
what little Health' He Has, with 
growing irritability, fatigued restlessness, swift loss of reasonableness, and ballooning negativism. 
There were a dozen tents masked by a strip of forest so tHin 
and ragged that Amarillo CucHillo and its airfield-spaceport could 
be glimpsed distantly through tHe 
stunted trees, witH Here and there 
small patrols of burly-looking 
Russians. 
This nearness did not wHet my 
Hope. It only made me impatient. 
Mendoza and tfie rest explained to me that I must stay hidden 
while they made contact and 
dickered witH tHe Russians. My 
Texan Height and generally 
strange appearance, tKey said, 
might arouse suspicion in tfie 
Russian military, wHo might not 
Have been informed at all about 
tHe part I Had played in tHe BentBack Revolt. 
I argued at all tfiis. Was I not 
El Esqueleto, I asked, and was He 
not known by now around tHe 
world? Even RacHel and Rosa 
could not win from me more tfian 
surly agreement to cooperate for 
tHe present. 
The Crees were an interesting 
if somber folk. For instance, small 
jars of petroleum and cKunks of 
coal were tHeir money and also 
their gods, because they Had 
learned that those black substances were tHe energy-filled re
GALAXY 
sidue of all animal and plant life. 
These they never burned, but 
used in trade and buried in small 
quantity wntK die dead, to “seed” 
them toward a similar immortality. 
But the Crees did not interest 
me. They irked me witK tKeir attrocious English and worse Spanish and with tKeir body odors, 
different from mine tKougH no 
worse. I did my best to ignore 
tKem. 
As for staying hidden and sensibly Horizontal, well, except when 
Russian patrols came near, I 
spent my days prowling about the 
camp with El Tacito in scowling 
attendance. I frequently stopped 
for glimpses of tKe silvery needleA SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
prow of the Tsiolkovsky or the 
Goddard waiting at the spaceport 
to take me home — at any rate 
that was wKy I felt it was there. 
Meanwhile, I thought, I was 
wasting precious time that I could 
have put to use asserting my 
claim to the radioactive gusher — 
for despite Fanninowicz’s babble 
about dowsing and such’, it seemed obvious that the Lost Crazy
Russian Pitchblende Mine had 
been the clue that had led the 
Texans to drill a mohole there. 
A/Ty colleagues’ suggestions that 
I forget about the mine, that 
I face the fact that Russia had 
never permitted the exploitation 
of her mineral wealth by foreign
159 
Over and over i]ie stom ending as He began: 
"Make ye no truce with Adam-Zad-^die Bear that 
walks like a manl ^ 
i When he stands tn as pleading in wavering, 
man-brate guise, ^ ^ 
When he veils the hate and cunning of his litde ' 
swinidieyesj 
When he shows as seerang quarter, with paws 
, like hands in prayer, ^1 
That is tihe time of peril— the time of the Truce "^^2 
of the Bearl” 
—“The Trace of the Bear,” by 
Rudyard lOpling ( 1898) 
ers, and that I consider myself 
damn lucky if they managed to 
procure me an exit visa and transport to Circumluna — all tliese 
reasonable suggestions I listened 
to with' great hostility and a growing suspicion that they wanted 
me off Terra so they could seize 
my wealth. 
Suggestions that I Have patience — Mendoza’s that I learn 
Cree, Rachel’s that I take up bowand-arrow, GucHu’s that I drop 
acid — I only snarled at. 
Perhaps by this time I had developed a mild chronic delirium 
from skin infections and fringeadequate blood supply to the 
brain. But I doubt it. I think it 
was sheer bloated egotism on my 
part, slightly augmented by gravity disease. Here I was a great 
and heroic actor, and I was being 
treated like a bum. 
At any rate, when Mendoza 
and Father Francisco went to 
dicker the first day and did not 
return, when Guchu and Rosa 
and Rachel — and even Fanninowicz! — took off on the second 
in the kack and didn’t come back 
either or send word, I decided on 
action. 
I engaged El Tacito in a game 
of gin rummy and then a bout of 
drinking same — I mean rum, not 
gin. When h’e was thoroughly 
soused I put him to bed, took his 
lightning pistols, equipped my 
exoskeleton with my last fresh 
160 
batteries and waited for dawn. 
At its first glimmer I emerged 
from our tent, menaced with my 
telescopic swords the Crees who 
would have stopped me and walked straight to Amarillo Cuchillo. 
Dawn was red when I reached 
the town and encountered a neat 
new sign with the ten Cyrillic 
characters spelling out “Zh’awlty 
Nawsh.” Like the Texans, the 
Russians had literally translated 
Yellowknife. 
I also encountered my first pair 
of Russian soldiers. 
I’ll admit that their extreme 
burliness and even greater hairiness startled me at first. Ever 
since Tearful Suzy the space hostess had mentioned “them fearful 
furry Russians,” I had assumed 
that all the references I heard to 
the hirsuteness of the Soviets were 
only one more ridiculous expression of that curse of Terran man, 
xenophobia. 
N ot so. The feet, hands, and 
faces, not to mention Head, 
neck and ears, of these two infantrymen were entirely covered 
by thick fur, which also bulked 
up their coarsely woven summer 
uniforms. Their nails too were 
thickened, somewhat in the direction of claws, but seemingly not 
enough to interfere with humanoid manipulations. 
After the first shock, the effect 
was delightful. The Human eye 
looks quite soulful wKen surrounded by fur. It Has something 
of the effect of a dolphin’s eye, 
while the fur itself modestly proclaims, “I am merely an animal, 
nothing special, comrade. There 
is nothing of the anthropocentric, 
supercilious, god-and-devil-creating witchdoctor about me.” 
They seemed easily to accept 
my strangeness too, after a moment’s initial shock. Most cosmopolitan beasts, I thought. 
And when one of the two responded to my "Zdraste, tovarisch,” with a softly guttural, 
“Spasebaw,” and in answer to my 
question gave me the simple directions needed to reach the Registry of Mining Claims, I felt 
preposterously pleased, as if I 
were in a fairyland of talking animals. 
Of course these were very different Russians from the generally hairless Slavic Thins, Fats 
and Athletics of Circumluna, but 
in a way I liked them better. 
They seemed less supercilious, less 
morally conceited and puritanical. 
One of the soldiers stayed at 
his post, the other companionably 
dropped in beside me, carrying 
his laser rifle in a relaxed, casual 
manner. 
I pointed toward the distant, 
silvery prow of the spaceship rising above the low buildings 
around us and asked, “Goddard?” 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
“Nyet,” he replied emphatically. 
“Tsiolkovsky?” I suggested. 
“Da!” he confirmed in something of a growl, eying me for a 
moment severely before resuming 
his smiling, animal placidity. 
■\T^e passed several bombed and 
~ ’ laser-charred areas. 
We met ten more furry soldierpairs before we reached the Registry, and in each instance the 
first procedure was repeated, so 
that by the time I entered the 
dingy building I had an escort of 
what seemed to me charming and 
docile teddy-bears, of average human height but more than human 
breadth. The facts that I was a 
good two feet taller than any of 
them and that none of them 
showed surprise at my height or 
exoskeleton doubtless added to 
my feeling of fairytale confidence. 
It did not even bother me when 
the bear-soldiers pressed into the 
building before, beside and behind 
me, and then remained in a half 
circle around me as I introduced 
myself to a Kapitan Taimanov, a 
gloriously golden-furred Russian 
who appeared to be in charge of 
things at the Registry. I believed 
they were merely child-curious 
about me. 
Taimanov waved me into a 
seat, called for vodka and caviar, 
and offered me a box from which 
I took a long thin cigarette. He 
snapped his furry fingers, and a 
soldier leaped to light it. Somewhat to my disappointment, it 
was only tobacco. Nevertheless I 
puffed it graciously. 
Kapitan Taimanov was all 
smiles and courtesy. We cKatted 
together lightly of Ivan the Terrible and Stalin, of Dostoyevsky 
and Pasternak, of Moussorgsky 
and Khachaturian, of Alekhine 
and Keres. We almost started to 
play a game of chess. The only 
time his lip curled up from his 
formidable teeth' was when a 
brown-pelted soldier ran his tongue around His furry mouth as I 
downed my sip and the captain 
his glass of vodka. 
We complimented each other 
on our command of Russian, 
though his seemed to me a kind 
of pidgin compared to that I’d 
picked up in Circumluna. 
Then he led the conversation 
around to myself. 
'H'or starters, I explained that I 
was a simple worker in the 
Communist undergrotind in Texas and how I had played the part 
of Kawstee Chiluhvehk' or Bone 
Man — El Esqueleto — from 
Dallas to Fort Johnson, helping 
foment the Bent-Back Revolution which had drawn Ranger 
units southward from Zhawlty 
Nawsh. 
“Then I take it you are not 
one of ours?” he said. “I mean, 
those grown tall by deliberate 
162 
misuse of the directional Hormone in the laboratories and 
creches of Lake Baikal, taught 
Texan and sent to infiltrate that 
last evil stronghold of capitalism?” 
“No,” I answered truthfully. 
“What is this about misuse of the 
directional Hormone? I thought it 
was used solely by Texans to giye 
them greater Height.” 
He laughed and said, “I can 
see you are an innocent in some 
matters — that freakish thing, a 
native revolutionary.” He paused 
a moment to frown, the short 
golden fur of his forehead furrowing. “Or else those at Baikal 
decided it was best to equip you 
with a completely false memory 
and identity. No matter. As for 
the directional Hormone, we Russians employ it as Nature always 
intended — Horizontally, so that 
we are stronger without additional strains on the heart, men able 
to cope with the svuface gravity 
of Jupiter, if that should ever become necessary. It also acts upon 
our hair in a multiplicatory fashion, producing those pelts which 
make Siberian weather far easier 
to cope with and which also make 
summer nudity more esthetic and 
cultural. Ah, my poor friend, you 
should see us sporting by the tens 
of thousands on the beaches 
aroimd Baikal and the Black 
Sea!” 
“Or around the nearest mudGALAXY 
hole,” I thought I heard a soldier 
mutter. 
But Taimanov did not catch 
that. He was slowly and solemnly 
looking me up and down, concealing whatever pity or contempt 
he may Have felt for my miserable figure — asthenic or cerebrotonic ultimate — in contrast 
with his own magnificent animal 
one. Finally he said most soulfully, a tear dripping from his 
left eye, “Poor tortured comrade, 
I can see without being told that 
you have spent many years in the 
prisons of Texas. It must Have 
been there that you learned Russian, from some equally imfortunate and Heroic captive. No, 
you do not Have to explain, I 
know it all. They have accused us 
Russians of brainwashing our enemies by deprivation of food, 
sleep and exercise, but wHat nation — except TexasI — Has applied carefully calculated starvation — and perhaps the rack! — 
to a point where a man is literally 
skin and bones, his muscles shriveled possibly beyond regeneration? Truly, the Soviets owe you 
much! But tell me this — what 
unsung genius of the revolution 
provided you with that most 
clever powered framework which 
enables you to walk?” 
“The Russians gave it to me,” 
I answered, thinking further to 
win his favor — and actually 
l3ung not so much. At least Half 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
the technicians who had built my 
exo had been Circumlunan Russians. 
a^hawTtuh vuh aliduhP’ he 
^ cursed, half rising to his 
feet and pounding on the table 
until the bottle jumped; and it 
would Have cracked, except it was 
four inches thick. “For fifty years 
the military has been asking the 
scientists for powered body-armor 
for soldiers, and now at last we 
see it — secretly given away to a 
foreign agent by the state security 
apparatus I Your pardon, comrade. This is not your fault, but 
the practice makes me furious.” 
“You and your soldiers look to 
me so physically powerful,” I put 
in placatingly, “that it would 
seem you would Have no need of 
mechanical aids.” 
“True, we are as strong as kodiak bears,” He agreed. “But with 
powered body-armor, we could 
leap rivers and single-handed encounter tanks and devastate cities. The atomic bomb would become a side-arm. One soldier 
could liberate an entire Central 
American country. Girrl” 
The idea of bears able to leap 
rivers sounded to me about as 
desirable as spiders able to fly, 
though I did not voice the 
thought 
Meanwhile Taimanov was muttering, “Nothing too good for our 
foreign agents! Anytffing good 
enougK for our soldiers! Grrr! But 
once more your pardon. Have 
more vodka. How else can I serve 
you?” 
Emboldened by this encouragement and another large sip of 
vodka, I told him about my local 
mining claim. I pointed out that 
as an ardent revolutionary crippled for life, I perhaps deserved 
financial compensation. 
He looked interested, said, 
“Da?” and inquired if I had documents to prove my claim. 
Now was my big moment. I 
asked if he could provide me with 
the amenities of a powerful sunlamp and a razor or electric clippers. 
'^liougK mystified, Ke complied 
with’ my request. TKe electric 
clippers were especially fine, and 
he confided in me that Ke cut his 
entire pelt close — en broscti — 
for th’e summer months. 
Downing Half of another vodka, I unlocked my rib-cage at its 
center and folded it away to either side. Next I unzipped my winter suit from neck to crotch. TKe 
soldiers murmured approvingly at 
the amount of Kair disclosed. I 
clipped it all off close and directed the large sunlamp at my ventral side. 
“You are that cold, tovariscK?” 
Taimanov expostulated. “Even 
the vodka Kas not warmed you? 
Perhaps a steam bath — ” 
I lifted my hand and pointed it 
toward my middle. 
“Watch,” I said. 
The twelve pairs of fur-circled 
soulful eyes grew larger as tiny 
blue-gray marks began to appear 
on my torso. Soon the message 
there was completely developed. 
Beginning high on my cKest and 
traveling interminably downward, 
somewhat distorted by the scars 
of my patio crawl and by various 
rashes, but legible all the same, 
were line after line of slate-blue 
print and script, interspersed with 
signatures, X-marks, letterheads 
and seals. 
It was all upside-down to me, 
but I knew it by heart. 
For it was simply a facsimile 
of Nicholas NimzovitcK Nisard’s 
provisional claim to his pitchblende mine, together with the 
three transfers of ownership and 
a Circumlunan confirmation. 
My father hadn’t entrusted me 
with the provisional claim but, 
probably stealing the idea from 
some spy story, had Kad a facsimile of it tattooed on my chest 
and belly in a preparation of silver nitrate, so that it would be 
invisible until I exposed it to 
bright sunlight or a sunlamp, 
whereupon the hitherto invisible 
silver would precipitate out as a 
dark powder and the claim appear written on my skin, clearly 
and permanently. 
I had certainly Kad a devil of 
GALAXY 
a time keeping it undeveloped, 
especially in Lamar’s patio. Now 
I felt fully repaid for my efforts. 
T explained tHe gist of tKe document and its postscripts to 
Kapitan Taimanov. 
He was amazed, as were His 
soldiers. He told me tKat I could 
undoubtedly obtain some large 
financial compensation, tKougK it 
was not witHin his immediate 
power to grant it. General Kan 
would Have to be consulted and 
possibly Novy Moscow. He poured me another vodka, offered me 
another cigarette and came 
around His desk to examine the 
tattooing more closely. 
I delicately sipped white fire 
and savored that burnt essence of 
earthiness, tobacco. 
Taimanov pointed a furry finger, hom-tipped, at the nethermost seal, a mandala quartering 
a cogwheel, tuning fork, beaker 
and atom. 
“What is that?” he inquired. 
“The great seal of Circumluna,” I explained, “confirming 
all the writing above to be authentic. You see, there is one further detail about myself which I 
have neglected to tell you: that 
in addition to my revolutionary 
status I am also a Circumlunan 
of the Sack, visiting Terra under 
the protection of — ” 
My words were lost in Taimanov’s growl of fury and command. 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
I realized that somehow success 
and vodka Had made me careless. 
Before I could so much as up 
the power of my exo, I was seized 
from all sides. A hard paw-edge 
chopped expertly between my 
headbasket and shoulder girdle, 
paralyzing me and, I thought, 
breaking my neck. Quite unnecessarily another Hand jabbed up 
under the front of my rib-cage 
into my solar plexus, cutting off 
my breath. 
Then Taimanov, his face the 
mask of an enraged bear, procured a pair of insulated wire 
cutters and snipped all the leads 
from my batteries to my servomotors. 
T was hoisted up and rushed 
across the street to the old 
Amarillo Cuchillo jail, where my 
exo was removed and the two 
lightning pistols in my pouch 
waved in my face as proof that I 
was an assassin at least. I was 
shaken until I decided my neck 
wasn’t broken, but would be 
shortly. 
Next I found myself strapped 
down on a table, again quite unnecessarily, and being interrogated by a formidable black-furred 
Colonel Bolbochan, who smoked 
an atrocious fat cigar, about a 
Circumlunan plot to seize all 
Russia and, though he seemed to 
think this matter of minor importance, the rest of Terra. He de
165 
tnanded to know how I h'ad 
smuggled myself out of the Tsiolkovsky, what special instructions 
for sabotage and terrorism I h'ad 
been given and what devilisK 
plans for further horrors the crew 
of the Tsiot h’ad up their sleeves. 
Apparently the ground-bear 
Russians were unable to assault 
the ship directly, though able to 
prevent its takeoff. It was a mystery to me. 
In vain I insisted that I h'ad 
left the Tsiol at Dallas and thereafter devoted myself to a rabblerousing advantageous to Russia. 
In vain I assured him that the 
Circumlunan Russians were very 
nice people and constituted somewhat less than half of its population, and that they certainly Kad 
no designs against or much interest in Terran Russia. In vain I 
explained that I wasn’t a true 
dweller in Circumluna, only an 
inhabitant of the sub -proletarian 
Sack, a harmless actor. 
When after a short period I did 
not produce answers of the sort 
Bolbochan wanted, I was systematically beaten with rubber truncheons. The humiliation was immense and the pain most excruciating. I had feared I would be 
driven mad if again deprived of 
my exoskeleton on Terra, but 
that fear was quite swallowed up 
in tlie physical agonies I was suffering. The shock of the blows 
prevented me from inventing a 
16 d 
story that might even temporarily 
have satisfied the Black Colonel. 
It even stopped me from getting 
any profit from the philosophic 
notion that Death should make 
himself familiar with suffering, 
pain and all other approaches 
toward . himself. 
At one point I was asked to 
name my confederates: those still 
aboard the Tsiol, those who Had 
sneaked aground with me and 
also the still fouler beings — Terran collaborators with the RussoCircumlunan devils. 
The only thing that kept me 
silent then was the remaining tatter of rational thought that it 
wouldn’t Help me one bit to Have 
Mendoza and Company rounded 
up and beaten like myself. Still, 
I would soon have confessed even 
that, to halt the torture, if Black 
Bolbochan’s questions Had not 
gone rocketing off into a farago 
about “moon monsters” which the 
satellitic Russians were planning 
to set loose in Siberia. Was I a 
moon monsters 
He had embarked on an even 
wilder inquiry about “Mars beetles” capable of devouring all Terra’s vegetation, when a grizzled 
General Kan came galloping in 
and raised His hand — to command, 1 supposed, new and more 
ingenious tortures. 
But I never learned what they 
were, for at that moment a velvetgloved inner blackness seized me 
and dragged me deep, deep down. 
Death’, With’ Spiders 
A s I came back to consciousness — or rather, as consciousness came back to me, for I 
certainly didn’t want it — I discovered that I was in my coffin 
and they were nailing it up. 
The hammering awakened all 
of my old pains and a remarkable 
number of new ones. And the 
greatest of the new ones was cold. 
I figured that there must be 
about ten hammerers pounding 
away, and the nails by now as 
thick as pearls on a string. 
I knew I was still on Terra, 
because Gravity was in the coffin 
with me. It struck me as peculiarly unfair that Gravity should operate even inside coffins. One 
would think that at least death 
would bring release from the horrible force, but it doesn’t. Such 
are the merciless ways of Terra. 
I commanded my eyes to open, 
so that I could look at the absolute darkness around me. I knew 
it would be absolute darkness, 
because no slightest glow came 
through my eyelids. 
But my eyelids, which were 
heavy and thick with one of the 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
new pains, refused to part. One 
more proof that I was dead indeed. 
How I could still feel pain 
while dead was a problem which 
I pigeonholed. I guess I didn’t 
want to have to admit that Hell 
existed. 
I attempted to reassess my situation philosophically. I was in 
great cold, in absolute darkness, 
in great pain (pigeonhole that 
one!), and inside my coffin (and 
they were still pounding on it). 
Well, one expects a coffin to be 
chilly and dark. It is also in the 
nature of coffins to be nailed up 
(though this one was taking a 
long time about it). 
But, especially if one has any 
illusions whatever left about the 
courtesy of humanity, one expects a coffin to fit — to be, in 
my case, about ten by two by 
one-and-a-half feet, inside dimensions. And, if humanity is especially considerate, to be comfortably lined, preferably with quilted silk. 
My coffin had no lining, and it 
definitely did not fit. In fact, 
from the way my body was contorted, I could tell that it was 
little more than four by four by 
four feet. My Head, tilted up, lay 
in a bottom corner. My back was 
gravity-pressed against the coffin’s hard bottom, which had a 
lattice of cracks in it, rather like 
the floor of President Lamar’s 
patio. My legs rose sharply up 
and my feet were wedged into the 
upper comer of the box opposite 
my head. 
Yes, my coffin was a mere box, 
an ignominious cube. And would 
they please stop pounding on it! 
I t next occurred to me that, as 
a Hero of the Bent -Back Revolution, I should have been encoffmed in high state, wearing my 
exoskeleton and with’ at least two 
gold medals, the other reading 
Socialist Actor Extraordinary. 
But I clearly didn’t Have my 
exoskeleton. I was wearing only 
my winter suit and it was strangely loose on my torso, accounting 
in part for my frigid state. 
I began to try to figure out 
what had happened to me prior 
to my encoffination. My first 
theory was that I had been 
thrown down the Crazy-Russian 
Mohole, landed in a bed of feathers a kilometer thick and found 
myself in the Realm of the Dead, 
whose monitors had nailed me up 
in this cramping and shameful 
box as punishment for impersonating Death in the world above. 
And were continuing to nail. 
There were several things 
wrong with that theory. To mention only one, the Crazy-Russian 
Mohole was filled from bottom 
to top with red-hot and blueradioactive magma. 
I tried to think of another the168 
ory, but the hammering wouldn’t 
let me. Instead, it re-ignited my 
every pain. 
It got louder and louder, less 
and less endurable. 
It became a hammering not on 
my coffin, but on my headbasket, 
then on my naked skull and face. 
As I realized I had been wanting to do all along, I escaped by 
dying. 
I instantly made a remarkable 
discovery. Whether one dies for 
a minute or a million years, it 
seems no time at all to the one 
who dies. 
For the next thing I knew, consciousness had come snuffling 
back to my body like the persistent beast it is. It sniffed me from 
head to toes, from feet to fingertips. Then it nuzzled my neck 
and leaped inside my skull and 
curled up there, wide-eyed, ears 
a-prick, and still sniffing. 
I was in precisely the same situation as I had been before, except for one wonderful difference: 
the hammering Had stopped. I 
still felt a wide spectrum of pains, 
but now I felt them silently. 
Whoever had been pounding my 
coffin had gone away. 
P erhaps the potuiding Had been 
only in my Head all along. 
Perhaps it had been the pounding 
of my heart frantically trying to 
make my ghost-muscles work by 
over-supplying them with glucose 
and oxygen, and now at last sensibly shifted into neutral and only 
idling along. 
I wondered if it was now pumping hard enough to keep alive my 
toes, which were so high above 
me. Oh well, better gangrene of 
the toes than gangrene of the 
brain, my Consciousness informed me. 
Where did I get the idea I 
was alive when I knew I was 
dead? Better suppress it. Cool it, 
Consciousness! 
I worked hard on keeping myself dead. I concentrated on stilling every part of myself, beginning with the toes. This worked 
very well on my muscles, since 
most of them were ghosts to begin with, non-functional in six 
lunagravs. There was the bonus 
that as I stilled each area of my 
body, the pain stopped coming 
from it. 
I worked at suppressing my 
thoughts too, especially any effort to remember what had Happened to me. 
I also held onto the sneaky 
point that if only I were patient, 
if only I remained passive while 
enough time passed — not very 
much — then I would surely be 
dead of freezing, dehydration, 
heart failure, starvation or gangrene of the toes. In approximately that order. 
I do believe I would have completed the operation successfully 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
except for one very nasty circumstance. 
Two large and sturdy spiders 
appeared on either side of me and 
began determinedly to explore the 
floor of my cubical coffin. 
When I say “appeared,” I do 
not mean I saw them. But I became aware of them. I felt them. 
However, I had started to get a 
glow in my eyes that seemed not 
so much the random shootingoff of rods and cones as light 
coming through my immovable 
lids. In fact, I was working to 
suppress that glow when the two 
spiders turned up. 
It happens that I Have an irrational dread of spiders, though 
there are few in the Sack and 
those chiefly in aracHnidariums, 
where they get along as well in 
freefall as insects and all other 
tiny beasts to whom gravity or 
its absence are matters of small 
moment. 
So that when these turned up 
in my coffin, I was pretty thoroughly terrorized. 
A peculiarly Horrible particular 
was that these spiders were cripples. Each had Had three legs 
amputated, but the operations 
had been completely successful 
and they got around very well on 
their remaining five legs. 
How I could know so much 
about the spiders without being 
able to see into their minds also 
troubled me. Not, as I Have said, 
that I have any psi talents, or 
that spiders are known to be open 
to telepathy. Still, I was troubled. 
Finally, the spiders seemed 
hiucK too much interested in my 
wrists, persistently nuzzling them 
and even pushing and pulling 
them around. I waited each’ moment for the stab of a poison 
fang. Go on, spiders, get it over 
with, I found myself thinking — 
it only is a sixth way of dying. 
Then the two spiders approacheded my sides and began to crawl 
up onto my body, dragging my 
’ arms behind them. 
It was at this point I realized 
the spiders were my two hands. 
'^hough it may seem strange to 
-*■ some, this was no great improvement. Lying helpless in the 
dark while one’s two hands begin 
to operate completely on their 
own, schizophrenically, is almost 
as bad as spiders would have 
been, believe me. 
Pinching first my suit and then 
cruelly pinching the skin of my 
chest, which was to my surprise 
smooth and hairless, they crawled up side by side to my neck, 
where they parted, each making 
for an ear. 
By Pluto, I thought, they are 
planning to strangle me! 
Why the idea of being strangled, or even self-strangled. 
Here now in his triumph where all things falter. 
Stretched out on the spoils that his own hand spread, 
Ab a god self-slain on his own strange altar 
De^ lies dead. 
■ ' —“A Forsaken Garden,” hy 
Algernon Charles Swinburne 
should have terrified me so, when 
I was exerting every atom of vnllpower to kill msrself and/or keep 
m3Tself dead, is pretty m3rsterious. 
Perhaps by now I was becoming 
luxury-minded and wanted to die 
in comfort, witH ever-diminishing 
pains. 
But then I noticed that neither 
of my hands had left a thumb 
behind on my windpipe, as they 
would surely have done if their 
purpose had been strangulation 
and they had any sense at all. 
I relaxed a bit and waited with 
some curiosity to, see what they 
were up to. 
You see, I was already crediting them with sense and purpose. 
They say a man is essentially two 
hands and a brain. I was pretty 
sure by now that my hands were 
cooperating with a section or self 
of my brain below the consdous 
level, which last level had been 
wanting only to die and/or stay 
dead — until this moment, when 
curiosity had begun to motivate 
it 
Meanwhile my crawling hands 
had each gripped an earlobe very 
tightly with thumb and trigger 
finger. From this secure base, and 
with each digging little finger into 
cheek, they dug middle finger and 
ring finger into my upper and 
lower eyelids, and then spread. 
Tlus caused me even more pain 
than I expected, because it turned 
out that my eyelids were extremeA SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
ly badly swollen. Also, my eyeballs were imusually sensitive. I 
got the impression that this area 
of my face at least had undergone a severe allerpc reaction, or 
else received repeated blows. 
But no matter how hard I willed them to stop and despite the 
hoarse little screams that now began to issue from my dry throat, 
my fingers went cruelly and remorsely about their business. 
Bright gray light lanced into 
my eyes and tormented my retinas and the visual corners of my 
brain — a third and not to be 
under-rated pain. 
Finally tears came, and at first 
they were a pain too. For a while 
I saw only their glimmer and the 
yellow blurs of matter floating in 
them. 
Gradually the pains diminished. My swollen lids became able 
to blink with my fingers’ help and 
even assume most of the work of 
keeping themselves open. My 
tears washed the grainy, gluey 
stuff away, and I was able to see. 
T was in the mortised stone cell 
-*■ with a door of bars and a 
small barred window. Its dimensions were those of the height of a 
Mexican door, so I assumed it 
had originally been built by Texans for bent-backs. 
The light came through the 
window and another like it in the 
corridor beyond the door of bars. 
Through the nearer window I 
could see a high sign which’ carried, white on black, the ten 
Cyrillic characters spelling out 
“Zhawlty NawsK.” 
So I was not in the hands of 
the Rangers, but the Russians. 
Horrible memories began to 
rise. 
I kept them submerged while I 
traveled my gaze down my body 
from my catercomered toes. 
My black winter suit was open 
wide from my crotch to my neck, 
revealing my Hairless front covered by upsidedown lines of legal 
writing. 
I remembered everything — in 
particular, every last stupidity. 
It only made me want to die. 
But even as I felt that, I noted 
that my fingers Had left my eyes, 
which stayed open a fair slit 
without manual aid, and were 
crawling down my torso toward 
my crotch, where I v/as intuitively sure they intended to start zipping me up. 
This indication that the survival urge was once again in control 
had the effect of steadying if not 
cheering me. While my hands 
worked, I began the unpleasant 
business of assessing my situation. 
Fortunately in such’ a case one 
need not begin by facing the 
worst, but can work up to it by 
easy stages. For instance, the first 
healthy reaction to a feeling of 
extreme guilt is the attempt to 
172 
shift as much of that guilt as possible to other people. 
So it was not unnatural that 
my first thoughts were about my 
father, not angry so much as gently pitying thoughts, very sentimental. 
The poor old boob, I thought, 
running his theater in space, not 
knowing a damn thing about Terra, but dreaming his idiot dream 
about the mining claim that 
would one day make us all rich. 
Did it occur to him that the 
claim was only provisional? That 
the country in which it was registered had changed hands at least 
once and now two times? That 
the Terrans have millions of laws 
to stop boobs like Himself from 
asserting their rights and claiming 
cash due them, and that without 
exception the Terrans are a planet of swindlers and roughnecks, 
intent only on money and power 
and ready on the slightest provocation to substitute violence for 
legal procedure? Oh, no! 
And then He had got the superidiot idea of sending me, his only 
son, down to terrible Terra to 
cash in on the mining claim. 
T Te did get the Longhairs to 
* build me a remarkable exoskeleton. I granted him that. But 
did he otherwise enlist their aid 
in His project? At least they knew 
a hell of a lot more about Terra 
than he did. 
No and double no! Instead he 
supplied me with a cloak, caneswords and an idiotically secret 
document. 
And I, super-boob that I was, 
had accepted this ridiculous role, 
even gloried in it. For a wKole 
terrible month on Terra, I had 
not lived, I Kad acted my way 
through everything. 
First I had been tempted by a 
mysterious role in a Texan palace 
revolution. 
Next I had eagerly plunged into 
the role of Death, leader of a 
grotesque adobe-hut revolution. 
Finally I had been imable to 
resist putting on a brief show of 
surprises for some talking bears 
— an ultimate in wrong-way animal acts. 
Had even my love for Rosa and 
Rachel been anything but theater? Probably not. Everybody is 
always telling us actors that because we feel or seem to feel so 
much in the theater, we can’t feel 
ansdhing in real life. 
Well then, face it, Scully, I told 
myself. For you, the great themes 
of Love and Death can be notlung 
but melodrama. You’re plajdng a 
small role in a vast thriller with 
an unknown finish. 
ExQept that your role, bar lastminute rescues, seems just about 
ready to finish in death in an unheated Russian prison cell. 
So start pla3dng that role and 
quit bawling! 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
A t that moment I heard a familiar voice roaring in the 
corridor. The language was Russian, but the import was pure 
Texan. 
“Quit fussing at me, you furry 
little fools! I want to see comrade 
La Cruz instanter. As consular 
agent of Texas in Zhawlty Nawsh, 
I got the right. Besides, can’t you 
get the fur out of your eyes long 
enough to recognize General 
Kan’s seal and signature? If you 
keep hindering me. I’ll report you 
to him. I’ll report you to Number 
One in Novy Moscow. I’ll hold up 
on those chess sets from the Black 
Republic. I’ll even stop that shipment of firewater and fisheggs I 
got coming in from Quebec! 
There, fellas, that’s more like it 
now.” 
Then a great familiar bulk filled the barred, MexicaTi-short 
doorway. 
“Wal, partner,” the bulk said, 
“you sure have got yourself in 
the goldumedest, most miserablest, hopelessest fix since Sam 
Houston got his army backed 
against the San Jacinto River 
just before the like-named battle.” 
I never would have thought 
that a time would ever come 
when the person I was most happy to see of all the hombres in the 
ripsnortin’, melodramatic universe 
was Elmo Oilfield Earp. But that 
time had come! 
Fixing 
T>y the next day, 24th' Spindletop, Elmo had got me in 
quite rapid succession, the following comforts: soup, a mattress a 
battery to heat my winter suit, 
a larger cell and — at last! — my 
exoskeleton. The Russians have 
removed its swords and all batteries but two, so that it operates 
at about quarter power. Sometimes I feel I am carrying it 
around, rather than it me. And 
when I plug in my suit heater, it 
stops moving altogether. Still, it 
is wonderful wearing it again. 
At first I had been so happy to 
see Elmo that it Had not occurred 
to me to wonder how He came to 
be there. 
Later, thinking it over, I realized he must Have been planning 
everything from our first meeting 
at Spaceport Dallas, possibly even earlier. I Have not asked him 
straight out if he is a Russian 
secret agent, and he Has certainly 
not volunteered that information. 
The war is over, he tells me. 
Russia says she is planning no 
further advances, Texas no reprisals, and a truce Has been agreed 
to. Elmo’s story is that he is a 
loyal Texan who just Happened 
174 
to be in the neighborhood when 
Texas sorely needed a consular 
agent in ZHawlty NawsH. Just 
happened to be! But perhaps I 
had best pretend to believe this 
tall tale. As the big rascal says, 
“Scully, most people in this imperfect world are so set on what 
they got to have, come Hell or 
high water, and on what they 
won’t take under no circumstances, that there just got to be 
a few fixers around — broadminded hombies willing to sacrifice their personal integrity, or 
even on rare occasions their sacred honor, just to get life moving 
again, or keep it barely turning 
over like a wore-out engine.” 
He confirmed my belated suspicion that all the rank-and-file 
Russians and most of the officer 
and beaurocrat class firmly believe that the Russians of Circumluna are the ultimate devils, 
the Super- Trotskyites, worse than 
Chinese, Texans or the blackestd 3 red fascists or inkiest Blacks. 
Well, why shouldn’t they, after 
a century of propaganda attributing every evil from meteorite 
showers to anti-Soviet dreams to 
the malignant intervention of intellectual Russians in the sky? 
But, Elmo says, the Russian inner elite, her real rulers. Have 
come to realize that their country 
desperately needs certain items 
which only Circumlxma can furnish them: fine instruments, com
GALAXY 
puter circuits, new higKer matHs. 
They are seeking a rapprochement with Circumluna wHicH will 
permit trade without scandalizing 
or even driving into revolt the 
rank-and-file. 
General Kan, I gather, is the 
sole member of the elite. He has 
been able to prevent attacks on 
the Tsiolkovsky, but he must keep 
her crew in quarantine to satisfy 
military prejudice. He also was 
the one who halted my torture, 
though not daring to go so far as 
to command special care for me. 
That had to be left to Elmo the 
Fixer, so he could be blamed if 
necessary. 
We had beet borsch for dinner. 
■^Text day Elmo procured me 
' the unheard-of amenity of a 
Hot bath. I was unwilling tmtil I 
learned El Tacito and Mendoza 
would give it to me, in guise of 
Elmo’s greaser servants. I was 
considerably refreshed, though 
my varicosities, etc., had worsened dismally. I quit prison-pacing, 
got a maximum of horizontal. 
Tas slipped me twin notes from 
Rosa and Rachel. Both hoping 
for my swift recovery and wishing me good fortune. Both signed, 
“Affectionately.” I wondered if 
either or both of them would 
come to the moon with me. By 
their ultimatum to me, I would 
have to choose between them. It 
would be a very hard choice. I 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
decided to play the scenes as they 
came. 
That evening Elmo brought 
such good news I could hardly 
believe it. It set my imagination 
racing. Through General Kan, He 
has learned that the Russian inner 
elite is considering a deal whereby /, as hero of the bent-back 
revolution, would be presented 
with “reward” of materials needed by Circumluna. Later, still as 
hero, not Circumlunan or Sackabond, I would make “party contribution” of stuff Russia needs 
from Circumluna. 
As part of the deal, I would 
also have formally to give up my 
family’s claim to the Lost CrazyCree (new name) Pitchblende 
Mine. I asked him, “Why so 
much fuss by pirates over paper 
proprieties?” 
He replied, “Scully, you don’t 
understand these Russians. If 
their fur were as all tied up as 
their nerves are inside them, 
they’d be kinky as blacks. 
They’re not relaxed like Texans. 
They don’t think broad and easy 
about moral and legal issues. 
When they pull a fast one, they 
want every detail that reflects a 
bit of good on them pinned down 
tight.” 
I then asked him worriedly that 
if the “gift” to me were automatically supposed to go to the 
Circumlunans, would I also be 
able to use it to get from the Cir
175 
cumlunans the concessions I 
wanted for the La Cruz TEeater 
and all sackabonds? He told me, 
“Look, Scully, you Hang onto tHat 
gift and you bargain witH it until 
you get what you want I guarantee you the LongHairs will play 
ball. I’m sorry to say it, Scully, 
but I sometimes think you weren’t 
bom with the business sense of a 
squirrel — what am I saying, 
squirrel? I mean lemming.” 
On reconsideration, this makes 
me wonder if Elmo weren’t in on 
the whole deal to bring me down 
to Terra — the building of my 
exoskeleton, even father’s idiot 
notion ... I don’t know where to 
stop. 
XText day, Spindletop 26tK, 
there was a hideous development. We got meat soup, but 
I couldn’t touch it. Elmo brought 
news that Russians demand the 
facsimile mining claim, flayed 
from my chest, before they will 
play ball. They insist on their 
“pound of flesh,” as bad as Sh'ylock. They’ve promised to make 
repair skin-graft on me, but that 
would take more weeks, months 
on Terra with chances of survival 
very slim. Elmo said, “Don’t 
worry, Scully. I’ll argue my best 
with them, tEough they’re stubbomer critters than President 
Austin was, bless him, tKe pighead. WHen a bear decides to 
claw you, it’s hard to change his 
176 
mind by appealing to his logic 
and common sense.” 
To get my mind off this Horrible possibility, I gave it tEe 
tougH task of figuring out wHicH 
of the two girls to ask to marry 
me. After long listings of tEeir 
good and bad qualities, my feelings, etc., I decided on Rosa Morales. The chief point is that, 
under all fieriness, she Has basic 
Latin submissiveness, I think. 
While RacHel would try to run 
me. I was not Happy about my 
decision. 
Elmo also reported that Fanninowicz has formally defected to 
the Russians. When and if he recovers from the dose of radioactivity he got at the gusher, he 
will go to Novy Tech as full professor of engineering and design 
power-armor for Russian soldiers, 
borrowing many details from my 
exoskeleton, I’m sure. It figures. 
If all Terra felt peaceful except 
one destruction-bent farm-boy, a 
German would build him a slingshot. 
On Spindletop 27tH, the Russians were still after my hide. Yet 
life must go on, no matter what 
horrors loom, so when Rosa visited me in jail, I proposed marriage to her. She kept me in suspense for a long time, made me 
really argue. 
Clincher was when I told her 
she would be top free-fall dancing 
girl and star acrobat in La Cruz 
TKeater. I added, “Besides — but 
don’t tell anyone this — I have 
always had a terrific yen for short 
girls." 
She yielded then and immediately demanded we summon “the 
Honorable Miss Lamar,” and tell 
her about my decision in Rosa’s 
presence. 
T Tere I drew the line and also 
blew my top. I insisted that 
while still on Terra I simply 
could not bear to hurt in that 
way Rachel, who had done so 
many things for me, even saved 
my life. She could be told after 
Rosa and I were off Earth’, but 
not now. Rosa told me the marriage-deal was off. We argued 
and argued. 
We finally hit on a compromise. With Rosa looking on and 
fighting over each word, wanting 
to make it harsher, I wrote Rachel a letter breaking the news 
gently, but telling her in no uncertain terms I was marrying 
Rosa and leaving tall Texans forever, sorry about that. We then 
gave the letter to Elmo, to be 
delivered to Rachel immediately 
after TsioPs blast-off. 
I also extracted from Rosa her 
promise — hand on imaginary 
Bible, heart crossed — that she 
will not tell Rachel, by word or 
indirection, about her victory. 
I told Elmo I would be taking 
him up on that “wife” reservation 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
After the burial-parties leave 
And the baffled kites have fled; 
The wise hyaenas come out at eve 
To take account of our dead. 
—Rudyard Kipling 
on TsioL He grinned and made a 
ring of thumb and middle finger, 
to assure me it was as good as 
done. 
Afterwards I felt miserable, but 
reminded myself I Had taken the 
only sensible course. After all, 
every woman in the universe is 
basically monogamous and accepts other arrangements — polygamy, even polyandry, etc. — 
when they are only game in town. 
Secretly I know I will grieve 
forever for Rachel. Yet I have 
done the wise thing. 
Besides, there is always Idris 
Mclllwraith. 
th Spindletop was a day for 
rejoicing. The Russians agreed 
to content themselves wtH photographs of my ventral side, plus 
quitclaim signed and sworn to by 
me, provided Father sends down 
original claim by first rocket. I 
patted myself on chest with great 
feelings of relief. Departxire is 
planned for tomorrow. 
All my Happiness was completely dashed when Rachel paid 
me an unexpected visit in jail. 
From zenith to nadir in one easy 
jump. She was wearing BlackMadonna rig, damn Her, minus 
pistols of course, and looking very 
chipper. 
Her chippemess faded, but she 
kept brave smile as she said, 
“Captain Skull, I wish to tender 
you my sincerest congratidations 
178 
and wish you a long life of bliss.” 
“Thanks, but what do you 
mean?” I asked, automatically 
sparring for time. “That I won’t 
lose my front skin? Yes, I’ll be 
happy about that the rest of my 
life. I don’t know about blissful.” 
“You know what I mean,” she 
said softly. “You and Rosa. From 
the first time I saw you together, 
I knew you were meant for each 
other. That’s why I lit into Her 
so fierce. Even then I realized I 
was just a clumsy old Texas gal, 
meant to be a poetry-writin’ and 
little-theater old maid, and nothin’ else. But don’t you grieve, 
Scully, don’t you give me a 
thought, except maybe to remember just for a moment on dark 
nights in space that there was 
once a platinum-haired girl in 
black on a silver horse, who loved 
you a little.” 
“What do you mean, me and 
Rosa?” I asked. Dammit, Rosa 
had promised me she wouldn’t 
tell! “And who is supposed to 
have loved me a little, you or 
your horse?” 
“You know what I mean, Scully,” she said and then added in a 
shaky whisper, “Marryin’ up. 
Gettin’ hitched.” 
“Did Rosa tell you that?” I demanded furiously, my voice shaking. Dammit, a promise is a 
promise. 
“Oh, no, she didn’t tell me in 
so many words,” Rachel assured 
me. “But I knew sHe’d been visiting you. And nobody could Have 
misread tKe meaning of tKe 
brigHtness in Her eyes. Besides 
tKat, sHe danced all over tKe 
tent.” TKen the Black Madonna 
drew Herself up. “As for my Korse, 
Scully, if Ke ever meets up with 
you again, I hope Ke kicks your 
face in!” 
A t tKat moment I became, in 
absolutely cold blood, an utter cad. I said, “Listen to me, 
RacKel, Rosa lied to you, or at 
any rate, sKe did everytKing in 
Her power to create a false impression. WKen she visited me 
yesterday Here, sKe asked me to 
marry Her and I turned Her down. 
Oh, I was as nice about it as I 
could be. You and I botH know 
sKe’s a good little trouper. But in 
essence I turned Her down. You’re 
tKe only woman I ever loved in 
my life, princess, and you know 
it. Captain Skull’s Heart is yours 
— to tromp on or toss aside, if 
tKat’s your pleasure — but yours 
forever!” 
Despite my eloquence, it took 
me a remarkably long time to 
win Her. SKe was especially suspicious about me Having turned 
Rosa down. Feeling myself every 
second a vicious Hypocrite and 
complete villain, I Had to invent 
proof after proof until sKe consented to beKeve me. And tKen 
tKere still remained all tKe work 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
of persuading RacKel to marry 
me. I finally managed it only by 
promising her sKe’d be star tragedienne of the La Cruz Theater 
and tKat we’d produce both 
Houston's Afire and Storm Over 
El Paso. (Would tKey be fringeacceptable? OH, well, we have 
play-doctors. I’m one myself.) 
I also Had to add, “Besides — 
but don’t tell anyone this — I 
Have always Had a terrific yen for 
tall girls.” 
“How’d you find tKat out?” 
sKe demanded. “WHat otKer tall 
females Has your fickle Heart been 
fixed on, Scully darlin’?” 
Great Jupiter! I Had to talk 
fast and watcH my every word 
not to bring in tKe name of Idris 
McIllwraitH. 
But in tKe end sKe did accept 
me. 
And tKen — oH, my aching 
mind — we Had to repeat every 
detail Rosa Had insisted on, down 
to RacKel supervising me while I 
wrote tKe letter of sad rejection to 
Rosa, and we sealed it and Handed 
it over to Elmo for delivery. My 
nerves were zinging for fear he’d 
give tKe sKow away, but he 
didn’t. 
After RacKel Had gone, however, Ke did tell me, “Scully, 
I must say I tlunk you’re a natural-Kom Kero of tKe punisKmentseeking sort. Wves are a combination of gadfly, rattlesnake and 
colt or sow. I ain’t ever Had tfie 
unwisdom, and maybe nerve too, 
to take on even one. And Here 
)Tou are putting yourself in tKe 
ring witK two! And not on Terra 
eitKer, wKere at least tKere’s space 
to disappear into, but up in tKe 
Sack, wKere I gatHer tKings are 
a bit cozy. OK, well, every man 
to his own insanity. I suppose 
you’ll be wanting anotKer ‘wife’ 
ticket on tKe Tshl. Guess I can 
wangle it, if you’ll agree to give 
the Russia pKotograpKers a free 
Kand witK you the next couple 
da5TS.” 
“Can’t be ‘wife,’ ’’ I told him. 
“TsioFs crew is all Russki, and 
Russian Circumlunans are all 
most conventionally moral, at 
least as far as us Sackabonds are 
concerned. A bigamous actor is 
just wKat they’re waiting for. Had 
better be ‘sister,’ I guess. At least 
our Heights agree.” 
“ ‘Sister* it’ll be. But Kow you 
going to justify tKat to Rachel. 
Or Kookie eitKer?” 
“My problem. And one more 
favor, ami^. On takeoff day, 
please see to it that each of them 
is privately summoned to Tsiot 
at different times, and tKat tKey’re 
at least strapped down — and 
preferably given spacesickness, et 
cetera, injections — before tKey 
know tKe other’s aboard.” 
“Do my best, old Koss. TKougK 
it’d be a mercy to you if I botched it. But it’s your funeral.” 
Soon as Ke was gone, I flopped 
and stayed horizontal twelve 
hours. TKe session witK Rachel 
Had really finished me. And tomorrow, pKotograpKers! I wondered if Russki ones are sucK 
wearisome clots as Sack “artists 
of tKe camera.” WKat artistry is 
there in pushing tKe button of a 
macKine tKat sausage-slices visual 
reality? 
Also, of course, guilts, fears and 
apprehensions tore me. Even in 
the Sack, bigamy must be by 
freest consent of all parties concerned. 
OK well, man is by nature P0I5'-. 
gamous, or at least aspires to be 
so, and women must make tKe 
best of it. For they are the best. 
Or else I, to name one, wouldn’t 
want them. 
'^Ke Russki pKotograpKers finisKed witK me on the last of 
Spindletop — and they came closer to finishing me, too, th'an even 
my maratKon-wooing of Rachel. 
TKey also proved much’ worse 
than Sack-snapsKooters, throwing 
me around and posing me as if I 
were a sack of flour, demanding 
tKe impossible of me physically, 
especially in motion sKots, grudging me occasional minutes in 
wKicH to eat, eliminate and pass 
out, just as if there were no labor 
laws whatsoever in the Homeland 
of Socialism. (Guess there aren’t.) 
TKey wore out all my batGALAXY 
teries, so I would Have Had to be 
carried aboard tKe Tsiolkosky, except tHat General Kan made a 
surly quartermaster Hunt me up 
replacements from those used in 
C.C.C.P. power weapons. He also 
restored me my telescopic swords, 
because cameramen wanted process shots of me pinking Austin, 
Lamar, Hunt, Ch'ase, Burleson 
and a whole detachment of fake 
Rangers. From now on I am a 
gone goose in the Lone Star Republic. No one there will believe 
I was anything but a knowing 
Russian agent from the moment I 
landed in Dallas. 
The photogs also made use of 
me to the very end, for the last 
shots had to be of me boarding 
Tsiolkovsky amidst crowds of 
cheering Mexes and Cree Indians, who Had gotten themselves 
a commissar now and were finding life a little more strenuous, 
what with the rigors of Russian 
overlordship being added to the 
rigors of nature in this new slice 
of Hither Siberia, 
But somehow I managed to endure the worst the pHotogs could 
dish out and still stay erect on my 
exolegs. If all those pix don’t sell 
me — and indirectly Circumlima 
— to the Russki rank-and-file, I 
don’t know what can. 
During those last shots I managed to say my warm good-bys to 
GucHu, El Tacito, Carlos Mendoza and Father Francisco, who 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
blessed me surreptitiously and 
told me he Has discovered he has 
a mission to convert the Crees, 
but not to mention it. 
Guchu said, “Back to the Acificpay Chosen for me. Every time 
I consort with you ofays, I find 
you’re crazier squares than before. Drop out, man, and turn off. 
You’re not too bad, at that Happen you stuck around, might be 
I could get you status as an Honorary black.” 
Old Tas grunted a sardonic 
“Vaya con Muerta, El Esqueleto.” 
I countered, “Before I ‘go with 
Death,’ he’ll Have to fight me to 
the finish.” He shrugged. “What 
other way?” 
Mendoza shook my hand. “For 
El Toro too,” he said. We squeezed hard. 
Elmo contacted me at the end 
too, though he was careful to keep 
out of the pictures and our conversation out of earshot. He explained, “A fixer’s got to keep out 
of humanity’s eye and forego the 
plaudits of the public, no matter 
how much His ego’d he soothed 
by a little notoriety. Yeah, the 
gals are both aboard, God Help 
you, just as you asked for them 
to be. Here’s a pack of reefers 
and a jug of tequila to sooth your 
nerves. THe3r’re gonna need it 
Now you screw the most you can, 
you hear me, out of those Longhairs for your ‘gift’ Nobody looks 
after a man but a man. Remem
181 
ber you got no head for money, 
but lucky impulses. You’ll never 
go far wrong. Incidentally — but 
keep this under your headbasket 
— don’t exi>ect Texas to take h’er 
defeat lying down. Russia’s got 
one mohole mine, but Lone Star’s 
got two hundred.” 
“Which side are you really on, 
Elmo?” I asked him impulsively. 
“Mine,” he grinned at me. 
/^oing aboard Tsiolkovsky was 
like returning to Circumluna, except for the continuing 
curse of gravity. Everything was 
clean, except me. All the people 
were calm and intelligent, even if 
slightly condescending. I saw the 
“gift” carefully stowed, then followed my learned doctor-stewardess to my water-mattress in 
a small alcove curtained to either 
side. I flopped gratefully. 
“You will remove your prosthetic,” she informed me in purest 
classic Russian. 
“Nyet,” I informed her. 
She shrugged. “I shall strap 
you down.” 
Another “Nyet” from me. 
“There are hand-holds,” I added. 
Another shrug from her. “Injections?” 
“Da,” I agreed. She made them, 
sniffing at me a little. 
When she was gone, I opened 
the curtains on either side. To my 
left and right, on similar mattresses, but strapped down, were 
182 
Rachel Vachel and La Cucaracha. 
Each smiled at me dreamily. 
Then they saw each other. 
“Why, you dirty, double-crossin’, bigamy-bent Bluebeard!” Rachel gasped. 
“Beard black,” I informed her 
coolly. “Bigamy mildest of marital variations in Sack.” 
“Liar! Blasphemer! Betrayer of 
virgins!” Kookie spat at me from 
the other side. “I warn you, you 
black worm, never trust me with 
a sharp knife. I shall employ it to 
separate you from your organs of 
generation!” 
“I’ll hold him down,” Rachel 
told her. 
“Beloveds,” I said serenely, “in 
Cincinnati one of you said, Tt 
may be different in the sky.’ Believe me, it will be. Meanwhile, 
let us look on this simply as another theatrical tour.” 
“My anger is destroying my 
mind!” Rosa wailed. 
“Scully, ah’m fit to be tied,” 
Rachel said. 
“You are tied,” I reminded Her. 
'T'he stewardess returned. “Raise 
ship in one minute. Now 
minus 58 seconds. A disturbance 
here?” 
“Indeed yes!” Rosa cried. “I 
am this villain’s wife and I wish 
to get off this filthy ship at once!” 
“Ah’m His wife,” Rachel contradicted her. “And ah’m the one 
wants to debark.” 
I moved my forefingers in little 
circles at my temples. 
THe stewardess looked at a 
card in Ker Hand. “It says ‘sister* 
Here.” Unsmiling, sHe waved a 
finger at me once. “You folk of 
the Sack give Circumluna a most 
unfortunate reputation. You are 
not kultutny. But wHat is one to 
expect of actors? Minus 43.” SHe 
departed. 
At that moment tHe p.a. system most opportanely struck up 
witH The Saber Dance from 
KHacHaturian’s Gayne, almost 
drowning out tHe girls’ outraged 
babblings. I lightly touched a finger to either ear. I could feel the 
drugs taking Hold. But I resisted 
them through the shock of blastoff and the dreadful minutes of 
18 lunagravs until brennschluss. 
Then, even as I was passing 
out, I felt the delicious release 
from bondage. My ghost muscles 
stirred. My exoskeleton became 
an encumbrance. I was back in 
my only proper environment. 
100 Years Later 
A/l'y great-great grandson Has 
just returned from a trip 
downstairs. For sentimental reasons I wished him to wear my 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
exoskeleton, but the Longhairs 
have invented an anti-grav suit 
that is little more than silvery 
overalls. So Good Old Titanium 
remained in His transparent museum ovoid. 
Times change. But only a little. 
The La Cruz Theater of the 
Sphere goes on from hit to hit 
and flop to flop. Longhair syntHograv (inevitable mate to antigrav) makes entrances and exits 
easier. Thought-projectors give 
new dramas enriched subjective 
content. 
Father and mother retired. Are 
thinking of spending last years in 
new transparent-translucent allplastic satellite, the Ship, building 
180 degrees away in same orbit as 
Circumlxma. Quarter of Ship’s 
population will be Circumlunan 
colonists, rest Terran refugees. 
My wives still bicker with me 
and each other, but mostly we get 
on famously. It is years since 
they confessed to me that way 
back in Dallas they Had decided 
to come with me to the Sack as 
bigamous wives. They Had just 
wanted to get out of me the best 
deal they could. 
Long ago we produced Houston's Afire. It has become a stock 
item in our repertoire. Next week 
we premier Storm Over El Paso. 
Rachel Vachel quite rapidly 
transformed into an exquisite 
Thin and, besides Her tragic acting, poetry and playwriting, be
183 
gan to alternate strip routines 
with Idris Mclllwraith'. WitK sucK 
activities and the passing years, 
President Lamar’s daughter Kas 
developed a more relaxed morality, which' is natural in a Texan, 
come to think of it. But I do not 
know about her affairs, if any, I 
never spy on my wives and expect, 
though I do not always get, the 
same courtesy from them. 
La Cucaracha remains completely unchanged, a natural Athletic, a demanding wife and a 
shrew-cat for jealousy. She is the 
Sack’s unequalled aerobatrix and, 
now that we have syntho-gfav, 
entertains with classic Flamenco 
dances. 
T?ifty years ago, partly to assert 
my independence, I had a 
mad love affair with’ Idris Mclllwraith, which for two weeks was 
the talk of the Sack and Circumluna’s shame. It ended when Rosa 
sliced me twice, fortunately only 
across the chest. She was fined — 
for nicking the bubble with a wild 
slash and almost depressurizing 
the Sack compartment. 
Poor Idris. Twenty years ago 
Rachel developed a serious heart 
degeneration — it is not safe to go 
Thin after childhood. But then 
Idris was explosively brained by 
a tiny meteorite — first time such 
a thing happened — and Rachel 
received her aged but hale heart 
as transplant. She sometimes asks, 
184 
“How’s it make you feel, Scully, 
to have your old girlfriend’s Heart 
beating inside of me?” 
How to answer that one? 
Aside from Idris we are all going strong. CircumIunan biologists have developed the TexoRussian directional hormone and 
are appl5Hlng it neither vertically 
nor horizontally, but temporarily, 
so that a man is taller in time. 
In any case, who ever dies in free 
fall? At first and even second appearance, it is a most Harsh environment, yet I believe life and 
man were meant for it. Life itself 
appeared and had its first great 
flowering in a kind of free fall, the 
sea. As life shifted some of its 
companies to land, the battle 
against gravity continued — the 
insects by their lightness and 
wings, the bird also. Even our immediate and happy-go-lucky treedwelling forebearers Had their 
own small idea about the achievement of free fall. Now with our 
nulgrav existence and technological anti-grav, we are perhaps really going somewhere. At any rate, 
it can be a good life. 
For almost a century Russian 
“gifts” squared Sack’s account 
with Circumluna. But then, due 
in part to great military reverses, 
a new spasm of Marxist fundamentalism and of hate for SkyRussians developed in C.C.C.P. 
“Gifts” cut off quick. Circumlunans, used to them, blamed us 
Sackabonds. It was chiefly to find 
a new source of Terran funds that 
Christopher Crockett La Crriz V 
went downstairs. 
T Te tells a strange story. Greatly aided by mohole radioactives, Texas mounted war after 
war against Russia and China. At 
the same time, unbridled and par
anoically grandiose use of Hormone was creating generations of 
Texans ten and twelve feet high’. 
These sometimes had brilliant 
minds, but were tragically shortlived — height’s and mass’s strain 
on heart and whole system, plus 
effects of mounting radioactivity 
of air, ground, sea, all else. 
Texas had an army deep in 
A SPECTER IS HAUNTING TEXAS 
Mongolia, when its general, a 19year-old, 13-foot military genius 
of the Alexander breed, succumbed to early heart disease. At tKe 
same time, the Seventh BentBack Revolution was successful. 
Within a year all tall Texans were 
dead, unless there is trutH in report of small Texan colonies in 
Australia and Antartica. They 
had gone the way of the dinosaurs and Peking Man. Their size 
was developed at the expense of 
more important survival traits — 
too big for their ego and tKeir 
dreams. 
What was left of Texas became 
the curious nation of Anarquia 
Mehico — if a self-styled “anarchy” may be called a nation. 
Its boundary with Russia is approximately the ancient one between the old United States and 
Canada. The furry ones Have become more and more arctic, uninterested in temperate-zone conquests. Besides, all tHe land to 
the south is badly contaminated 
by radioactivity from the moholes. 
Anarquia is a curious and fairly 
promising nation, I gather, though 
it must devote much’ of its 
thought and energy to purifying 
its poisoned air, soil, water, people and germ plasm. The combination of Latin, Indian and short 
Texan (honorary Mex) seems not 
a bad one. Tall Texas left much 
salvageable industry, while the 
Mexes, gaining ground with' each' 
revolution, became a more prudent and industrious race. 
At any rate, the La Cruz Thea
ter and the Sack have found new 
funds there to Help to pay their 
rent to Circumlima. The donor 
was the Mendoza-Earp Foundation for Serendipitous Studies, 
founded by the Carlos and the 
Elmo Oilfield, whom I once knew. 
Carlos lived to a great age for 
a Terran, dying only a quarter 
century ago, while Elmo disappeared in Africa some fifty years 
before that, during a mysterious 
“fixing” mission for the Pacific 
Black Republic. He left Mendoza, by illegal channels of course, 
a considerable fortune. 
Recalling how he both sucked 
me in and took care of me, remembering his tall tales and belly 
realism, but above all else his irreverent good humor, I like to 
think of him still going on with 
his “fixing,” somewhere. 
— FRITZ LEIBER 
Announcing — 
THE GALAXY AWARDS 
Galaxy Publishing Corporation announces the establishment of annual awards 
for excellence In Klence*fIctIon writing. Every story appearing In the magozines Galaxy 
and If In Issues dated 1968 will be eligible for the first series of awards, which will 
consist of: 
1968 Galaxy Award 
$1,000.00 
for the best story of the year. Honorable Mention will receive $250; the next 
runner*up will receive $100. 
The procedure by which the winning stories will be selected It Intended to 
reflect the judgment of the readers of Galaxy and If, Principal reliance will be placed 
on a mail survey of a randomly selected group of subscribers to the magazines In 
making the awards. Questionnaires asking for preferences will be circulated to these 
subscribers approximately one month offer the December issues appear. 
Qaicux4f 
lioohUtelL 
by ALOIS BUDRYS 
T he Russians, may the snow 
fall lightly, have always loved large, noisy things. They are 
the people of the biggest cannon, 
the biggest concentrations of cannon, the biggest orchestras, the 
biggest bells, the biggest rockets 
and clusters of rockets ... If it 
functions, good. If it advertises 
that it functions, ever so much 
the better. A Russian — a real, 
honest-to-Muscovy Russian — is 
the closest Europe Has yet come 
to producing a Texan. 
The Russians, may the river 
not flood, have their reasons for 
being among the few people on 
Earth to determine attitude on 
the basis of physical evidence. 
What concerns us is that the peoples who equate progress with 
physical exertion, and who evaluate the worth of progress by 
ascertaining the efficiency of the 
attendant physical effort, are also 
classically the science-fiction peoples. And the Russians Have a 
penchant for sf tKat goes back 
to the day of Mary Shelley at 
least. There is a rich tradition of 
imitation-Frankensfe/n fiction in 
Russian, probably reaching down 
to the pulpiest possible levels, for 
the old emigres who used to reminisce about them so fondly were 
also avid Nick Carter fans in their 
boyhoods. (To this day, I believe, the Novoye Russkoye Slovo 
continues the practice of decades 
in running one comic strip for its 
audience of U.S.-resident newspaper readers. “Tarzan” with Cyrillic captions is, believe me, a 
visual experience). 
What is also interesting is that 
while Russian sf writers are outof-phase with us, they nevertheless find and exploit the same 
possibilities we do, although apparently some years behind us. 
188 
Postwar Soviet sf, for example, 
was Gemsbackian, with the same 
sesquipedalian enthusiasm for 
technology the liberator: “Ah, 
Comrade, here among the marvels of the year 2000, while we 
traverse the pneumatic tubeway 
between your apartment and your 
office, we are free to discuss dialectical materialism in total tranquility, as contrasted to the old 
days when one had to shout in 
the street. One almost regrets the 
interval is so short, but if we leave 
any points uncovered, I shall dictate a hypnagogic electromagnetic 
recording of my remarks, and you 
shall play it in your sleep tonight 
on your somniac encephalon, 
da?” 
The Russians now, may the 
tundra bloom, give every evidence of having discovered John 
Campbell. (“But why was the 
whole thing started in the first 
place? What for?” “Well, just 
how should I explain it . .?” 
Betly thought a moment. “You 
see, it’s this way in science: 
“What if?’ A lot of discoveries 
have come from this.” “What do 
you mean by “What if?’ ” “Well, 
take for instance: “What if we 
place a live wire in a magnetic 
field?’ This “What if gave us the 
electric motor ... in short, it just 
means experimenting.”) 
Out of context, this may sound 
like simply a more sophisticated 
expression of enthusiasm for tecH
GALAXY 
nology. To some extent it is, but 
it is even more an entHusiasm for 
th'e reflective, speculative mind of 
tKe pbilosopHer of engineering. It 
is a sHift toward Humanism, altfiougH, as in tKe original, always 
witK tKe HigHest premium b'dng 
placed on competence. First you 
qualify; then you may speak. 
Many of tKe stories in Path Into the Unknown, subtitled “TKe 
Best of Soviet Science Fiction,” 
(Delacorte Press, $4.95, witH an 
introduction by JuditH Merril), 
read as if tKey were from tKe back 
pages of circa 1950 Astoundin^s. 
One or two, “An Emergency 
Case” by Arkady and Boris Strugatsky, and “The Purple Mummy,” by Anatoly Dneprov, remind one powerfully of Eando 
Binder; tKe parallel is uncanny 
in tKe case of tKe Strugatskjrs, for 
“Wanderers and Travellers” by 
Arkady Strugatsky working alone 
is an apparently poetic and Humanistic story built around an 
obvious gimmick employed to 
give tKe reader a momentary 
cKeap tKrill witKout putting Kim 
— or tKe autKor — to tKe work 
of going tKrougK tKe story wKicH 
sKould begin wKere Strugatsky 
leaves it. On tHis and otKer evidence, I would say tKat wKoever 
compiled tKis antKology of tKe 
“best,” (wKicH carries an ori^nal 
English cop 3 uigKt date of 1966), 
Kad tKe same delicate problem 
Miss Merril Has every year in tKis 
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 
country — Kow to bring out a 
book you can call tKe “best” 
wKile still including some bylines 
tKe public will recognize as topdrawer even tKougK tHey’re getting a little musty. TKe Russians, 
on tKe basis of example, don’t 
Have any better an answer here 
than we do. 
TKe tone of general dull competence and overfamiliarity in 
tKis book is Happily interrupted 
by Sever Gansovsk^s “A Day of 
WratK.” G. Gorfs “TKe Boy” has 
its momenfs. BotH are novelettes; 
tKe two sKort stories in tlus book, 
“TKe Conflict” and “Robby,” 
botK by Ilya VarsKavsky, prefigure wKat must by now be a booming, general enthusiasm for F 
8 b SF-style writing . they’re 
about due for it, may tKe potato 
blossom. 
“A Day of WratK” (from which 
tKe ‘WKat if passage was quoted — I made up tKe Hypnagogic 
pneumatic one, from a memory 
of Yefremov), is about an experiment gone wrong — tKe creation, 
and then tKe abandonment, of a 
bearlike, android race, wKo begin 
to terrorize a rural province after 
being left to tiieir own devices. 
TKe characters in tKe story have 
pseudo-Anglic names: Betly, Fidler, Mellor, Richard and Klein. 
It is a little like The Island of 
Dr. Moreau, and a little bit like 
Walter M. Miller’s “Conditionally Human,” but it is set in the 
Soviet Union although’ Gansovsky may not realize that; nowhere 
else on Earth, any more, are you 
going to find the combination of 
technological urban centers, 
horseback transportation and 
brooding extreme rural isolation 
that makes this story so effective. 
This capability of presenting 
immediate contrasts between 
technology’s attitude and th'e old 
soil-bound ways (and arousing 
the old peasant fear of beckoning, 
imperious voices outside the cabin at night) is apparently the major unique contribution the Russians are making to the body of 
science fiction. It’s also interesting that Gansovsky ends his story 
with a peasant uprising against 
the androids, after the metropolitan establishment fails to protect 
them from its own creations, but 
if this really signifies anything 
political, I doubt if even Gansovsky realizes it out loud. 
There are translation problems, 
by the way. “The Boy’’ dissolves 
into incomprehensibility just as 
we are about to learn how a contemporary young genius could be 
the medium of communication 
with a similar boy from a prehistoric terrestrial civilization. Judy 
feels the translator was trying to 
say “ESP.” I feel he was trying 
to say “doppelganger” in a Gilbert Gosseynish sense, but who 
can be sure? And “The Purple 
Mummy” has to be “The Purple 
Mannequin,” or “The Purple 
Simulacrum.” 
Either way, it’s purple. But 
Vladislav Krapivin’s “Meeting 
my Brother” is ultraviolet, or perhaps supersonic, in exactly the 
same way Don A. Stuart wrote in 
a high whine whose upper registers plucked directly at the tough 
sentimentalist in all of us. It’s 
about a lonely boy who waits for 
a cosmonaut ancestor to come 
back from a time-dilation flight 
and be his older brother. It’s not 
a very good story. In U. S. terms, 
there are 1936 plot devices all 
through it, and lots of symbols 
straight out of the self-conscious 
literary days of the 1950’s. But it’s 
a lovely human idea, and that’s 
what the story’s about. The science in it is used solely for the 
purpose of offering an otherwise 
impossible solution to a common 
human problem; this is the latest 
definition of science fiction, on 
either side of the Iron Curtain/ 
time-shift. 
The Russians, may the spoon 
not break the glass, are a people 
just like us — contradictory, a 
little more rural, a little more 
academic, just as overwhelming 
and convinced they’re right, louder than most of us in assuming 
their rightness and equally speculative in evolving fresh views of 
themselves. This is a good book. 
It won’t tell you whether the Russians are bad or good — I per
GALAXY 
sonally find the U.S.A. preferable 
— but particularly if you are interested in it as an indicator of 
h'ow people are getting along with 
their physical capabilities . 
here is a most valuable opportunity to take a fresh' perspective. 
Another book for you is Mark 
R. Hillegas’s The Future as 
Nightmare: H. G. Wells and the 
Anti-Utopians (Oxford University Press, New York, 1967. $5.75). 
This has been out for some time, 
but no one has paid enough attention to it, so I’m doubling back 
to it now. 
Hillegas teaches English' and 
conducts a course in science fiction and utopian fantasy at 
Southern Illinois University; this 
book appears to be a thesis. Sidney Coleman and Harlan Ellison 
both tell me there is nothing new 
in it. And I expect this is true. 
But there was lots new in it to me. 
Not so much because it revolutionized any profound views on 
my part. But because it does the 
job it offers to do. It surveys and 
comments on the course of Wellsian science fiction, from its development by H. G. Wells on 
through its subsequent modifications, its effect on such Russian 
writers as Evgenyi Zamyatin and 
its response in such reactionaries 
as Aldous Huxley. It quotes and 
summarizes from Wells, from We 
and from an appreciation of Wells 
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 
by Zamyatin, from Orwell, from 
Huxley, and among others, from 
Ayn Rand, who is pretty conclusively shown to have imported 
quite a bit of Zamyatin/Wells 
back into the Anglic side of the 
time-shift. In other words, it’s a 
handy compendium of milestones, 
together with a covering explanation for where we were and where 
we’re going, and why. 
For combined readability, portability and digestibility, there is 
nothing like it in the field. I have 
grave reservations about some of 
its conclusions on Wells’s evolution as a writer, because I differ 
180 degrees . well, 178 . 
with Hillegas’s preconceptions on 
the subject. And Wells is the key 
to the whole business, for us as 
well as the Russians, because he 
remain the outstanding expositor 
of both the hope, and the despair, 
which are embodied in technology 
and which are the major facts of 
life in our world. So how you regard Wells, and what you think 
about Huxley, Orwell, Rand and 
other popular philosophers who 
reacted to him and to what he 
felt at various times in his career, 
is crucial to what you will think 
of Hillegas’s reasoning. But this 
is not crucial to whether the book 
is valuable, and you should have 
it. Because if you are past the 
stage where anything labeled “sf” 
is just ducky wonderful, and you 
are beginning to find that some 
writers sing to you wfiile otKers 
turn you OFF, witKout mucB reference to measurable factors like 
literary ability, th'en tKere may 
not be anything new for you in 
this book, but where else is it all 
in one place? 
We are becoming educated. The 
cuteness of the early F85SF school 
of editing — and its open contempt for the accomplishments of 
the Campbellian school — has 
paid off not only in buckets and 
buckets of froth but in a positive 
move toward incorporating Liberal Arts concepts into wKat had 
been almost exclusively a B. S. 
field. 
We have paid for this, through' 
the nose, and we are still paying 
for it; the field is choked with 
poseurs. But we are begirming to 
get positive value for it, as well. 
It’s in the nature of things that 
what we get is rarely either pure 
horse or pure unicorn. Take a 
book like R. A. Lafferty’s Past 
Master (Ace). 
The setting is Astrobe, a Human world of the future; to all 
appearances, the only human 
world that counts. Astrobe was 
planned as a utopia, a golden 
place where the Humdn dream 
will reach full fruition. But things 
are in trouble. It’s now the “Astrobe dream,” for, as in Cordwainer Smith’s world, the distinction between human and mech192 
anical is fast rubbing out. Programmed persons, and mechanical assassins, destroy anyone 
whose emotions are not in accord 
with the dream. And despite the 
golden cities, there are “feral 
strips,” where dwell people and 
beasts out of nightmare, and 
there is Cathead which, wilii The 
Barrio, is a devouring, rapidly expanding slum where millions 
dwell in ghastly, short-lived 
squalor despite the fact that luxury and long life are freely available to all who return to society. 
The world, the dream and Man 
all are tottering. The triumvirate 
which rules the world meets in a 
guarded room to nominate the 
next World President at this crucial time. The mechanical killers 
meanwhile wreak slaughter with 
the guards in the corridors, for 
they must be kept away from the 
triumvirs, one of whom is their 
target because they can sense his 
lack of accord with the Astrobe 
dream. 
Whom do they select? Who 
else but the author of Utopia? 
Given a time-travelling capability, what more logical thing to do 
than to send back to old Earth 
for Sir Thomas More, wBo is also 
not only a certified, beatified 
Catholic saint but also A Man for 
All Seasons, and about to get his 
head cut off anyway? 
You see what I mean about 
education. If anyone had tried 
tKis even a few years ago, tKe 
writer would have Had to spend 
so much time building up More’s 
credentials that there wouldn’t 
have been room for any story. 
But things have changed, and 
Lafferty’s “What if?” is not 
“What if you wanted to travel in 
time?” but “What if you had 
trouble in Utopia?” 
You also see what I mean about 
part horse, part unicorn. Because 
the ostensible “What if?” is 
“What if Thomas More had trouble in Utopia?” and to that 
“What if?” we get no believable 
answer. 
More has a great many adventures, meets many picturesque 
people, says some engaging things 
and does not much resemble either the hero of the play or the figure in the encyclopedia articles. 
His solution to the problem turns 
out to be to die in exactly the 
way he died in renaissance England, to great and implausible 
popular effect, except that again 
he departs into the future just before the blade falls. 
The temptations he meets are 
illusory; Lafferty is so busy creating incidents that he fails to 
sustain Thomas’s character. It 
doesn’t often happen, but here’s 
a book that should have beefi 
50% longer. There is nothing intrinsically wrong with wHat’s ia 
it, but it’s a collection of good 
scenes at which Thomas arrives 
and departs; what is happening to 
Kim inside is happening in the 
waits offstage. His ultimate escape is worth a momentary smile, 
but it leaves a lasting sense of 
vitiation. It’s the polar apposite 
of the empty feeling you get from 
stories in which it turns out Homer, Leonardo, Christ and Thomas 
Edison were all travelers from the 
future. 
It is good to see this kind of 
thing being written. It fills in the 
structure that Delany, Zelazny 
and some of those other people 
haven’t paused to do more than 
indicate. It provides a place for 
skilled work to be done, and for 
future generations to evolve from. 
Lafferty is a good man, even if he 
does talk incessantly about his 
drinking problem. 
Well, anyway. This would have 
been a beautifully rounded column if Lafferty had only introduced Wells instead of More into 
the utopian problem. But Wells 
' was so damned shabby-genteel. 
— ALOIS BUDRYS 
REMEMBER 
New subscriptions and changes of 
address require 5 weeks to process! 
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 
GALAXY’S STARS 
1^ obert Silverberg, wKo Has 
written more books tHan 
most people Have letters, is a 
dapper young man witH a neat, 
scholarly beard, married to a 
pretty pKysicist named Barbara, 
possessor of rougfily a dozen Siamese cats and a Huge House 
formerly occupied by New 
York’s famous “Little Flower,” 
Fiorello H. LaQuardia. Among 
His accomplisEments is a successful term, just now ending, as 
president of tHe Science Fiction 
Writers of America. In last year’s 
balloting for tHe SFWA’s annual 
“Nebula” awards for excellence, 
Silverberg was in tHe running in 
two of tHe four competitions — 
coming in second and tKird respectively witH His Ballantine 
novel, THorns, and His memorable sHort novel, Hawksbilt Station, originally publisKed in tHese 
pages a year or so ago. 
But nobody Has all tHe luck In 
tHe world, and Silverberg Has Had 
to take a few jolts from fortune 
— most recently a large-scale fire 
wHicH wrecked His Home, interrupted completion of a number 
of books because tHe notes for 
tKem were unavailable during repairs and generally complicated 
His life. It’s an ill wind, tHougH; 
194 
VAU. V 
tHe fire tHat postponed His books 
made it possible for Silverberg to 
put in a little more time on science-fiction stories. Nightwings is 
tHe first fruit Our opinion of it 
is fairly simply expressed: We 
just tfiink it’s tHe best story He 
ever wrote. 
* * • 
Fritz Leiber, wHose A Specter 
Is Haunting Texas winds up in 
tHis issue, is at tHe moment en 
route to Clarion College, Pennsylvania, wHere He and Half a 
dozen otHer science-fiction notables will be teacHing a summer 
course in science-fiction writing. 
In tHe process of getting tHere 
Leiber is driving cross-coimtry 
from California, His car decorated witH notable lines from tHe 
novel . watcH for it! Brian W. 
Aldiss is Literary Ekiitor of tHe 
Oxford Dmly Meal in England, 
winner of tHe 1966 Nebula award 
and Guest of Honor at tHe 1965 
World Science Fiction Convention in London. Lise Braun, a 
New York Housewife, appears 
Here for tHe first time anywHere. 
We predict you’ll see Her again 
— an easy prediction, as it Happens, because Her second sHort 
story. Leviathan, is bcHeduled 
for an early issue of Galaxy. 
The 
BEMs in your neighborhood 
won't run off with your books 
if you put inside the front cover 
of each book... a gummed bookplate 
with your name printed on it! 
No. CF-614 by Emsh 
YOUR NAME HERE 
No. CF‘6I2 by Emih 
No. CM‘I2 by CulIen'Rapp No. CX*57 by Lynd Ward 
FINAGLE SAYS — 
The umpteenth corollary 
of Finagle's General Law of 
Dynamic Negatives says: 
"No books are ever lost 
by loaning except ones you 
particularly want to keep." 
too for $S; 200, $7.30; 300, $10 
with owner's name imprinted 
All Postpaid. 
Add state sales tax. if any. 
ACTUAL SIZE, all deiignt, 3x4 inches 
The designs shown above are the only ones we offer I 
Order from GALAXY 421 Hudson St., New York, N.Y. 10014 
SCIENCE FICTION 
BOOKS $ 
for only 
wh#n you 
F-c!ion Book 
Club and agree to 
acceot only lour books 
during tbe corning year. 
A TREASURY OF GREAT 
SCIENCE FICTION 
Kdlted hy Anthony Houcher 
600. A Riant (wo*voIume collection of Rfcal kcicnce fiction readInR. Over 1.000 |)gRe< of exciiittR 
fiction-four fulMenRth noveN. 
twelve novelettes. elRhl short 
slorle.s by Hay Bradbury. Robert 
A. Heinleln. A. E. van Vogt. 
I’oul Ander.son. Arthur C. Clarke, 
Theodore Sturgeon. Alfred Be-iter. 
and a dozen more. Counts as 1 
choice. Pub. ed. $S.95 
YES— even the two-volume set at left 
counts as only a single choice! 
Moh the C'lub work.*;: Fnch month it ofTcrs a 
really superb new science fact or fiction book at 
u fraction of its regular price. Even though these 
books sell for $4.95. $5.95 and more in their original editions. C'lub members get them for only 
$1.49 each -in special full-length, hard-cover editions- unless you select an extra-value book at 
slightly higher price. And the C'lub tells you in 
advance what each monthly selection will be. 
During your trial membership, you agree to take 
as few as four books in the coming year. C'ancel 
anv time thereafter. 
No-Risk Guarantee: If not delighted with introductory 5-book shipment, return books within lU 
days to cancel membership. Otherwise you will 
be enrolled in the C'lub us a Trial Member. Mail 
coupon today to Science Fiction Hook Club. 
Garden City, New York 11530 
SC IKNC'IC riCTION HOOK ('Ll H 
Dept. 88-GXX, Gurdon N,.Y. 11530 
iMcihe ai-cfut iiiy «(»tdirutlon for inemhi‘r.<dii|) in the Sclrmt* 
V'irtlon it<Mik riub und rush tlii* 3 txKiki wlio.sf nufuhvrii 1 luvi* 
• Iri'lt'iNitdow Itiirme mily ulus shliuiliiK mul tumdllni;. 
fur all 3 Tlifti (‘wry month, .send im* tlu> i'IuIi'k free tiulletln. 
'I'liings lu t'oim-". uhii-li dcMTlIivs coiiilng st’lt><tlun!i. Fur 
fitch tiuuk 1 iccf|)l. 1 uill |jiy only $t.4U. plu.'i shipping «t>d 
loiiidllng. unIfSk I ittkc iin csira\alut* sflfctiun at * Idxlicr prlcc 
l need takr only four l>uuks within llif tutiilng yi'ur and may 
rrslgn al any timr liiercafter. 
NO-RISK GUARANTEE: If not 
dvllghted with my introductory 
packaRc. I muy return It in lU day.-, 
pay nutliing. owe nuliilnx. and my 
tiifUibfruhlp will l>v lancfled 
Prlul 
Name 
Circle 
the numbers ot 
Ihe 3 books you 
went: 
609 
600 
626 
614 
603 
643 
— .Staie
If under 18, parent must kIkii here. 
(Offer Rood in l.'.S.A. unl.vl 
MJ. The Pail 
Throufli Toaerraw: "Future History" Stones, by 
KobertA Hemlem 
Pub cd. SS.fS 
Ml. Psycboaelsl. 
1.. P. Davich. three 
minJy a aalasy 
apart - meet and 
turn a tieepy villaxc 
into a niahimarc 
Pub. ed. W.W 
Mt. Colosaus b> 
D. F. Jones. Macbirfe conquers 
man! "Inaeniout.. 
alarming". Punch. 
Pub. ed. S4.9S 
S14. The Egg 
Shaped Ihtag. C. 
Hodder- Williams 
F.ngifieer finds crealure"programmed" 
lodesiroytheworld. 
Pub cd S4.«5. 
44d. FuUsttc Voy. 
age. by Isaac Asimov. A miniaturi/edteamof doctors 
invade a man's 
blood stream Pub. 
cd. SJ.tS 
*dJ. The Time 
Hoppers. K. Silveiberg. Papulation 
explosion forces 
IhiHisands to flee 
back SOO years. 
Pub. ed iXH 
««4. The Flying 
Saucer Keader. J 
l>avid. Anthology 
on UFO's. Fact or 
fiction? Pub. cd. 
$4.*^ 
611. Elcfliciit?9. 
Fred Hoyle. Satan 
sPubed $4.90 
621. Prom The 
Twilight Zoac by 
Rod Serling. 14 
spine-tingling stones that breach the 
gap bet ween scicns'c 
and supcrslilion. 
Oil. UangerouiVF 
sloas. Anthology o( 
n original stones 
never before in 
print by Sturgeon, 
Andeisun. oiheis. 
Pub. cd S6.09 
397. Inlerrnptcd 
lourwey by John OFuller. The strange 
story of an American couple abducted aboard a UFO 
Pub. ed. SS.05 
612. TIm FouadaIloa Trilogy, by 
Isaac Asimov. The 
ends of the galaiy 
reven tobarbatism. 
Pub cd 910 90