Qc ^xv The Best in Pertinent Science Fiction December, i 970 mai 
I C5 
SCIENCE FI 
NOVELETTE 
DARKSIDE CROSSING 
James Blish 
THE MAD SCIENTIST 
AND THE FBI 
Stephen T,^li 
and featuring 
ROBERT A.HEINLEIN 
ROBERT StLVERBERO 
GRAHA^E LEMAN 
ke't;: lAUMER 
ALGIS BUDRYS 
ERNEST HILL 
Ph’nglui mglw’nafh Cthulhu 
R’lyeh wgah-nagi fhtagn! 
That eldritch chant in the Old Tongue* 
signifies: “In his house at R’lyeh dead 
Cthulhu waits dreaming,” but we’re 
here to tell you; “Cthulhu naf/fhtagn” 
—Cthulhu, the dread Great Old One, 
has awakened and is coming your way 
in Beagle Books’ new Arkham Editions 
of the works of H. P. Lovecraft. 
Lovecraft is America’s greatest master 
of weird fantasy— and the Arkham 
Editions will bring you the best of his 
work in paperback form, including 
many “lost” stories new even to HPL’s 
devoted fans. 
Beginning in December with THE TOMB AND OTHER TALES, we 
will go on with AT THE MOUNTAINS 
of MADNESS and THE LURKING FEAR 
in January (each book priced at 950), 
with many more novels and collections 
to follow. 
The Beagle SF/fantasy line will also 
include the Anthony Boucher Memorial 
Anthology, SPECIAL WONDER, and 
HIJACK by Edward Wellen, the first 
Mafia SF novel. 
‘Nothing Is known of the Old Tongue, 
except that it was heavily coated. 
BEAGLE BOOKS, INC. 
An Intent Publisher 
101 FifthAve.,NewYork,N.Y. 10003 
Galaxy is published in French, German, Italian, Japanese and Spanish. 
The U. S. Edition is published in Braille 
and Living Tape. 
December, 1970 
Vol. 31, No. 1 
NOVEIBTTCS 
DARKSIDE CROSSING 4 
James Blish 
WE ARE WELL ORGANIZED 38 
Robert Silverberg 
SERIAL (Conclusion) 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 96 
Robert A. Heinlein 
SHORT STORIES 
EJLER JAKOBSSON 
Editor 
DONALD H. MENZEL 
Science Editor 
LESTER DEL REY 
feature Editor 
JUDY-LYNN BENJAMIN 
Managing Editor 
FRANC L. ROGGERI 
Art Director 
JACKGAUGHAN 
Associate Art Director 
JAYTUNICK 
Circulation Director 
L.C. MURPHY 
Administration 
• 
ARNOLD E. ABRAMSON 
Publisher 
BERNARD WILLIAMS 
Associate Publisher 
THE STENTH DIMENSION 26 
Ernest Hill 
2001 HOURS' SOLO 70 
Grahame Leman 
THE MAD SCIENTIST AND THE FBI . 76 
Stephen Tall 
SCIENCE FEATURE 
THE LIMITING VELOCITY 
OF ORTHODOXY 187 
Keith Laumer 
FEATURES 
EDITOR'S PAGE 2 
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 93 
Algis Budrys 
Cover by GAUGHAN, suggested 
by DARKSIDE CROSSING 
GALAXY MAGAZINE is published monthly by UPD Publishing Corporation, a subsidiary of 
Universal Publishing & Distributing Corporation, Arnold E. Abramson, President. Main offices: 
235 East 45 Street, New York, 
N.Y. 10017. 75t per copy. 12-issue 
subscription; $7.50 in the United 
States, elsewhere $8.50. Second 
class postage paid at New York, 
N.Y. and additional mailing offices. Copyright ® 1970 by UPD 
Publishing Corporation under International, Universal and PanAmerican Copyright Conventions. 
All rights reserved. The publisher 
assumes no responsibility for unsolicited material. All stories 
printed in this magazine are fiction and any similarity between 
characters and actual persons is 
coincidental. Title registered U.S. 
Patent Office. Printed in U.S. A. 
43° N, 154° E 
Willy Ley died suddenly on June 24, 
1969. On June 25, Lester Del Rey 
wrote a masterful summary of Willy’s 
work (First Citizen of the Moon, 
GALAXY, September 1969) brilliantly managing to wring from hard and 
stony facts the flowing essence and 
meaning of a life without fanfare that 
affected not only this nation’s destiny 
but, through it, that of humankind. 
Dr. Donald H. Menzel, one of 
Earth’s top astronomers, later joined 
our masthead as science editor and 
consultant. Don stopped at the office 
before taking off for Moscow, where 
he was to chair an international commission designated to name the craters 
on the far side of the moon. 
So Judy-Lynn Benjamin (see masthead) said, “Don — how about a crater 
named Willy Ley?’’ Don looked bemused and said, well, he didn’t know — 
many names would be proposed. And 
L 
THESE MOON CRATERS 
BEARTHENAMESOF: 
— Willy Ley 
— Norbert Wiener, 
U.S. mathematician, 
founder of Cybernetics 
— John Von Neumann, 
U.S. mathematician 
— Joseph L. Pawsey, 
Australian radio astronomer 
— William Wallace Campbell, 
U.S. astronomer 
Leon Campbell, 
U.S. astronomer 
how big a name was Willy’s after all? 
But there was Lester’s manuscript, 
not yet gone to the printer. Don read 
it — few people knew or remembered 
Willy’s pioneering with rocketry until 
Lester pointed out its full significance 
— and when Don had finished he 
swore: “I’m certainly going to nominate Willy.” 
And he did. And he fought. And 
Judy-Lynn launched an information 
and letter-writing campaign, using 
Lester’s words and her own. 
And of 1500 world-famed names 
proposed for immortality, Willy’s 
was one officially chosen. 
Willy’s Crater is at 43° North, 
154° East, Far Side of the Moon — 
looking forever outward to stars farther than our sun. Some day you may 
want to drop in on his place. Don’t 
forget the address. 
— JAKOBSSON 
S-F readers, get involved! Palidpate! 
How? By filling out and mailing the 
questionnaire below. Why? Because 
an inkling ot your tastes and background will enable us to please you 
more than ever. 
All who answer the questionnaire, 
if they so wish, can sign up for a new 
subscription— or extend an existing 
one— at a dollar off the regular rate 
for 12 issues. 
But whether or not you take us up 
on the bargain subscription otter, 
please do cooperate by returning the 
questionnaire. The information will 
help GALAXY satisfy the most agilebrained, most discriminating, most 
shockproof, most rigorous and at the 
same time most generous reader 
there is— to wit: you, the science-fiction enthusiast. 
GALAXY, 235 East 45 Street, New York, N.Y. 10017 
In general, I like stories by; 
1 . 
2 . 
3 . 
I think the two best stories in this 
issue are: 
1 . 
2 . 
I like novel-length serials: 
YES □ NO □ 
I like the illustration on the cover 
of this issue: 
YES □ NO □ 
On the whole, I like the illustra
tions in this issue: 
YES □ NO □ 
GALAXY should publish more 
science-fact articles: 
YES □ NO □ 
Four-letter cusswords and sexual 
terms are okay in science fiction : 
YES □ NO □ 
I don't like fantasy mixed in with 
my science fiction; 
YES □ NO □ 
I am a physician, scientist, engineer or technician— or studying 
to be one: 
YES □ NO □ 
I am currently enrolled in high 
school : 
YES □ NO □ 
I am currently enrolled in college 
or already have a college degree: 
YES □ NO □ 
I'm not against some real-life sex 
when it's important to the story: 
TRUE □ FALSE □ 
I am male □ female □ 
I am years of age 
Yes, I want to take advantage of your bargain offer. Enclosed find $6.50 in cash, 
check or money order. Sign me up for a 12-issue subscription □ (or) Extend my 
present subscription for an additional 12 issues □ 
NAME 
ADDRESS 
(PteasB add $ 1.00 for foreign subscriptions.) 
I 
EELING old and diffident he 
propped himself naked on one 
elbow and looked down at Eleanor 
in the indirect halflight shed 
from the amber sides of the reading lamp fastened insecurely to the 
headboard. It was to be, in effect, 
his last such look, but he felt neither more nor less detached than 
ever. 
Asleep, and with almost all of 
her makeup kissed off, she still did 
not look her age, which (her dossier assured him) was forty; but she 
would no longer pass for the thirty-two she claimed even (though 
she knew better) to him. Certainly 
she did not need the defense that 
somewhere for every woman there 
is a man, or two — let alone that 
there is no woman whom most 
men will not take to bed at least 
once. No, she was pretty; too 
blond to be real, too old to be high
breasted, too worn to be worshipped and so on — but pretty, 
very pretty. Insofar as he could tell 
(he had never been much of a 
sensualist), she was sexually both 
responsive and expert. Furthermore, she had good taste and was 
moderately intelligent and she 
would have been a credit to him 
(had he ever given a damn about 
social credit). 
But he did not give a damn about 
how he looked to anybody. He had 
seen himself in newspaper photographs often enough to realize that 
a remarkably short, slim man 
with whitening red hair and fading bushy red eyebrows has nothing to be vain about. Had he not 
been rich, the newspapers and the 
television cameramen would have 
passed him over like a stray cat. 
He got up quietly and went to 
the bathroom, where he looked at 
himself in thO long mirror on the 
back of the door. Cheekbones; 
ribs; pot; shanks; scars; broken 
toes; no, nothing to recommend 
him but money. This was no news. 
And even more certainly, Eleanor 
was hardly a mistress anybody 
else would have taken had he been 
not only the world’s, but the 
world’s history’s richest man. She 
was neither a Kennedy nor a 
Gabor — had probably never even 
heard of their legends; no family; 
no power; no symbol of wealth, 
sex or anything else — except, perhaps, that John Hillary Dane was 
hardly in any way like any other 
billionnaire in history. 
Poor child. Born in Vienna, she 
had at sixteen married an Alsatian named Max (who?), a 
stranded Wehrmacht lance-corporal about whom even Dane’s intelligence department had been 
able to find nothing further. At 
seventeen she had deserted him to 
try the Hamburg cabaret circuit — about those years Dane had 
never asked anybody — where an 
American naval lieutenant from a 
good Virginia family (totally investigated; totally uninteresting) had fallen avidly in love with 
her and had sponsored her immigration, through his Richmond 
connections, to the States. 
The kid had meant to marry her 
but he never saw her again, though 
for years thereafter he could have 
found her — had he known how — in 
any model directory. Dane himself 
had picked her from a photograph 
in a sleazy, only semi-legal maga
zine called The Private Swinger, 
which specialized (among more 
gruesome specialties, such as 
whips and chains) in free listings of 
women for whom “model” was 
only the most mailable and the 
most instantly dispensable 
euphemism. As far as Dane could 
be sure, he had been drawn to the 
photograph only because the 
nearly nude woman in it looked 
blurrily pretty, unlikely to want 
marriage if otherwise provided 
for, and seemed nothing like his 
wife. 
It worked out fairly well until 
this pretty but hardened piece of 
goods had — quite undemandingly — fallen in love, perhaps for the 
first time in her life and, worst of 
all, with Dane. At least she said so, 
and he had no special reason to 
doubt her. Though he had never 
felt any real love for anything, he 
had been through several episodes of that strange cardiacrespiratory madness (once with 
Jennet) he would have called infatuation, remembered how 
painful, unwelcome and distracting it had been, and was convinced 
that Eleanor really did have the 
disease — and never mind the money. 
H e sighed, closed the bathroom door just far enough to 
leave a little light in the room and 
got back into the bed. Obscurely, 
he was touched, or at least he 
thought he was. He did not think 
he was moved. Eleanor was silky 
and he was full of remote affection for her, but she was not 
what he had been looking for in the 
world. Nothing was. He was as yet 
unconvinced that what he wanted 
even existed. If it did, he would 
not know how to recognize it. He 
could not even put a name to it. 
Poor child. 
She stirred foggily — somehow, 
even in the deepest, most satisfied 
sleep, she sensed when he was 
watching her — and blinked up at 
him. 
“What?” she said. 
“I didn’t say anything.” 
“No — but you were thinking.” 
“The ultimate crime?” 
“You know what I mean, John.” 
Since he did know he did not 
answer. It was odd, and a little 
piquant, to hear this ewigWeibliche cliche in her still faintly 
Viennese accent, as though 
nothing and nobody had changed 
since the creation of the Garden. 
But then, he had had a much better chance to obliterate his own, 
more outre accent than she had 
had, and a good deal more incentive, too; for a model/courtesan in 
America, a slight accent is an article of trade; for a rising young executive, not. The day after his first 
boss in the United States had 
described him — with admiration, 
as he had realized too late — as “a 
genuine All-Latvian Boy,” he had 
set out to teach himself phonetic, 
Webster Ild International 
dictionary English; and then had 
discovered that nobody spoke it. 
Worse, most Americans mistook 
it for a phony British accent, or 
what the British called “Mid-Atlantic,” neither one thing nor the 
other. Now it was too late to revert to his boyhood New Jerseyan, or teach himself Webster 
Illd — and besides, very soon now, 
he would be talking only to himself. 
She slid upright on the bed, unsuccessfully pulling hair back 
over her freckled shoulders, and 
folded her forearms on her knees 
above the sheet, her breasts depending heavily and somewhat 
pathetically between her upper 
arms. Resting her chin on her 
crossed wrists, she spoke quietly. 
“Is this it?” 
“Yes.” 
As always, he did not exactly 
care; and yet she looked so blowsy 
and so forlorn in her expensive 
setting that he felt a paradoxical 
and quite unexpected tenderness. 
He added: “I’m sorry.” 
“Oh, I knew it was coming. 
Luck always changes and ‘I’m 
sorry’ is no help. If one can say, 
‘I loved it while it lasted,’ one has 
all one can reasonably ask for.” 
The particuliar mixture, again, 
of European fatalism and 
American cliche. And, of course, of 
the rituals of what the books called 
love. Should he feel guilty? He did 
not know. 
DARKSIDE CROSSING 
“I loved it while it lasted.” 
“Perhaps. I know you tried. It’s 
the only part of life I know where 
trying is the surest way to 
fail — but never mind.” 
“It wasn’t that,” Dane said. 
“The problem is, I’ve got to go on 
a trip — a long one.” 
“You can’t tell me where, I 
suppose.” 
“I could — but it wouldn’t mean 
anything to you. Hardly more 
than a dozen people in the world 
have ever even heard of it.” 
Her carefully bleached and 
shaped eyebrows rose. “I didn’t 
think there could be such a place 
any more. It must be very small.” 
“It may well be,” Dane said 
guardedly. “But that’s not important. The main thing is. I’m not 
coming back. Nor am I telling 
anybody but you that I’m going. 
I’m just going to vanish.” 
“Oho. A Shangri-La.” 
He smiled. 
“Something like that. I can’t be 
sure. But once I’m gone a lot of 
people will be looking for 
me — and one of them is bound to 
happen on you, sooner or later.” 
“I know about your private detectives,” she said tranquilly. 
“But I know how to keep secrets, 
too, and you know I know. I will 
keep this one.” 
“Thank you.” 
“I hate men who thank me. It 
makes them seem so abject, as if 
I’d demeaned myself by taking 
them on. A proper man ought to 
take a woman by right, without 
any doubts of himself.” 
“I’m sorry.” 
“There, you see?” she said, 
lifting her hands and breasts to 
God. “Somehow that’s the kind I 
always get — either terribly 
grateful, or terribly apologetic.” 
“You’re very philosophical. I 
have to be grateful for that.” 
“I’m furious,” she said, weeping abruptly but with open eyes, 
“and I love you. At least, in God’s 
name, before you go, show me a 
little honest lust.” 
O RDINARILY, when an observatory discovers a new celestial object its first act is to telegraph the particulars to Harvard 
University, the world’s astronomical information clearinghouse. Harvard then prints an announcement, which it mails as a 
postcard to subscribing observatories. In due course the discovery is confirmed — or it is not; 
if it is, the discoverers write it up in 
detail, and submit it as a letter to 
Science or Nature, both of which 
are weeklies. If the discovery is of 
sufficient importance in the 
editors’ eyes, this entire cursus 
honoram need take no longer than 
two months, despite the world-wide 
glut of scientific publication. 
The Dane Observatory discovery was of sufficient importance, 
but the station in the crater of 
Coropuna was no ordinary ob
servatory. It was the only one in 
the world which was not wholly 
owned by a university or 
consortium of universities, a 
foundation or a government, but 
by one single man. And Dane had 
issued orders that nothing it found 
was to be communicated by anybody until he had seen it first. The 
staff protested, mildly, but 
secrecy was one of Dane’s major 
ways of making money — and of 
keeping himself to himself, 
though under that rubric he called 
it privacy. 
He insisted. 
It was perhaps a sign of the 
times, he reflected, that none of 
his astronomers chose to resign 
rather than work under these conditions. The rule was wholly alien 
to what was supposed to have been 
the tradition of freedom of information in science; but the tradition had been systematically traduced by the security regimens 
which had begun to proliferate in 
the West about 1940, and in the 
East long before that. By as early 
as 1970, every major country in 
the world had its own equivalent 
of an Official Secrets Act, and 
nearly every scientist had become 
resigned to it. 
Dane’s private counterpart of 
such an Act was by now only a 
minor cloud in the general climate, which was one of steadily 
thickening fog — being steadily 
further thickened by the spying 
devices he had either made possi
ble or which his own company produced. 
But in view of the discovery itself, his ruling was providential as 
far as his own interests and drives 
were concerned. Briefly, Dr. H. 
Kardon Uscott, his chief of staff at 
Coropuna, had found that the Sun 
is a double star. 
The Sun’s companion, Uscott 
reported, is a white dwarf star, of 
about the same size and intrinsic 
brightness as Proxima Centauri — 
which had previously been supposed to be the nearest of all other 
stars to the Sun. But the Alpha 
Centauri twins are four lightyears away from the solar 
system. The Sun’s companion was 
only twelve thousand times as far 
from the Sun as the Earth is — a 
meaninglessly long distance in 
miles but only about one sixth of a 
light-year, which is minuscule as 
interstellar distances run. 
The two mismatched stars revolve around a common pair of 
epicenters in an ellipse, one circuit of which takes 1,300,000 years, 
so that the proper motion of the 
dwarf companion against the 
background of “fixed” stars is 
only one second of arc per year. 
Had it been in northern skies, even 
this would have been spotted by 
blink-microscope comparison of 
sky atlases reaching all the way 
back to the Astrographic 
Catalogue started in 1887 by no 
less than eighteen universities — regardless of the fact that there are 
DARKSIDE CROSSING 
more than nine hundred other stars 
in Earth’s skies which are brighter, every one of them much farther 
away. But instead, it stood in the 
sky almost directly above the 
South Pole, effectively invisible, 
unmapped, even its proper motion disguised by the precessing 
of the equinoxes. Until Dane Observatory had become functional it 
had never even been photographed, let alone suspected to be 
a companion of the Sun. 
Dane’s star had risen — and not 
in the East, but in the ultimate 
austreal cold. 
He was instantly gripped by a 
desire to see it, but business held 
him back for more than a year, 
while his astronomers fretted. 
Nevertheless, he read the data 
closely as they were transmitted 
to him by teletype: mass, 0.07 
Sun — brightness, 0.000079 
Sun — maximum eccentricity, 
0.07 — maximum separation from 
Sun, 13,300 A. U. While he was 
about it, he checked some other 
nearby stars — whenever possible under their Roman, Arabic or 
even Chinese proper names, so that 
tracing the nature of his interest 
would be difficult even through a 
computer. Nan men (Alpha Centauri), Zuarah (Gamma Eridani), 
and Eta Cassiopeiae were all Sunlike stars and all quite nearby, but 
they were also members of multiple-star systems, which seemed to 
rule out planets. For a while he 
was captured by a single star. 
about eight percent brighter than 
the Sun and identified as Delta 
Pavonis. But he lost interest in it 
on finding that it is nineteen lightyears away; the computer had 
more grandiose ideas than he did of 
what could be meant by “nearby.” 
When at last he was able to fly 
down to Coropuna, Dr. Uscott was 
almost at the bursting point. 
“I can’t begin to tell you how 
important this is,” Uscott said, 
leading the way along the bitterly chill floor of the faintly echoing 
dome toward the telescope. The 
poor man’s teeth were chattering 
like a squirrel’s under his breathing 
mask, obviously as much from 
excitement as from cold. “Just to 
begin with, the f-finding that one 
member of a close double can have 
a big family of planets throws 
every existing theory of how solar 
systems are formed into the discard. Though Beta Solis, as we call 
it, does also explain the aberrations in the orbit of Neptune, as the 
discovery of Pluto never did. But 
there’s still more.” 
They got into the lift which 
would take them to the telescope’s 
Newtonian focus, where there 
was a heated and pressurized viewing chamber (the Cassegranian 
focus could not be heated, since it 
was directly under the big mirror, 
which heat would warp). 
“What more?” Dane said. 
“This dwarf star has at least one 
planet. Apparently about the size 
of Jupiter. The implications — ” 
Suddenly Dane thought he knew 
how Toby Walker had felt in the 
electric chair atop the tower in 
Denver. 
“A planet!” he said tensely. 
“Will I be able to see it?” 
“Oh, no. It’s far too faint, 
though with electronic amplification we might barely be able to 
get an image or a track of it. We 
only deduced it from a p-permutation, a wobble in the companion star’s own orbital track. 
But Mr. Dane, the implications — ” 
“You have no idea,” Dane said 
into his mask, “what the implications are. Show me this star.” 
II 
H e looked at it long and 
hard, though it was very far 
from being impressive: a tiny, 
blue- white spot of light, spiky with 
the distortions caused by the four 
supporting members of the telescope’s prism, fuzzy with aberration, dancing slightly in the 
viewing field — seeing was a problem even this high up in the air. No 
planet was visible, as Uscott had 
predicted; nor did any appear in 
the photographs Dane was subsequently shown in the observatory 
office. But there was Dane’s star 
— close, ambiguous, somehow 
frightening, and yet somehow also 
infinitely promising. “You’re sure 
about this planet, Uscott?” 
“Absolutely, Mr. Dane. We’ve 
r7! T| Ballantine 
C* I *1 Books 
IN mid-August, in mid-flight to England to meet with other paperback 
people, I realize that there is not going to be any December column. This 
is not to keep you from reading, however. Don't missTthese wonderful titles for December: 
BEYOND THE GOLDEN STAIR 
Hannes Bok 
ASSASSIN OF GOR 
John Norman 
TIMEPIVOT 
Brian N. Ball 
AND here is a list of other top fantasy 
and science-fiction works published 
by Ballantine in 1970: 
ADULt FANTASY 
THE HIGH PLACE 
James Branch Cabell 
AT THE EDGE OF THE WORLD 
Lord Dunsany 
LUD-IN THE-MIST 
Hope Mirriees 
THE ISLAND OFTHE MIGHTY 
Evangeline Walton 
THE SHAVING OF SHAGPAT 
George Meredith 
PHANTASTES 
George MacDonald 
THE DREAM QUEST OF 
UNKNOWN KADATH 
H.P. Lovecraft 
ZOTHIQUE 
Clark Ashton Smith 
THE WELL AT THE WORLD'S END 
William Morris 
DARKSIDE CROSSING 
GOLDEN CITIES, FAR 
Edited by Lin Carter 
THE BROKEN SWORD 
Poul Anderson 
SCIENCE FICTION 
THESHIP WHO SANG 
Anne McCaffrey 
STARBREED 
Martha deMey Clow 
PHOENIX 
Richard Cowper 
TIMEPIECE 
Brian N. Ball 
A THUNDER OF STARS 
Dan Morgan and John Kippax 
DAY MILLION 
Fredbrik Pohl 
GREAT SHORT NOVELS OF 
SCIENCE FICTION 
Robert Silverberg 
ALPHA ONE 
Edited by Robert Silverberg 
BREAKTHROUGH 
Richard Cowper 
ALL JUDGMENT FLED 
James White 
RINGWORLD 
Larry Niven 
REBIRTH 
John Wyndham 
THE ELEVENTH COMMANDMENT 
Lester del Rey 
NERVES 
Lester del Rey 
THE YEAR OF THE LAST EAGLE 
Leona Train Rienow (with Robert Rienow) 
SATELLITE 54-ZERO 
Douglas R. Mason 
ANOTHER END 
Vincent King 
Good cheer and best wishes to all . BB 
detected others far more distant, 
by the same method. The eccentricity — ” 
“Could there be others?” 
“Well, now, there we have a 
problem. All our cosmological 
theories have gone out the window 
as of last year. It’s impossible for 
this star to have any planets, even 
a single gas giant. But there it is. 
(For that matter, in this light, our 
Sun shouldn’t have any planets, 
either). So — yes, provisionally, 
there could well be others. We need 
a lot more research and, even 
more, we need a lot of theoretical 
help. When can we send out the announcement?” 
That star — Beta Solis — had cost 
Dane more than forty million 
dollars; not very expensive as 
modern real estate values went, but 
on the other hand . 
He stacked the photographs and 
handed them back. 
“Never,” he said. 
D ane could not have said exactly when he had decided to go 
to the star. It seemed to him that he 
simply and inevitably assumed 
that he was going from the moment that Uscott had told him the 
star might have other planets besides the gas giant; but the decision might lie buried even earlier. 
He knew something of the obstacles to the ordinary notion of 
interstellar flight, in part from his 
own training, in part from his recent checks with the computer. 
Limited to a slow build-up to nearlight speed and an equally slow deceleration as the target was approached, such a trip across even 
the four light-years to the Alpha 
Centauri system (Nan men, 
Hadar, Proxima) would take the 
better part of a lifetime. Moreover, the energy requirements 
would be prodigious; the mass 
ratio of propellant to ship would 
be somewhere in the neighborhood of a billion to one for any reasonably speedy crossing. Technologically, the thing was impossible now and probably would 
be for — to be optimistic — a 
century to come. 
But crossing only a sixth of a 
light-year — two light-months — was 
another matter, especially if one 
viewed it as a one-way trip. A little 
scribbling (for now he wanted to 
leave no further clues even with 
the lowliest computer programer or in the machine itself) showed 
him that it was in principle within 
reach now. 
Suppose, for example, one were 
to build a fusion-drive ship almost exactly like the Indefeasible, the one that had set out for the 
Saturnian satellite. Titan, in 2002. 
The design would involve only 
two essential differences: first, its 
life-support systems would be 
totally devoted to one man, not 
five; and second, all the space and 
mass saved by this would be given 
over to propellants. 
The Indefeasible had reached 
Saturn’s orbit in nine months, decelerating most of the way under 
solar drag. The same ship under a 
continuous two gravities of acceleration — which would be no 
harder on the passenger than living in one of the Dane Tower’s express elevators — would pass the 
aphelion of the orbit of Pluto a little sooner and, in fact, a crossing 
to the dwarf companion in such a 
vessel would probably take no 
more than three years of subjective time, thanks to the LorenzFitzgerald effect. (Of course it 
would take longer in objective 
time, but Dane did not plan to 
come back.) 
T he scheme had many beauties. 
To begin with, no Research-andDevelopment expense would be required; the Indefeasible, now on 
its way back from the Saturian 
system, was no longer a pioneering machine, but a collection of 
hardware down to its last circuit 
and component, and Dane could 
put his hands on all its specs without exerting himself overmuch. 
He did not have to invent it. He 
could then sub-contract each component, breaking the manufacture of the ship into so many 
tiny parts that no single sub-contractor would have the faintest 
idea of what the part he was making was ^going to be used 
in — thanks to the phenomenon 
called technological fallout, 
spaceship components were con
DARKSIDE CROSSING 
stantly turning up in civilian applications anyhow. Even gross 
parts like hull plates could be 
scattered among a multitude of 
aircraft, submarine and boiler 
works all over the world, and none 
of them Dane subsidiaries. It 
wouldn’t even have to be done on a 
cost-plus accounting system, 
since no profit was contemplated 
anyhow. 
Fine; nobody would recognize 
the bits and pieces for what they 
were. But how could you conceal 
the assembling of them, let alone 
the completed object? Clearly the 
ship would have to be assembled 
in orbit, not on Earth, which willynilly would make it the most conspicuous human artifact since the 
Seven Wonders of the Ancient 
World with the Dane Tower piled 
on top of them. 
Conceivably it could be assembled on the ground on the 
Moon, in some unnamed and uninteresting crater on the far 
side. No, scratch that — the take-off 
from the Moon would leave a high 
level or residual radioactivity 
which would arouse intensive investigation within only a few 
years. Also, assembly under even 
lunar gravity, while not outright 
impossible, would be too expensive. 
Well, several dozen communications and weather satellites 
^ere in synchronous or “parking” 
orbits around the Earth, just far 
enough out — 22,300 miles — so they 
made one revolution every 
twenty-four hours, thus remaining permanently above the same 
spot on the ground. Why not assemble his own ship in a twentyeight day orbit behind the Moon? 
There were no bases back there; in 
fact, there were only three on the 
near side: two American, one Soviet. Any of them, if by any chance 
it picked up the passage of the vessels containing Dane’s parts and 
crew, would be likely to assume 
that the unscheduled flight belonged to the other nation. 
(Better have a Russian-speaker always aboard, to respond if hailed 
by one of the U.S. bases.) Another 
plus! 
Next came the problem of a 
staging area on Earth. Another 
extinct volcano in the Cordillera 
Occidental was the obvious 
answer — everyone was already 
used to his shipping vast quantities of materials down there — and 
as for the take-offs, well, obviously the observatory staff would 
have to be in on all this, and who 
else would see them? 
Indeed, now that he came to 
think of it, the only part of this 
operation that threatened to be 
uncontrollably conspicuous was 
the money. The cost, he was sure 
from the experience of the Indefeasible, would be almost a billion 
dollars; to raise that he would have 
to liquidate about a third of his assets and that would be news — the 
Wall Street Journal and the 
London Sunday Times Business 
News would alike front-page it. 
But he had another convenient 
cover; He could reinvest the 
money in Dane Laboratories, the 
corporation — ostensibly interested in ethical drug research, with 
emphasis on longevity — he had set 
up to disburse the monies for his 
time-viewing project. That project 
he would keep going, dead end 
though he now knew it to be. If the 
pharmaceutical front were ever 
penetrated, the revelation of the 
Future experiments would be 
sensational and would make a 
marvelous false pointer to which 
direction he had vanished in. And 
he could probably make use of 
many of the people on the Future 
project staff, which would cut down 
on one fraction of the expense — 
they had already been bribed. So, 
by great good luck, had Toby 
Walker, the only reporter in the 
world of whom Dane was actively 
afraid. 
A note: Could that vast, perfect 
computer he had unsuccessfully 
tried to have Toby sabotage be 
copied in petto for the starship? If 
so, it would save a lot of space and 
weight; and just the attempt to do 
so — though not for this purpose — was already a matter of 
record as the chief interest of the 
Future project. 
E SHOULD, he thought, give 
some consideration to the future of the firm, because it repre
sented the future of his family. 
Little enough though he cared now 
about Jenny and Hank — let alone 
Jennet — he had loved them once 
and they were his responsibility, 
as, for that matter, were the livelihoods of Dane employees. (There 
were no stockholders; he had 
bought them out early in the game 
and neither the parent holding 
company nor any of its subsidiaries had ever gone public, a 
situation on which the Department of Justice had made three 
lengthy, expensive and utterly 
futile court assaults.) 
It would be best to handle this by 
testament. He already had a reliable general manager, who could 
be depended upon to keep things 
going — though not to keep them 
growing — after Dane’s disappearance. In a will he could give exactly half of everything to each of 
the children — apart from a trust 
fund for Jennet. It would take ten 
years for him to be declared legally dead; if in that time the kids 
had grown up enough to take an 
interest in the firm, all well and 
good; if not, the exact fifty-fifty 
split would prevent them from imposing arbitrary policies upon the 
manager, since they were at loggerheads about everything almost all of the time. (Hence also 
the trust fund for Jennet; if he split 
control into three parts, any damn 
fool notion, without limit, would 
command a majority.) They 
would be protected from another 
DARKSIDE CROSSING 
antidiversification suit by the 
government by the massive 
liquidation of a third of his 
companies. 
It would be wise, he supposed, 
to try to determine whether or not 
the dwarf companion had any other planets besides the gas 
giant — let alone one on which he 
could live. Of the nine possessed 
by the Sun and their twenty-threeodd satellites, only one supported 
life above the bacterial level at 
all — and the chances that a white 
dwarf would have a viable world 
were much smaller. 
On the other hand, Uscott had 
said that there was suddenly no 
longer any theoretical base or 
model for planet formation, 
thanks to their own discovery of 
Beta Solis. Dane had the distinct 
impression that if Uscott were to 
find the dwarf companion to be 
surrounded by ice cubes, or even 
fairies, he would be more resigned 
than surprised. In any event it 
seemed unlikely that the question could be answered by evidence 
from Dane Observatory alone, and 
Dane had no Intention of letting 
Uscott ring in any other observers. 
He would take the chance; if there 
was no planet for him when he got 
there, well, he would at least be 
shut off the Earth, which he himself had helped to spoil. 
Now, about a trust fund for 
Eleanor . 
Clearly, the details were going 
to be knotty, but that was why he 
employed experts. The first principles all appeared to be sound. 
Indeed, he was a little awed at 
the way all his interests, without 
any foreplanning on his part, 
seemed to fit into — and to have 
been pointing toward — the flight 
to the dwarf Companion. Some 
familiarity with the sacred literatures of the world might have acquainted him with his predecessors and his prophets, but his early 
interest in poetry had not lasted 
long enough; he was now only an 
engineer and entrepreneur. He 
was yet to realize that for a god 
nothing can go wrong in the youth 
of his power; even his errors are 
fruitful or can be corrected by deluge of rain, blood, locusts or 
money. 
M oney is time. By spending 
somewhat more than the minimal billion dollars Dane got the 
ship — which, peculiarly, he called 
the Tranchemer, though to nobody but himself — built in a year. 
The computer project worked out 
in half that time, so he was able to 
give himself six months of intensive flight training in a mock-up of 
the Tranchemer’s life-support and 
control chambers which had been 
constructed on one of the many 
empty levels of the Dane Tower. 
He was even once able to visit the 
secondary staging area in a farside lunar crater some sportive 
interpreter of the earliest Orbiter 
photographs had named Alfred 
E. Neumann (and indeed there is a 
distinct resemblance); and from 
there, to go through the thenskeletal Tranchemer herself. This 
was his first trip into space and he 
found he enjoyed it hugely. 
Nothing, absolutely nothing, 
went wrong. How could it? 
It then became time to assemble the family, which did prove 
difficult. Jennet was of course no 
problem — she was always conpulsively, obstreperously, naggingly, there. But Hank had become the leader of some sort of 
noise-making group which called 
itself Sufi Mahound And The 
Black Goyim; and though despite 
its strainedly outre name it 
sounded like every other such 
group to the nineteenth decibel 
place and it had proven popular 
enough to be almost constantly 
on tour. As for Jenny, she was not 
hard to locate, since she had 
settled down to reading what she 
called “half-Haiku” to another 
sort of semi-music in coffee-shops 
in the East Village; but persuading her to attend the meeting 
was more work that pinning down 
Hank’s itinerary. 
When at last Dane did manage 
to bring them all together they 
were strangers. Hank, always 
long and thin, now looked like 
someone preparing to model as a 
hairy ghost. Even Jenny looked 
rather gaunt, though as a teenager she had been on the plump 
side — but at least she was clean. 
She had inherited her father’s red 
hair, which she wore very long. 
Hank’s, which was dark brown, 
was almost equally long and kept 
getting mixed up with the crux 
ansata which he wore on a neck 
chain over his buckskin jacket; 
every so often he would get hair out 
of his eyes with a toss of the head 
which in Dane’s own youth had 
been the gesture with which young 
men said, “I never wear a hat — ” 
as though not wearing a hat were a 
point of honor. 
But they no longer aroused in 
Dane any emotion but faint distaste. Against the background of 
the overstuffed and fussy drawing 
room — Jennet had Edwardian 
tastes — they seemed like nothing 
but waifs. Well, it was their own 
choice. 
Dane wasted no time on preliminaries. 
“I wouldn’t have bothered any of 
you for something trivial,” he 
said. “The fact is. I’m leaving the 
business and the country — permanently. You are all provided 
for; Horowitz and Horowitz are 
sending you letters giving you 
the details. There are a number of 
people who know where I’m 
going, but you would find it very 
difficult to figure out who they 
are — and impossible to get them 
to talk even if you did identify 
them.” 
“Why should we try?” Hank 
said. “If you’ve provided for us. 
DARKSIDE CROSSING 
where you go is your own business.” 
“Precisely.” 
“Well, I for one shall certainly 
try,” Jennet said grimly. “I 
didn’t marry to be provided for 
and, in fact, your damn businesses 
have been nothing but a burden to 
me. And I certainly didn’t marry 
to be deserted. When I think — ” 
“You have no choice in the matter. As for trying, it would be 
fruitless, because 1 have so arranged matters that it would be 
physically impossible for you to 
follow me, even if by some miracle you did figure out where I’d 
gone.” 
“You make it sound like you’re 
going on the next trip to Saturn,” 
Jenny said scornfully. 
“You might just as well assume 
that I’m going time-traveling, for 
all it will do you. And Jennet, for 
your own good, I strongly advise 
you not to try.” 
“A threat, now?” 
“Not at all. When you get the 
letter from the lawyers, you’ll see 
that it’s to your advantage to 
have me declared legally dead in 
the minimum possible time. 
Don’t cloud your case by searching for me or otherwise flailing 
about as if you thought me still 
alive. To do so would be not only 
useless but stupid.” 
“And you expect me to take 
your word for this?” 
“No, not really,” Dane said. 
“But it is my best advice and I’m 
obligated to offer it. Making the 
horse drink is up to God, not me.” 
“I don’t think you can tell the 
difference any more,” Jennet 
said in a voice of rusty iron. “Your 
notion that you can get away with 
this sounds suspiciously godlike 
to me. You’ve had so much power 
for so long you think it’s infinite 
now. And you are going to look 
marvelously silly when I find you 
bedded down with some starlet in 
Peru.” 
Dane grinned. “Ah, you’ve ferreted out my secret already. Well, 
I wish you joy of it. But you’d better tell Sam Horowitz before you 
tell the press. You may find his reasoning more plausible than 
mine — or anyhow, less suspect.” 
“Hey Dad, is that really all there 
is to it?” Hank said, with visible 
disappointment. Dane was momentarily startled by the Dad, until he realized that it was a standard 
term of address in Hank’s present 
circles. 
“Sorry, Hank, but I’m answering no questions and dropping no 
clues,” he said. “Assume anything you like. Even an accurate 
guess wouldn’t change anything in 
the slightest.” 
“ — God said,” Jennet added. 
The meeting, inevitably, went 
on for quite a while longer, and became increasingly more painful; 
but at this point, since Jennet had 
inadvertantly had the last word, 
the Recording Angel switched off 
his tape. 
Now, to say goodbye to Eleanor. 
Ill 
M asked by the Moon and by 
the inherent invisibility of rocket exhaust in space, the Tranchemer began to move under its own 
power. In his control couch, John 
Hillary Dane could hear nothing 
but a vague whisper, transmitted 
along the hull — the noise of the 
engines, as well as the torrent of 
hard radiation they produced, were 
separated from the life-support 
sphere by more than a mile of 
storage modules, most of them 
airless until he should need to enter them — but he could feel the 
thrust mounting, all right. 
It was welcome; he had spent the 
last frantic ten days of preparation in free fall, except for brief 
workouts in the centrifuge chamber. His designers had considered 
locating the entire life-support 
capsule along the rim of a 
centrifuge, as the designers of the 
Indefeasible had done; but the crew 
of the Saturnian expedition had 
reported that the nausea produced by moving about under the 
Coriolis forces involved had been 
so much worse than the effects of 
free fall itself that they had kept 
the centrifuge shut off for most of 
every ship’s day. Dane would just 
have to get used to free fall, for he 
was going to spend a substantial 
part of three years in it, with only 
enough time in the small centrifuge to maintain his skeletal muscle tone and to prevent calcium 
from being leached out of his 
bones. At the moment, though, 
the return of the equivalent of 
gravity — even though it did make 
him feel as though he were lying 
on his back — was a pleasure. 
Solemnly elated, he touched a 
pre-programed trigger on the 
computer console. Immediately in his foam-padded earphones 
the whisper of the engines took on 
tonality; it was joined by a high 
violin tremolo on E flat, and then 
by a distant horn call in rising and 
falling fourths — the opening of 
the Fourth Symphony of Anton 
Bruckner, suitably subtitled The 
Romantic. Within a few minutes, 
Herr Bruckner was making so 
much noise that the engines were 
swamped out entirely. 
The thrust, however, grew much 
faster; long before Herr Bruckner had gotten to his second theme 
(though since his first themes tend 
to come as groups of three, his 
seconds do not show up in any hurry), it had reached the prescribed 
one gravity — which was even a little unpleasant after ten days of no 
gravity at all. But it would not last 
long. He had discovered early on 
that his snap estimate of the 
acceleration he would need, and its 
duration, had been fantastically 
too high — which was lucky, for had 
his original guess been correct, no 
ship conceivable in the present 
DARKSIDE CROSSING 
state of the art could have been 
built to deliver it. What was 
achievable was an average relative 
velocity of 9,455 miles per second, 
which at one gravity of acceleration would cost the Tranchemer 
three hours, thirty-four minutes 
and twenty-five and a fraction seconds of thrust. 
Needless to say, Dane was not 
planning to travel at anything like 
that clip inside the dusty, littered 
solar system — or expend the 
energy needed to attain it, either, 
this close to the only home of Man. 
Instead he planned to run the engines at one gravity inside the 
solar system for only one hour, 
thirty-five minutes and eight 
seconds, and even there only in 
short bursts. The rest of the requisite velocity — which meant almost 
all of it — would have to be picked 
up later, when the Tranchemer was 
far beyond both the environment 
of Man and the possibility of 
detection. 
From several points of view, of 
which comfort was the least important, it would have been better 
to have left the Moon under nine 
gravities and put in correspondingly more coasting time 
later. The present trajectory would 
take the Tranchemer once across 
the near side of the Moon, a crossing during which she was sure to be 
spotted by radar by one of the 
bases and perhaps even visually as 
well. But that couldn’t be helped; 
Dane could only hope that the tran
sit would be written down as a 
story of saucer sighting. The 
synchronous orbit in which his ship 
had been built was necessarily in 
the plane of the ecliptic; whereas 
she would eventually have to be 
traveling at ninety degrees to 
that plane, and her mass was so 
great — and her distribution of it 
so barbell-like — that she could not 
be wrenched into the new direction 
in a hurry without snapping 
somewhere along the bar. 
As Herr Bruckner reached his 
third theme, his usual and here 
again uniquely appropriate binary 
one, the Earth appeared over the 
limb of the Moon, a vivid blue 
globe about the size of a pea held 
at arm’s length. It would soon become much larger, for the synchronous orbit actually passed 
closer to the Earth than it ever did 
to the Moon and the Tranchemer 
was widening its distance from the 
Moon every second now. That was 
perhaps a protection; at that distance the ship would be difficult 
to spot by accident from either the 
Earth or the Moon. 
. The Earth duly grew. By the 
time Herr Bruckner, a notoriously long-winded composer, had 
gotten to the absolute end of his 
symphony. Earth was a stupendous and beautiful sight. The 
computer, as instructed, gave Dane 
five minutes of silence (except for 
the engines) to contemplate it and 
then began to pour into the earphones something even more long
winded, the Second Symphony 
(subtitled The Resurrection) of 
Gustav Mahler. Herr Mahler was 
also much noisier; if any challenges were coming in — or any 
parting words from Dane’s 
associates — neither Mahler nor the 
computer would let them through. 
The swelling of the Earth would 
have given Dane the illusion that 
he was on his way home, had he 
considered the Earth home any 
longer. He did not. He watched the 
beauty expand with an abstracted 
mind. In due course the symphony 
came to an end in a tumult of 
orchestra, organ, chorus and bells, 
and by then Earth was receding 
and Dane had his heavy back to it. 
No more music now. Unlocking his chair from the floor, Dane 
drove it along its tracks to the food 
output of the console, which 
extruded at him tournedos Rossini, 
a baked potato with sour cream 
and chives, artichoke hearts, a 
garlicky tossed salad, an athelbrose 
bombe and a fast-dripping pot of 
espresso, all oriented to the thrust 
of the engines — his farewell 
dinner and one of a kind he would 
see no more than six times a year 
henceforth. As he tackled it, the 
computer began to read to him 
something he had always meant to 
read himself but had never had the 
time to, what with business and 
keeping up with the technical 
literature (the computer’s library 
consisted almost seventy-five 
percent of such works): 
Jemand musste Josef K. verleumdet haben, denn ohne doss er 
etwas Boses getan h'dtte, wurde er 
eines Morgens verhaftet . 
He fell easily in with the language, in which he had always 
been fluent. The Earth of its origin 
fell increasingly away and by the 
second chapter he found that he 
was not thinking about the Earth 
any more — or anyhow, not so 
often. 
L ike most laymen, when Dane 
had thought about the solar system at all he had thought of it in 
terms of those spurious “maps” 
which are printed in popular 
magazines, showing the orbits of 
the planets as a series of close concentric circles, with the planets 
themselves neatly arranged 
outward from the Sun in a straight 
line. The reality, even though he 
was looking down on it, was very 
different: a sea of stars in which 
the planets were only other sparks, 
lost in vastness and impossible to 
identify without the aid of the 
computer, and those beyond 
Saturn not visible to the naked eye 
at all. He had learned to expect 
this but after a lifetime of 
unconscious acceptance of the 
usual simplistic schematic, it was 
nevertheless disorienting. 
By a large coincidence the 
Tranchemer's great arc away from 
the system did not become sharply 
inflected away from the ecliptic 
until it passed the orbit of Saturn, 
DARKSIDE CROSSING 
and the planet was nearby at the 
time— near enough, at least, so 
that the ship’s image amplifier was 
able to bring in a spectacular view. 
Dane studied it for several hours as 
it, too, dwindled. It affected him 
in a way he would have found hard 
to describe. The Earth, to be sure, 
was beautiful' from space — and 
had a special beauty as an oasis of 
life — but Uscott had said that 
there were probably many other 
such in the galaxy, and indeed 
Dane was staking his life on there 
being another a good deal less 
than a lifetime away. But this 
great, frozen, poisonous storm of a 
planet, colored in a thousand 
shades of straw and surrounded by 
gossamer rings of broken ice and 
dust, might well be unique. Leaving 
it behind was somehow more 
forceful a symbol of his abandonment of his home system than 
leaving the Earth had been. 
In its honor he had the computer 
play him the Saturn movement 
from Holst’s The Planets', but in 
the face of the real glory of the real 
globe the music seemed so cheap 
that he ordered the crystal wiped. 
This was unfair to Holst, who had 
never intended to depict any 
actual planet — his suite was instead a sort of requiem for 
astrology — and Dane instantly regretted his action — but the thing 
was irrevocably done. He would 
have to learn to be less impulsive, 
or such flashes of irritation might 
expunge his entire library before 
the trip was done. He called for the 
Missa Solemnis next, and to this 
great requiem, which nothing could 
cheapen, the ringed giant passed 
out of his ken except as another 
spark, which in turn faded 
away . 
Odd other crochets cropped up. 
He had always thought of himself 
as a solitary type despite his record 
as an executive non pareil — as, in 
fact, a sort of latent introvert; one 
of the minor attractions of the voyage had been the prospect of 
absolute solitude, of absolute freedom from all obligations and 
interruptions, even the maddening 
and ubiquitous telephone. By the 
time he had left Saturn behind, 
however, he found that he was 
talking to himself a good deal. Oh, 
the computer could talk but its responses were stereotyped; it always gave the same reply to the 
same proposition; it could speak 
but not conduct a conversation, 
unless one wanted to argue logic 
with it, a pastime for which Dane 
was not well equipped by training. 
His monlogues at least sometimes had the virtue of surprise. 
S OME distraction was provided by the return of gravity, 
for with the solar system now 
spread out behind him, he was still 
only making slightly better than 
171 miles per second — a tremendous pace compared to any interplanetary velocity ever achieved 
before, but still nowhere near what 
he needed for the major crossing. 
But this time there was no reason 
to apply the acceleration in short 
bursts, since all the necessary 
course corrections had now been 
made; the remaining velocity could 
all be piled on at once, and that 
was what the computer was programed to do. After one hour, 
fifty-nine minutes and eighteen seconds, the engines shut off again 
and he was back in free fall and 
the contemplation of his own state 
of mind. He would not get any diversion from that source again for 
the next thirty months. 
Nevertheless, the sudden 
marked change in his environment, brief though it had been, 
helped him to get back to 
something resembling his normal 
frame of mind. Then, about six 
weeks later, just as he was congratulating himself upon having 
come to terms with his sentence 
and even beginning to resume 
enjoying it, he had a shock that he 
had utterly failed to anticipate. By 
this time he was more than forty 
astronomical units from the 
Sun — more than the mean distance of Pluto, though in a quite 
different direction. In complacent 
celebration, he looked back at the 
solar system for a last time — 
— and found that he had lost the 
Sun. 
Of course, the computer could 
find it for him. At this distance it 
should be the brightest star in the 
sky, almost like a distant but still 
intolerable arc-light; and from this 
angle it was being sought among 
the thinning stars toward the edge 
of the galaxy, since the Trachemer 
was going approximately in the 
direction of the galaxy’s center. In 
fact, once the computer had located it, the image amplifier probably 
could still make a recognizable 
disc of it. 
But to the uninstructed, naked 
eye it was gone and that was what 
counted. The lone star that had 
spawned Man’s home was now 
only a bright dot among thousands of other dots; no longer 
Zarathustra’s and Mithra’s great 
object of worship, but only a grain 
of incandescent sand on a remote, 
permanently dusky beach. 
Dane was expatriate, as no man 
had ever been before — nor would 
he ever see that Sun again. 
No such conscious chain of 
thought about the matter passed 
through his mind, however, until 
much later. Upon the discovery 
itself he was abruptly in the grip of 
an acute panic. His knees turned to 
jelly, his fingertips and lips 
tingled, his soul was filled with 
dread and he was fearfully 
dizzy — no, not dizzy, for the cabin 
did not seem to be swimming — but 
overwhelmingly he needed to lie 
down. Clumsily — for he had lost 
almost all control of his body — he 
swam into the womb of the centrifuge and to the hammock; and 
there he passed out, almost before 
he could hit the starting switch. 
DARKSIDE CROSSING 
H e AWOKE feeling absolutely 
normal, except that he could 
not remember who he was, where 
he was, or the names of most of the 
things around him; nor did this 
produce in him any emotion 
greater than a mild curiosity. Only 
a long-established reflex prevented him from killing himself by 
trying to leave the centrifuge before 
turning it off. 
He floated into the control 
chamber as compulsively and as 
mindlessly as a sperm going home. 
He was startled, finally, when the 
computer spoke to him — though 
all it said was, “Menu?” — despite 
the fact that he could think of no 
good reason why a room should 
not talk. The startlement got him 
started asking questions. 
The computer was both a good 
and a bad interlocutor. It could 
inform but it could not lead; certainly it was not programed for 
psychotherapy. As a result, after 
several days Dane had most of the 
facts, both major and minor, back 
in his head, but he could not be said 
to be in possession of them. They 
had no rank order, no importance, 
no relevance to the creature he had 
become. And the computer knew 
nothing at all about all that part of 
his past which therapists call 
“formative.” 
This fugue and amnesia, he later 
figured out, lasted nearly six 
months and was perhaps a lucky 
episode in a way, for relearning 
even simple facts kept him as pre
occupied and happy as a child who 
has just discovered that there are 
more than fifty Oz books, for almost the whole period. Coming out 
of it into the real universe was painful and he was never sure again that 
he quite completed the journey. 
His only test for the firmness of 
his grasp upon anything was how 
painful it was, which in the human 
condition is perhaps the best test, 
but he remembered dimly that 
there had also been such a thing as 
joy, of which he never recovered 
anything more than the word itself. 
Some other changes also became 
evident. As Eleanor probably had 
known — or would have agreed, had 
the thought been new to her — Dane 
had never been much of a sensualist, but he had cold-bloodedly 
provided for his inevitable needs 
with a library of pornographic 
films (on hot tapes or crystals — 
the definition would have been too 
poor) which he had planned to use 
sparingly, whenever the problem 
could no longer be ignored. He 
had even allowed for the law of 
diminishing returns by having the 
films graded by two experts, one 
of whom had been his own personal clinical psychologist. He 
found now that even the most orgiastic of these had no effect on 
him . and what was perhaps 
worse — though this was only a 
guess on his part — nedther did the 
mildest, in which the “consorts” 
showed some tenderness toward 
each other in addition to the meaty 
coils of their “relationship.” 
He was, he concluded tentatively, no longer quite human. 
The conclusion was tentative 
because he no longer remembered 
whether or not he ever had been. 
At the end of the first year the 
apparent magnitude of the dwarf 
companion was +2. It did not occur to him to ask the computer the 
apparent magnitude of the Sun. 
By the end of the second year the 
computer was able to report that 
the dwarf companion had at least 
five planets — another blow to the 
chops for the cosmogonists. Three 
of these were gas giants, one of 
them — the one whose existence 
Uscott and his crew had deduced — 
now plainly separated from the 
companion’s glare in the amplifier 
image. It had thirteen satellites, all 
of them dead losses. The other two 
were dense inner planets but could 
be called Earthlike only by the 
most rarified of theorists: one was 
too far away from its primary tc 
be warm enough for liquid water, 
and the other was ten thousand 
miles in diameter and returned a 
spectrum with only one absorption 
line — carbon dioxide. 
Dane was not dismayed. He was 
rediscovering Mozart and had just 
gotten up to K. 361. None of this 
music seemed to have any emotional content — though, judging by 
the rest of his library the man he 
had once been must have thought 
it did — but the technical perfection 
of even the small works, e.g., the 
piano pieces for four hands, was 
staggering. 
Six months later Dane had found 
his planet and three months after 
that, the 7>a/ic/iewerswapped ends 
and began to prepare an orbit 
around it. No wonder it hadn’t 
been visible before; it was less than 
six thousand miles in diameter and 
only forty million miles from its 
feeble, collapsing star. But it 
would do; it would do very nicely. 
Only mildly elated, the creature 
which had been John Hillary Dane 
in some past broke out of storage 
the dove-shaped child of the Tranchemer which would be his landing 
craft and began to prepare his 
epiphany. In his earphones, from 
the earth beneath, he could already 
hear voices speaking in tongues. 
“Goodbye,” Eleanor said in the 
blackness. 
“Goodbye, my dear.” 
“John . your Shangri-La . 
is it really so far away?” 
He kissed her for the last time. 
“It is years away,” he said. “And 
in Time, every single second is 
more than a hundred and eightysix thousand miles.” 
The door closed between them, 
and that was that. He was not 
good, among other things, at parting speeches. A very long time 
later, Toby Walker, who had a fix 
on Macbeth, was to say that nothing in his life so ill became John 
Hillary Dane as the leaving of it.^ 
DARKSIDE CROSSING 
THE 
STENTH 
DI
MENSION 
ERNEST HILL 
You'll never see a ghost if 
^ you can't see one sideways! 
T he sculpture should not have 
been standing where it was, with 
no significant attempt at display. 
In an alcove, dimly lit. Mottled 
paper peeled from the rough cement rendering of walls under a 
cracked plaster ceiling. The marks 
of a rat’s gnawing showed on the 
soft, worm-eaten woodwork on a 
forward angle where the floor and 
skirting met. He cleared a way 
through the heaped-high rubbish 
littering the studio floor to a point 
where he could stand at a proper 
distance to take in the whole. Stoa, 
by Albertin. A porch — not that the 
title would signify very much. 
Philosophers had sat on a stoa and 
become stoics. Albertin had probably never heard of them. Albertin 
had made no move to greet or 
welcome him. He had stayed where 
he was, squatted, hunched in the 
windowseat, staring out into the 
darkness. A clock was ticking 
somewhere or rain was dripping 
rhythmically through a leaking 
roof. A scurrying of mice under 
the dilapidated floor broke the 
otherwise total silence. 
“It is an interesting work,” Map 
Tonquille said, at length. “I should 
like to see it in the round. From all 
sides, so to speak.” 
“Who’s stopping you?” Albertin growled. 
Albertin was stopping him. Albertin was stopping him by sitting 
there, a beer can in his hand, and 
making no effort to help drag the 
two-meter-high bulk out from the 
alcove. Two meters high, one meter deep ... He hesitated, chin in 
hand, reflecting, casting a second, 
speculative glance at the object in 
the alcove. Stoa, by Albertin. Was 
it two meters high? A moment before it had seemed to be just that. 
The curled head-scrolls were just 
clear of the ceiling — and the ceiling was around two meters — two 
meters ten high. But were the headscrolls there, just below the yellow, 
smoke-grimed plaster, or were 
they much lower? Were they headscrolls at all? They had seemed to 
be something like that, curliqueing inward and downward — or upward and outward? And then 
again, suddenly, they were flat 
planes. The whole elevation was 
a succession of black flat planes, 
interleaving, shuffling themselves 
like a pack of opaque — transpar
ent — translucent — misty gray 
cards. 
They were not, of course, moving, the planes, the cards. Albertin would never have stooped to 
the mechanical devices so much a 
part of the last fin de si'ecle vogue 
— the electro-mechanical school. 
The planes — the scrolls — the windmilling pale-grained, gray-veined 
protuberances were static, as unmoving as the columns, steps, angled doors and intricate lattice 
work of the interior. The semblance of movement was a trick of 
the concealed lighting although the 
light sources themselves would also 
be static. It was indeed quite ingenious. A trick of the angling. A 
bringing together of a succession 
of optical illusions confusing the 
eye and the brain behind the eye. 
A conjuring with emotion through 
a visual and mental paradox. 
He gave up the idea of dragging 
the sculpture out into the open. 
There was nothing to hold on to. 
Nothing you could be sure was 
really there, or at least in the same 
place where a moment before it 
had seemed to be. He stepped 
farther back and considered what, 
if Albertin’s positioning could be 
trusted, would be its frontal aspect. As a striking example of the 
art nouveau, Stoa could hardly be 
equaled. But then, no one had 
ever equaled Albertin even in his 
cruder metallo-morph period. Albertin was, in any period, unique. 
“Interesting,” Tonquille said 
THE STENTH DIMENSION 
again. “As an example of the art 
nouveau — ” 
Before he could finish Albertin 
leaped down from the windowseat, his thin, sloping shoulders 
drawn back and his disproportionately large, workman’s hands 
clenched and raised in some sort of 
invocation. He hurled the beer can 
to the ground, stamped on it and 
kicked it toward a corner cluttered with half-finished objects in 
wire, glass, plastic and indeterminable materials. 
“What did you say?’’ he 
shouted. 
“As an example of the art nouveau — ’’ 
“You poor, fat, little tick!’’ the 
sculptor roared. “What do you 
know about art nouveaul What 
the hell do you know about anything?” He threw himself against 
the wall, his hand shielding his 
eyes, prepared, quite probably, to 
be sick. 
“Very little.” Map Tonquille 
smiled as he answered the question. “But enough to recognize a, 
work of art when I see one. 
Enough to be aware of current 
trends — ” 
“Art nouveau'.” Albertin spun 
around and thrust his big hands 
into his smock pockets and collapsed into the only article of furniture that might possibly, a long 
time ago, have been referred to as 
a chair. “What’s art nouveau^ 
There’s only one art, you indescribable, patronizing pig. What 
the hell’s new about it? Art — yes. 
Genius — yes. Driving me mad. 
Be driving you mad if you had eyes 
in your bald baby head. New, my 
backside! It’s as new as the dodo.” 
“Possibly. It does however show 
an understanding of present-day 
choice of materials, new colors, 
lighting and an insight into a facet 
of human psychology that would 
have been impossible, for instance, 
to Praxiteles.” 
“Bloody art nouveau'.” Albertin snorted. “The first little CroMagnon man who rubbed red ochre into his bison was bowled over 
by every shaman in the valley 
shouting and throwing up his muddy paws and bellowing ‘art nouveau'.” Get out of my sight!” 
“I should be prepared to consider purchasing if you would 
name your price.” 
A lbertin was on his feet 
again, lurching to a cupboard 
hidden behind stacks of plastic 
materials and spools of wire. He 
fought his way through the obstruction, picking up sheets and 
strips an armful at a time and 
hurling them into any vacant area 
that seemed in an arbitary way 
suitable. 
“Price?” he shouted over his 
shoulder. “What’s price? Want a 
tag on it? Want to pay at the door 
and get your change and wheel it 
away in your little wicker basket? 
You make me sick.” 
“Nevertheless — ” Map Ton
quille smiled — “since I want to 
buy your work I must know its 
price.” 
Albertin was stooped, rummaging in the cupboard and Tonquille 
noticed with a sudden wave of sympathy how very thin the man was. 
The outline of his spine showed, 
too knobby, against the overlarge 
smock where it arched beneath 
the shoulders and his long, scrawny 
neck craned out from the bulge of 
the rucked-up collar like a wine 
bottle from a waiter’s napkin. He 
turned with a beer can in his hand 
and pulled off the tab with his 
teeth. 
“Why ask me?” he growled. 
“You’re the connoisseur. You 
know all about price and tags and 
value and all that crap. I only 
know about worth. What do you 
pay for genius now on the open 
market? Ten dollars an hour for 
inspiration and five for stringing 
the thing together? That’s what 
your sort paid for Van Gogh until he died and you all made your 
fortunes out of him. What do you 
pay for Van Gogh these days? Ten 
million dollars? Christ! If he heard 
you bidding for him now he’d cut 
his other bloody ear off.” 
“I do not collect archaic painters,” Tonquille explained patiently. 
“And I have really no idea of the 
price paid for the gentleman to 
whom you refer. It is your work I 
am interested in acquiring.” 
“You are interested in acquiring?” Albertin put the can to his 
lips and his Adam’s apple rose and 
fell steadily. “Yeah,” he said, at 
last. “Interested in acquiring. 
That’s a handy mouthful. Interested in acquiring means you’ll 
buy if the price is right and you 
won’t if it isn’t. Genius must take 
its turn with the groceries. “What 
the hell do I care!” he shouted suddenly. “I hate the damn thing. 
Take it away! I don’t want it.” 
Map Tonquille walked to the 
window seat and sat with a careful 
straightening of his trouser 
creases. He took out a checkbook and deliberately began to 
write. 
“I shall be fair with you, Albertin,” he said. “Since you have obviously no commercial sense, I am 
paying you what I consider to be a 
fair price. A hundred thousand 
dollars.” 
“You’re robbing yourself,” Albertin growled. “What do I want 
with your money?” 
“You will want to stay drunk 
for quite a time. My money will 
help you there. One has to be moderately rich to savor the full immoderation of artistic poverty. 
When it is all gone, you will begin 
to work again and I shall come 
back and quite possibly find the 
right words to name your new 
period.” 
Albertin glowered at him for a 
while, his bloodshot eyes smoldering under the jut of the bushy 
eyebrows, his high-domed, narrow 
forehead checkered with a pucker
THE STENTH DIMENSION 
ing of thin upward and deep transverse wrinkles. Suddenly he 
grinned, dived into the cupboard 
and held out a Scotch whiskey 
bottle. 
“You’re not a bad little tick,” 
he said. “Have a drink!” 
Tonquille shook his head. 
“Take the check,” he said, “and 
have this — this masterpiece delivered to my private apartments in 
Chelsea New Town Block.” 
“Delivered?” Albertin snorted. 
“What do you think I am — a moving man? Take the damn thing 
yourself.” 
“Since I am paying a hundred 
thousand dollars I should have 
thought . But no matter. I will 
arrange for it to be collected later 
tonight. It is perhaps as well. This 
object — this Stoa — needs careful 
and professional handling.” 
He turned again and studied his 
purchase. The perfect blending of 
the uncountable optical illusions 
among the planes was a sheer delight. It was impossible for the eye 
to focus on any point of the interior, which seemed to be in constant movement, apparantly causing the sides to bend and bulge — 
one moment they were solid, 
square and green and the next, 
hazy purple, rounded and rolling 
with the undulation of prairie 
wheat in a wind. Sometimes the 
whole seemed to rotate about a 
central axis, giving the impression 
of unfathomable depth, an illusive rotundity, an infinitely dark 
central cone. And in the cone a 
figure, growing steadily out of a 
lightening of the black homogeneity was also slowly rotating in 
the reverse direction. A human 
figure. A woman in black with — 
was it a poke bonnet? High, 
rounded and drawn in under the 
chin, secured with a broad bow. 
Anti-clockwise turning. Black on 
gray. A widow in widdershins. 
“You know what you’ve got 
there, don’t you?” Albertin was 
back in the window seat, a halfempty Scotch bottle in his hand, 
sober , and suddenly sardonic. 
“You’ll never live with it.” 
“No,’^ Map Tonquille said slowly. “I don’t know what I’ve got. I 
am only a collector. A rich man 
who can afford the time and the 
money to learn. I don’t know what 
I’ve got. But I shall study it at 
length and feel something in the 
end of its true significance.” 
“You don’t say?” Albertin was 
bantering but less hostile. “When 
you’ve found out all about it, 
come and tell me. I never felt a 
thing myself that made any sense. 
Just for now — what do you think 
it is?” 
“A work of art.” 
“Yeah. I suppose you could say 
that. I never found out what art 
was either. What sort of work of 
art?” 
“Sculpture, of course, in the 
modern idiom. The disposal of the 
planes and lighting confuse the eye, 
creating a certain illusion — ” 
“The planes and the lighting, 
you think?” 
“There is more?” 
“I don’t think you’ve quite got 
the hang of it, little man. Optical 
illusions — yeah. I guess that’s 
what I’ve put there. I never really 
know. But why are they illusions? 
Why can’t your eye follow something you could measure with a 
ruler and a photometer and any 
other gadget you happened to have 
in your pocket?” 
“You are about to tell me, I 
think?” 
A LBERTIN, Tonquille noted, 
was never as sober as when he 
had been drinking heavily. His surly bellicosity had left him and he 
seemed genuinely troubled, as if 
wrestling with a real physical problem rather than with the obscure 
images of some artistic inner enigma. He began to pace the studio, 
kicking moodily at any bric-a-brac 
that came within range of his 
heavy-soled canvas boots. Ruffling his fingers through the thick, 
upstanding mop of his gristled, 
black hair. Running his thumb 
around the collar of his smock and 
the paint-daubed, dirty and collarless shirt beneath. 
“Know about dimensions?” he 
asked at last. 
“I don’t quite follow you?” 
“Dimensions. How many are 
there?” 
“Unless the entire world has 
been very sadly misled, there are 
three.” 
“You think only three?” He 
stood stock still, his back to the 
window and the sporadic flush of 
some distant, on-and-off-diffusing 
neon-sign behind the night. Staring 
at the short, pudgy figure of the 
buyer he counted slowly, one, two, 
three on his fingers as if not quite 
sure of the visual significance of 
numbers. 
“There are more?” Map Tonquille asked. 
“Your eye and your brain create their own dimensions. I believe 
there are no such animals. Physically and in real terms, there can’t 
be. No breadth, no length, no 
height. They are the illusions we 
create to give us something to hold 
on to. A plausible artifice we have 
invented so that, God help us, we 
can understand a little measure of 
the un-understandable.” 
Map Tonquille glanced quickly 
at his new purchase. It was rotating again. Mouth-shaped. Two 
broad, puffed-out lips turning, the 
woman poised between them — or 
over them. A savage mouth with a 
bone through its savage nose. The 
woman smiled at him. The lips 
closed. There were only the planes. 
Black and gray planes shuffling. 
Lights on a film of porous sponge 
steel. Blades. A saw-toothed zigzag of steps rising to a summit 
that was again its base. 
“I don’t quite follow you.” 
“Listen. What is the world, the 
THE STENTH DIMENSION 
universe made of? Atoms? A basic 
hydrogen atom? And what is a basic hydrogen atom made of? It’s 
something we call energy which is 
as good a name as any other for 
something we know nothing whatever about. What is energy? Has it 
got dimensions? Can you go out 
into the universe past the last galaxy and say ‘Up to this point we 
got energy, further on we ain’t? It’s 
so high, so wide and this much 
deep?’ Listen! Listen, little man! 
We — you and me — we are only 
modifications of the same stuff 
that surrounds us — it doesn’t even 
surround us, because that implies 
dimensions — it just is and we just 
is, too, a part of it. Inside us, 
trapped, is something else, an eternal something that hasn’t got any 
dimensions either. It’s got power 
but it’s different from the energy 
past of us. It uses its power, its 
self-awareness, to become extra 
aware. It can’t take in infinity because, unlike energy, it’s finite, it 
just can’t comprehend infinity. So 
what does it do? It divides eternity 
up into manageable cubes. It finds 
three ways of looking at the same 
thing.” 
“Four — if you take in time.” 
“Oh — claptrap! Time isn’t a dimension in this sense. If the little 
beast inside you were timeless, it 
would be infinite, too, and 
wouldn’t need to cut up the cosmos into cubes. And if it had no 
duration it wouldn’t exist at all. It 
divides the timeless infinite into 
cubes it can look at three ways and 
it moves downtime in a straight 
line, cubes an’ all. Maybe it’ll manage four ways one day but it hasn’t 
gotten that far yet.” 
“You may be right,” Tonquille 
conceded. “But I don’t see where 
it gets us. If our three dimensions 
are just our way of looking at the 
whole — it’s the only way we’ve 
got.” 
“How dense can you get?” Albertin groaned, striking his fist into 
the palm of his hand. “Don’t you 
see the relevance of all this to my 
— my creation? That thing there? 
Don’t you see that if we, the human race, divide up infinity into 
any three dimensions that suit us, 
the three we’ve evolved quite arbitarily, quite by chance, like everything else — don’t you see that 
countless other beings are doing 
the same thing — dividing it up 
neatly into three? Don’t you see 
that these dimensions must overlap everywhere? We are all, we 
who house these little finite beasts, 
all one big unity. You are just as 
much a part of the constellation of 
Ursa Major as you are of the contents of this room.” 
“No.” Tonquille shook his head. 
“I don’t see that at all. Since I am 
demonstrably not in the constellation of Ursa Major, you will need 
more than your artistic insight to 
convince me that I am.” 
“Artistic insight, my Aunt Fanny’s left boot! Insight is a better 
tool than physics any day because 
physics can never get you anywhere as long as it is concerned 
with measuring the immeasurable. 
But this isn’t art, it isn’t even philosophy — it’s pure down-to-earth 
common sense. Look, my little 
tubby plutocrat! What’s between 
you and Ursa Major? What precisely stops your being there, since 
you seem to be sure you’re not?” 
“Distance, I should say.” 
“Sure! Sure! Distance — length, 
my bulky baby boyo. A dimension. 
An illusion. We’ve split eternity up 
into breadth, height and length, 
haven’t we? What about the people, 
just like ourselves who’ve done it 
the other way — breadth, height and 
stenth?” 
“I should follow you better if 
you told me exactly what stenth 
is.” 
“And the others who’ve made it 
breadth, length and kelth? God Almighty, man, they’re only words. I 
can invent words for them as good 
as any they’ve got themselves; it’s 
the thing that matters, the way of 
looking, not what you call it. 
Here, there, anywhere you like, 
someone, a whole people, a whole 
world, have looked at infinity differently. Law of averages, they 
must have. By the law of averages, 
some will have cottoned on to two 
of ours with one different. Just 
their way of looking at something 
that in its entirety would be completely incomprehensible.” 
“What you mean is, that all 
about us there are — ” 
“Look, mac! Have you ever 
seen a ghost sideways?” 
“I have never seen a ghost at 
all.” Tonquille considered in his 
quiet, precise way. “But I accept 
that others have had that good fortune. Sideways, you say? I must 
admit, from what I know of the 
subject, it would seem a little unlikely.” 
“Unlikely my foot! It’s totally 
impossible! All you see of a ghost 
are its two dimensions, all your 
eye can manage, because it’s not 
gotten around to taking in the new 
one. You see its breadth and height 
and if you’ve just a tiny little 
crumb of psychic insight you see 
the hazy outline of its stenth. 
There’s others, I expect, in the 
breadth, length and kelth category 
and those you would only see from 
above, flat as a pancake. If you ever saw one sideways it would be 
because you couldn’t see it face 
on. It would be a length, height 
and telth creation. If you haven’t 
got that little crumb of psychic 
sense that a little runt like you 
wouldn’t have, you wouldn’t see it 
at all. You’d be stuck with your 
inborn, handy illusion, depth, 
length, distance. No, you little 
tick, you’ll never see a ghost.” 
“I wonder — ” Map Tonquille 
turned back to the sculpture. It 
was a cone now, the neck stretching away into an infinity of darkness. The woman was there, taking 
off her bonnet, shaking her hair 
loose about her shoulders. “What 
THE STENTH DIMENSION 
you are saying is, in simple terms, 
that by confusing the eye and the 
brain, dislodging the focus of the 
understanding from that area of 
stimulation-response with which it 
is accustomed to deal, you disorient the psyche — enabling it 
to absorb stimuli from another 
plane. Because it can no longer distinguish its familiar length it takes 
in, sporadically perhaps, the stenth. 
Since it forces us to view spatiality 
from this new plane, your work is 
four-dimensional.” 
WpOUR?” Albertin lurched to* ward his creation, shouldering Tonquille angrily aside. He 
thrust his long neck forward, 
glaring at the rapidly shuffling 
planes. “Four?” he repeated, uncertainly. “Yeah — well — four, I 
guess — I had hopes — ” 
“You had hoped for more?” 
“Five or six, perhaps.” He 
turned away and leaned his head 
against the wall. From the movement of his bunched round shoulders he appeared to be stifling a 
paroxysm of sobbing. “Perhaps the 
whole damn lot. The nth. Perhaps 
a particle, a grain of an idea of no 
dimensions at all. An extra dimension somewhere else down the 
time-stream. I don’t know what 
Fve done. Take the ghastly thing 
away before I break it with a 
sledge hammer. Nothing is what 
you want. Nothing touches on reality. And why doesn’t it? Because 
we can’t ever know what reality is. 
We can’t see as much of reality as 
a dead flea in a bed sock.” 
“You mentioned ghosts,” Tonquille took charge of the dilapidated chair, sitting carefully upright, his small white hands folded 
carefully in his lap. “You said that 
I should never see a ghost.” 
Albertin turned and was leaning 
back against the wall, staring at 
him with those scarlet, almost animal eyes. 
“Go on!” he said, hoarsely. 
“I think you were not speaking 
of ordinary ghosts in so-called 
haunted houses. In the interior of 
Stoa 1 thought I saw — ” 
“No!” Albertin shouted, heaving himself from the wall with a 
jerk of his shoulderblades. “No. 
You never saw anything. There’s 
nothing there.” 
“Indeed I seemed to see very 
clearly — ” 
“No!” Albertin had taken Tonquille by the shoulders, his long 
chin only a week’s stubble length 
from Tonquille’s nose. “You saw 
nothing. Do you hear? You never 
saw her!” 
“Please pull yourself together, 
Albertin, or I shall consider this 
discussion closed.” 
Albertin straightened his back 
and turned slowly to the alcove. 
He limped toward the giant, citadel-like creation, sparkling gold in 
the dim light of the low-wattage 
electric bulb suspended by a single 
cord from the ceiling. He held out 
a shaking, pathetic hand toward 
the glitter that was fading now into 
a rising and falling of dull-shaded 
planes, the cone and the darkness 
at the end of the cone. 
“She’s there,” he said wistfully. 
“She’s there, isn’t she? Down at 
the end of our days — a long time 
before we began. Just a figure in a 
cabin door reflected on the dark, 
lapping water of an endless night. 
But there is a light there somewhere behind the door. The door, 
you see, the door has only breadth 
and height.” 
“You said a ghost. Do you — 
did you know her, Albertin?” 
“Time’s a poor fish,” he said 
sadly. “Round and round the goldfish bowl. It’s nose in the length 
and the new, the reborn stenth, way 
back at the tip of its tail.” 
He was limping as if one leg had 
suddenly grown too short or the 
other too long, limping toward the 
cupboard, one hand raised, shielding his eyes. 
“I didn’t think you would see 
her, too,” he muttered. “I misjudged you, Mr. Money-bags Tonquille. I’m sorry, Mr. Money-bags 
Tonquille. I’m truly sorry.” 
“There is no need to be.” 
“Take back your money, Mr. 
Tonquille. This thing’s too big for 
you or me. No one should peep 
through the two-way mirror like a 
voyeur in a brothel into the other 
worlds that are all around us. You 
know what I’ve done, Mr. Tonquille? I’ve made a keyhole. A hole 
is two-dimensional, you see. Any
one can make a hole in any world, 
but I’ve put the stenth behind it. 
One day, she will see it from her 
side and in the length, she’ll see 
me. I’ve made a peephole through 
to her. I couldn’t stand her seeing 
me again, knowing that I couldn’t 
cross.” 
Map Tonquille continued to sit 
rather primly in his chair, fingertips pressed together, considering 
the implications of a universe without dimensions and a girl in a poke 
bonnet with two dimensions in one 
world and a third in another. Albertin behind him was searching 
the shelves of the cupboard. He 
had apparently run out of his usual 
brand of Scotch whiskey since, 
when he turned, the bottle he held 
was small enough to be concealed 
in the palm of his hand. 
“Tell me,” Tonquille asked him. 
“Did you know the woman in the 
poke bonnet?” 
“Questions.” Albertin groaned. 
“Always questions. There are no 
women and no men in heaven or on 
earth. Only modifications of the 
universal ether. But the illusion is 
very sweet.” He continued, raising the flask to his lips, “It doesn’t 
matter. Nothing matters. No one 
can see her sideways.” 
He had fallen with a crash to the 
floor and his back was arching and 
his head thrown back in a sudden, 
unnatural contortion before Map 
Tonquille realized what had happened. In a moment he was on his 
THE STENTH DIMENSION 
knees beside the sculptor, tearing 
at the smock with the frantic and 
totally hopeless idea of massaging 
his heart. Anything to relieve the 
ghastly spasms that racked the 
frail, tortured frame. 
“Don’t die, Albertin,” he 
begged. “Albertin, come back! The 
world needs you. There is no one 
anywhere to take your place.” 
The lips were drawn back over 
the yellow teeth and the mouth was 
locked open so far that the jaw 
seemed ready to split the thin 
stretched membrane of the cheeks. 
But the tongue moved and, hoarsely, before the final contortion 
hooped the agonized body and relaxed it slowly into death, five 
words croaked from the foamflecked lips. 
“The switch — pull the switch — ” 
M ap Tonquille looked vainly in 
the studio, in the one adjacent 
bedroom and the length of the passage outside for a telephone. He 
found no switch on that floor of 
the old, decaying building. He decided it was useless to run for a 
doctor. The merest layman could 
see that Albertin was dead, the 
sweet smell of pear drops on his 
lips, one hand clutched at his 
throat and the other reaching out 
toward the — the thing in the corner. And Tonquille could see the 
switch now, although he had not 
noticed it before. A red switch on 
the plinth under the sculpture. His 
sculpture. He had not noticed be
fore that his sculpture was 
mounted on a plinth. Why should 
he throw the switch? What would 
the switch do? Extinguish the lighting concealed behind the planes in 
the interior of his work. Probably. 
One could not be sure. 
The cone was there again, turning very slowly in a clockwise direction. The girl was there, too. 
No longer in black, but in a long, 
tight-fitting dress reaching to her 
ankles and cut low at the front. Edwardian, perhaps. She seemed 
younger — gayer. He felt a strong 
desire to sit and watch her for no 
matter how long and irrespective 
of what she might do. A keyhole, 
Albertin had said. He, cultured, 
urbane, a connoisseur of the arts, 
was peering at a woman through a 
keyhole. Albertin was right. One 
could not draw aside the curtains 
and gape into the secret interstices 
between the veils. There would be 
time when he had the object home, 
properly mounted in his own apartment, to study and consider all its 
implications. There was no doubt 
that Albertin’s creation was now 
his property. His check was valid 
and could be paid to the sculptor’s 
estate, dependents, if he had any. 
The cone had widened now, was 
as broad as it was long. He would 
have said it had infinite length and 
infinite breadth if it had not been 
for the life-size woman in its center. Infinity could hardly be divided 
into life-sized objects. She was 
looking out somewhere over the 
edge of the near-infinite space, her 
hands extended in welcome. She 
was turning, spinning widdershins, 
a smile on her face, her hands 
stretched out, reaching to the ends 
of an immeasurable distance where 
two more hands were forming, 
spinning and joining with hers, the 
fingers intertwining, the arms 
growing out of the particles of 
darkness until Albertin and she, 
whole and complete, went twirling 
down to the narrowing neck of the 
funnel and vanished. 
The planes were shuffling themselves and the zigzag dragons 
teeth of the endless belt were 
climbing to a summit that was always one step farther on, when, 
knowing that he must, Tonquille 
pulled the switch. 
A sense of awful inevitability 
had seized him and when, with a 
blinding flash, the entire masterpiece disintegrated into a heap of 
metal, wire and faintly steaming 
plastic strips, he was not really 
surprised. Only tired, disillusioned 
and determined to forget the whole 
thing. Surprise came later when he 
rang the doctor for the tenement 
and reported to him that Albertin 
was dead. 
“You’ve made a mistake,” the 
voice retorted sharply. “Albertin 
was cremated three weeks ago. 
Suicide. He poisoned himself.” 
“The time lag on the stenth,” 
Tonquille mused, sadly. “I should 
have known. I never did see the 
man sideways. ★ 
one generation 
beyond Dune 
is where DUNE MESSIAH begins. Author 
Frank Herbert returns to the duneworid 
of Arrakis for an epic of imperiai intrigue 
and human ecology-an epic that spans 
the universe. That’s why we can teli you 
where DUNE MESSIAH begins, but not 
where it ends — 
We're reprinting fast, but your bookselier may be out of stock. Order 
this and other Frank Herbert books 
today ; 
FrUSH ME: 
I copies of DUNE MESSIAH I 
I (N1847) 95C 1 
I .copies of WHIPPING STAR j 
(S1909) 750 I 
copies of THE EYES OF HEISENBERG 
I (S1865) 75(J 
I . copies of DESTINATION; VOID 
I (S1864) 750 I 
I copies of THE SANTAROGA BARRIER I 
I (81615) 750 I 
1 Namp 
! Address 
1 
1 f-'ty 
State 
Zip 
1 Include list price 
j each title. 
plus a dime 
postage for 
BERKLEY PUBLISHING CORP. 
Dept, mhk 
200 Madison Ave., New York 10016 
THE STENTH DIAAENSiON 
“In the pantheistic systems 
of Giordano Bruno, monads 
are conceived of as eternal, 
both corporeal and soullike, and each a microcosm 
or mirror of Deity . 
— Funk &. Wagn all's 
I 
I N LOUISVILLE Siegmund Kluver still feels like a very small 
boy. He cannot persuade himself 
that he has any rightful business up 
there. A prowling stranger. An illicit intruder. When he goes up to 
the city of the urbmon’s masters a 
strange boyish shyness settles over 
him that he must consciously strive 
to hide. He finds himself forever 
wanting to peer nervously over his 
ROBERT SILVERB ERG 
An Episode — Urban Monad 116 
shoulder. Looking for the patrols 
that he fears will intercept him. 
The stern brawny figure blocking 
the wide corridor. What are you 
doing here, son? You shouldn’t be 
wandering around on these floors. 
Louisville is for the administrators, don’t you know that? And 
Siegmund will babble excuses, his 
face blazing. And rush for the 
dropshaft. 
He tries to keep this silly sense 
of embarrassment a secret. He 
knows it doesn’t fit with the image 
of himself that everyone else sees. 
Siegmund the cool customer. Siegmund the man of destiny. Siegmund who was obviously Louisville-bound from childhood. 
If they only knew. Underneath it 
all a vulnerable boy. Underneath it 
a shy, insecure Siegmund. Worried that he’s climbing too fast. 
Apologizing to himself for his success. Siegmund the humble, Siegmund the uncertain. 
Or is that just an image too? 
Sometimes he thinks that this hidden Siegmund, this private Siegmund, is merely a facade that he 
has erected so that he can go on 
liking himself, and that beneath 
this subterranean veneer of shyness, somewhere beyond the range 
of his insight, lies the real Siegmund, every bit as ruthless and 
cocky and rung-grabbing as the 
Siegmund the outer world sees. 
He goes up to Louisville nearly 
every morning, now. They requisition him as a consultant. Some of 
the top men there have made a pet 
of him — Lewis Holston, Nissim 
Shawke, Kipling Freehouse, men 
at the very highest levels of authority. He knows they are exploiting 
him, dumping on him all the 
dreary, tedious jobs they don’t feel 
like handling themselves. Taking 
advantage of his ambitions. Siegmund, prepare a report on working-class mobility patterns. Siegmund, run a tabulation of adrenal 
balances in the middle cities. Siegmund, what’s the waste-recycling 
ratio this month? Siegmund. Siegmund. Siegmund. But he exploits 
them, too. He is rapidly making 
himself indispensable, as they slide 
into the habit of using him to do 
their thinking. In another year or 
two, beyond much doubt, they will 
have to ask him to move up in the 
building. Perhaps they’ll jump him 
from Shanghai to Toledo or Paris; 
more likely they’ll take him right 
into Louisville at the next vacancy. 
Louisville before he’s twenty! Has 
anyone ever done that before? 
By that time, maybe, he’ll feel 
comfortable among the members 
of the ruling class. 
He can see them laughing at 
him behind their eyes. They made 
it to the top so long ago that 
they’ve forgotten that others still 
have to strive. To them, Siegmund 
knows, he must seem comical — an 
earnest, pushy little rung-grabber, 
his gut afire with the upward urge. 
They tolerate him because he’s 
capable — more capable, maybe, 
than most of them. But they don’t 
respect him. They think he’s a fool 
for wanting so badly something 
that they’ve had time to grow 
bored with. 
Nissim Shawke, for instance. 
Possibly one of the two or three 
most important men of the urbmon. (Who is the most important? 
Not even Siegmund knows. At the 
top level, power becomes a blurry 
abstraction; in one sense everybody in Louisville has absolute 
authority over the entire building 
and in another sense no one has.) 
Shawke is about sixty, Siegmund 
supposes. Looks much younger. A 
lean, athletic, olive-skinned man, 
cool-eyed, physically powerful. 
Alert, wary, a man of great tensile 
strength. He gives the illusion of 
being enormously dynamic. A 
teeming reservoir of potential. Yet 
so far as Siegmund can see, Shawke does nothing at all. He refers 
all governmental matters to his 
subordinates; he glides through his 
offices at the crest of the urbmon 
as though the building’s problems 
are mere phantoms. 
Why should Shawke strive? He’s 
at the summit. He has everybody 
fooled, everyone but Siegmund, 
perhaps. Shawke need not do but 
only be. Now he marks time and 
enjoys the comforts of his position. 
Sitting there like a Renaissance 
prince. One word from Nissim 
Shawke could send almost. anybody down the chute. A single 
memorandum from him might be 
able to reverse some of the urbmon’s most deeply cherished policies. Yet he originates no programs, he vetoes no proposals, he 
ducks all challenges. 
To have such power and to refuse to exercise it, strikes Siegmund as making a joke out of the 
whole idea of power. Shawke’s 
passivity carries implied contempt 
for Siegmund’s values. His sardonie smile mocks all ambition. It denies that there is merit in serving 
society. I am here, Shawke says 
with every gesture, and that is sufficient for me; let the urbmon look 
after itself; anyone who voluntarily 
assumes its burdens is an idiot. 
Siegmund, who yearns to govern, 
finds that Shawke blights his soul 
with doubt. 
What if Shawke is right? What 
if I get to his place fifteen years 
from now and discover that it’s all 
meaningless? But no. Shawke is 
sick, that’s all. His soul is empty. 
Life does have a purpose and service to the community fulfills that 
purpose. I am well qualified to 
govern my fellow man; therefore I 
betray mankind and myself as well, 
if I refuse to do my duty. Nissim 
Shawke is wrong. I pity him. 
But why do I shrivel when I look 
into his eyes? 
T hen there is Shawke’s daughter, Rhea. She lives in Toledo, 
on the 900th floor, and is married 
to Kipling Freehouse’s son Paolo. 
There is a great deal of intermar
riage among the families of Louisville. The children of the administrators do not generally get to live 
in Louisville themselves; Louisville is reserved for those who actually govern. Their children, unless they happen to find places of 
their own in the ranks of the administrators, live mostly in Paris 
and Toledo, the cities immediately 
below Louisville. They form a 
privileged enclave there, the offspring of the great. Siegmund does 
much of his nightwalking in Paris 
and Toledo. And Rhea Shawke 
Freehouse is one of his favorites. 
She is ten years older than Siegmund. She has her father’s wiry, 
supple form: a lean, somewhat 
masculine body, with small breasts 
and flat buttoeks and long solid 
muscles. Dark complexion; eyes 
that glitter with private amusement; a sharp elegant nose. She 
has only three littles. Siegmund 
does not know why her family is 
so small. She is quick-witted, 
knowing, well-informed. She is 
more nearly bisexual than anyone 
Siegmund knows; he finds her tigerishly passionate — but she has 
told him also of the joy she takes 
in loving other women. Among 
her eonquests has been Siegmund’s 
wife Mamelon, who, he thinks, is 
in many ways a younger version 
of Rhea. Perhaps that’s why he 
finds Rhea so attractive; she combines all that he finds most interesting about Mamelon and Nissim 
Shawke. 
Siegmund was sexually precocious. He made his first erotic experiments in his seventh year, two 
years ahead of the urbmon norm. 
By the time he was nine he was fa
WE ARE WELL ORGANIZED 
miliar with the mechanics of intercourse, and consistently drew the 
highest marks in his physical relations class, doing so well that he 
was allowed to enroll with the eleven-year-olds. Puberty began for 
him at ten; at twelve he married 
Mamelon, who was more than a 
year his senior; shortly he had her 
pregnant and the Kluvers were on 
their way out of the Chicago newlywed dorm and off to an apartment of their own in Shanghai. 
Sex always seemed agreeable to 
him for its own sake, but lately he 
has come to realize its value in 
building character. 
He nightwalks assiduously. 
Young women bore him; he prefers those who are past twenty, 
like Principessa Mattern and Micaela Quevedo of Shanghai. Or 
Rhea Freehouse. Women of their 
experience tend to be better in bed 
than most adolescents, of course. 
Not that that is his prime concern. 
One isn’t ever that much better 
than another and Mamelon can 
give him all the physical pleasure 
he needs. But he feels that these 
older women teach him a great 
deal about the world, sharing their 
experience with him in an implicit 
way. From them he draws subtle 
insights into the dynamics of adult 
life, the crises, conflicts, rewards, 
depths of character. He loves to 
learn. His own maturity, he is convinced, stems from his extensive 
encounters with women of the older generation. 
Mamelon tells him that he is 
generally believed to nightwalk 
even in Louisville. This is in fact 
not so. He has never dared. There 
are women up there who tempt 
him, women in their thirties and 
forties, even some younger ones, 
such as Nissim Shawke’s second 
wife, who is hardly older than 
Rhea. But the self-confidence that 
makes him seem so awesome to 
his peers vanishes at the thought 
of the wives of the administrators. 
It is bold enough for him to venture out of Shanghai to use women of Toledo or Paris. But Louisville? To slip into bed with Shawke’s wife and then have Shawke 
himself arrive, smiling coldly, saluting, offering him a bowl of tingle — hello, Siegmund, are you having a good time? No. Maybe five 
years from now, when he’s living 
in Louisville himself. Not yet. But 
he does have Rhea Shawke Freehouse and some others of her stature. Not bad for a start. 
N NISSIM SHAWKE’S lavishly furnished office. There’s space 
to waste in Louisville. Shawke has 
no desk; he conducts his business 
from a gravity-web slung hammock-fashion near the broad 
gleaming window. It is mid-morning. The sun is high. From here 
one has a stunning view of the 
neighboring urbmons. Siegmund 
enters, having received a summons 
from Shawke five minutes before. 
Uneasily he meets Shawke’s cold 
gaze. Trying not to look too humble, too obsequious, too defensive, 
too hostile. 
“Closer,” Shawke orders. Playing his usual game. 
Siegmund crosses the immense 
room. He must stand virtually 
nose-to-nose with Shawke. A 
mockery of intimacy; instead of 
forcing Siegmund to remain at a 
distance, as one usually requires 
of subordinates, Shawke brings 
him so close that it is impossible 
for Siegmund to keep his eyes 
locked on both of Shawke’s. The 
image wanders; the strain is painful. Sharp focus is lost and the 
features of the older man seem 
distorted. 
In a casual, barely audible voice, 
Shawke says, “Will you take care 
of this?” and flips a message cube 
to Siegmund. It is, Shawke explains, a petition from the civic 
council of Chicago, requesting a 
liberalization of the urbmon’s sexratio restrictions. “They want 
more freedom to pick the sex of 
their children,” Shawke says. 
“Claiming that the present rules 
unnecessarily violate individual liberties and are generally unblessworthy. You can play it later for 
the details. What do you think, 
Siegmund?” 
Siegmund examines his mind for 
whatever theoretical information it 
may contain on sex-ratio questions. Not much there. Work intuitively. What kind of advice does 
Shawke want? He usually wants to 
be told to leave things just as they 
are. All right. How, now, to justify the sex-ratio rules without seeming intellectually lazy? Siegmund 
improvises swiftly. His gift is an 
easy penetration into the logic of 
administration. 
He says, “My impulse is to tell 
you to refuse the request.” 
“Good. Why?” 
“The basic dynamic thrust of an 
urban monad has to be toward stability and predictability and away 
from randomness. The urbmon 
can’t expand physically and our 
facilities for offloading surplus 
population aren’t all that flexible. 
So we need to program orderly 
growth above all else.” 
Shawke squints at him chillingly 
and says, “If you don’t mind the 
obscenity, let me tell you that you 
sound exactly like a propagandist 
for limiting births.” 
“No!” Siegmund blurts. “God 
bless, no! Of course there’s got to 
be universal fertility.” Shawke is 
silently laughing at him again. 
Goading, baiting. A streak of sadism his main diversion in life. 
“What I was getting at,” Siegmund continues doggedly, “is that 
within the framework of a society 
that encourages unlimited reproduction we’ve got to impose certain checks and balances to prevent disruptive destabilizing processes. If we allow people to pick 
the sex of their children themselves 
we could very possibly get a generation that’s sixty-five percent 
male and thirty-five female. Or 
vice versa, depending on whims 
and fads of the moment. If that 
happened, how would we deal with 
the uncoupled surplus? Where 
would the extras go? Say, fifteen 
thousand males of the same age, 
all with no available mates. Not 
only would we have extraordinarily unblessworthy social tensions — 
imagine an epidemic of rape — but 
those bachelors would be lost to 
the genetic pool. An unhealthy 
competitive aspect would establish itself. And such ancient customs as prostitution might have to 
be revived to meet the sexual needs 
of the unmated. The obvious consequences of an unbalanced sex 
WE ARE WELL ORGANIZED 
ratio among a newborn generation 
are so serious that — ” 
“Obviously,” Shawke drawls, 
not hiding his boredom. 
But Siegmund, wound up in an 
exposition of theory, cannot easily 
stop. “Freedom to choose your 
child’s sex would therefore be 
worse than having no sex-determination processes at all. In medieval times the ratios were governed by random biological events, 
and naturally tended to gravitate 
toward a fifty-fifty split, not taking into account such special factors as war or emigration, which, 
of course, would not concern us. 
But since we are able to control 
our society’s sex ratio, we must 
be careful not to allow the citizens 
to bring about an arbitrarily gross 
imbalance. We cannot afford the 
risk that in a given year an entire 
city may opt for female children, 
let’s say — and stranger phenomena 
of mass fancy than that have been 
known. On compassionate grounds 
we may allow a particular couple 
to request and receive permission 
for, say, a daughter as their next 
little, but such requests must be 
compensated for elsewhere in the 
city in order to insure the desired 
overall fifty-fifty division, even if 
this causes some distress or inconvenience to certain citizens. Therefore I would recommend a continuation of our present policy of 
loose control over sex ratios, 
maintaining the established parameters for free choice but always 
working within an understood assumption that the good of the urbmon as a whole must be — ” 
“God bless, Siegmund, that’s 
enough.” 
“Sir?” 
“You’ve made your point. Over 
and over. I wasn’t asking for a dissertation, just an opinion.” 
Siegmund feels mashed. He 
steps back, unable to face Shawke’s stony, contemptuous eyes at 
such close range. “Yes, sir,” he 
murmurs. “What shall I do about 
this cube, then?” 
“Prepare a reply to go out in 
my nailrie. Covering basically what 
you’ve told me, only embellishing 
it a little, dragging in some scholarly authority. Talk to a sociocomputator and get him to give 
you a dozen impressive-sounding 
reasons why free choice of sex 
would probably lead to an imbalance. Get hold of some historian 
and ask for figures on what actually happened to society the last time 
sex-ratio freedom was allowed. 
Wrap it all up with an appeal to 
their loyalty to the larger community. Clear?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“And tell them, without quite 
putting it in those words, that the 
request is refused.” 
“I’ll say we’re referring it to the 
high council for further study.” 
“Exactly,” Shawke says. “How 
much time will you need for all 
this?” 
“I could have it done by tomorrow afternoon.” 
“Take three days. Don’t hurry 
it.” Shawke makes a gesture of 
dismissal. As Siegmund leaves, 
Shawke winks cruelly and says, 
“Rhea sends her love.” 
W ¥ DON’T understand why he 
1 has to treat me that way,” 
Siegmund says, fighting to keep 
the whine out of his voice. “Is he 
like that with everyone?” 
He lies beside Rhea Freehouse. 
They have not yet made love tonight. Above them a pattern of 
lights twines and shifts. Rhea’s new 
sculpture, purchased during the 
day from one of the San Francisco 
artists. 
She says, “Father has a very 
high regard for you.” 
“He shows it in a strange way. 
Toying with me, almost sneering 
at me. He finds me very funny.” 
“You’re imagining it, Siegmund.” 
“No. Not really. Well, I suppose I can’t blame him. I must 
seem ridiculous to him. Taking 
the problems of urbmon life so 
seriously. Spouting long theoretical lectures. Those things don’t 
matter to him any more, and I 
can’t expect a man to remain as 
committed to his career at the age 
of sixty as he was at thirty, but he 
makes me feel like such an idiot 
for being committed myself. As if 
there’s something inherently stupid 
about anyone who’s involved with 
administrative challenges.” 
“I never realized you thought so 
little of him,” Rhea says. 
“Only because he falls so far 
short of realizing his abilities. He 
could be such a great leader. And 
instead he sits up there and laughs 
at everything.” 
Rhea turns toward him. Her expression is grave. “You’re misjudging him, Siegmund. He’s as 
committed to the community welfare as you are. You’re so put off 
by his manner that you don’t see 
what a dedicated administrator he 
is.” 
“Can you give me one example 
of—” 
“Very often,” she continues, 
“we project onto other people our 
own secret, repressed attitudes. If 
we think, down deep, that something is trivial or worthless, we indignantly accuse other people of 
thinking so. If we wonder privately 
if we’re as conscientious and devoted to duty as we say we are, 
we complain that others are slackers. It might just happen that your 
passionate involvement with administrative affairs, Siegmund, represents more of a desire for mere 
rung-grabbing than it does a strong 
humanitarian concern, and you 
feel so guilty about your intense 
ambitions that you believe others 
are thinking about you in the same 
terms that you yourself — ” 
“Wait! I absolutely deny — ” 
“Stop it, Siegmund. I’m not trying to .pull you down. I’m just offering some possible explanations 
of your troubles in Louisville. If 
you’d rather I kept quiet — ” 
“Go on.” 
“I’ll say what’s on my mind . 
and you can hate me afterward, if 
you like. You’re terribly young, 
Siegmund, to be where you are. 
Everybody knows you have tremendous ability, that you deserve 
to be on the brink of going to 
Louisville — but you’re uneasy 
yourself over how fast you’ve risen. You try to hide it but you can’t 
hide it from me. You’re afraid that 
people resent your climb — even 
some people who are still above 
you may resent you, you sometimes think. So you’re self-conscious. You’re extra-sensitive 
You read all sorts of terrible 
WE ARE WELL ORGANIZED 
things into people’s innocent expressions. If I were you, Siegmund, 
I’d relax and try to enjoy myself 
more. Don’t worry about what 
people think, or seem to think, 
about you. Don’t fret about grabbing rungs — you’re headed for the 
top, you can’t miss, you can afford 
to slack off and not always worry 
about the theory of urban administration. Try to be cooler. Less 
businesslike, less obviously dedicated to your career. Cultivate 
friendships among people your 
own age — value people for their 
own sake, not for where they can 
help you get. Soak up human nature, work at being more human 
yourself. Go around the building; 
do some nightwalking in Warsaw 
or Prague, maybe. It’s irregular 
but not illegal — and it’ll knock 
some of the tightness out of you. 
See how simpler people live. Does 
any of this make sense to you?” 
Siegmund is silent. 
“Some,” he says finally. “More 
than some.” 
“Good.” 
“It’s sinking in. Nobody’s ever 
spoken to me like that before.” 
“Are you angry with me?” 
“No. Of course not.” 
Rhea runs her fingertips lightly 
along the line of his jaw. “Do you 
mind topping me now, then? Td 
rather not have to be a moral engineer when I have company on 
my platform.” 
His mind is full of her words. 
He is humiliated but not offended, 
for much of what she has said 
rings true. Lost in self-analysis, he 
turns mechanically to her, caressing her. But he is preoccupied with 
the intricacies of her entry into his 
character. She finally makes him 
aware of the failure of his virility. 
“Not interested tonight?” she 
asks. 
“Tired,” he lies. 
Rhea laughs. He thinks about 
how he must reshape his public 
image. Not to look ridieulous before the men of Louisville. 
H ome again, not long after 
midnight. Two heads on his 
sleeping platform. Mamelon is entertaining a nightwalker. Nothing 
unusual about that; Siegmund 
knows that his wife is one of the 
most desired women in the urbmon. For good reason. Standing 
by the door, he idly watches. Mamelon is making sounds of passion, but to Siegmund they sound 
false and forced. He feels vague 
resentment. If you’re going to have 
my wife, man, at least give her a 
decent time. He strips and cleanses 
himself, and when he steps out 
from under the ultrasonic field the 
pair on the platform lie still. Mamelon is hardly breathing hard, 
confirming Siegmund’s suspicion 
that she was pretending. Politely 
Siegmund coughs. Mamelon’s visitor looks up, blinking, red-faced, 
alarmed. He’s Jason Quevedo, the 
innocuous little historian, Micaela’s man. Mamelon is rather 
fond of him, though Siegmund 
can’t see why. Nor does Siegmund 
understand how Quevedo manages 
to cope with that tempestuous 
woman Micaela. 
Mine not to reason why . 
The sight of Quevedo reminds 
him that he must visit Micaela 
again soon. Also that he has work 
for Jason. 
“Hello, Siegmund,” Jason says, 
not meeting his eyes. Getting off 
the platform, looking for his scattered clothes. Mamelon winks at 
her husband. Siegmund blows her 
a kiss. 
He says, “Before you go, Jason. 
I was going to call you tomorrow, 
but this’ll do. A project. Historical 
research.” 
Quevedo looks eager to get out 
of the Kluver apartment. 
Siegmund continues, “Nissim 
Shawke is preparing a response to 
a petition from Chicago concerning possible abandonment of sexratio regulations. He wants me to 
get together some background on 
how it was in the early days of 
ratio determination, when people 
were picking their children’s sexes 
without regard to what anyone 
else was doing. Since your specialty is the twentieth century, I wondered if you could — ” 
“Yes, certainly. Tomorrow, first 
thing. Call me.” Quevedo edges 
doorward. Eager to flee. 
Siegmund says, “What I need is 
some fairly detailed documentation covering first the medieval 
period of random births, what the 
sex distribution was, you see, and 
then going into the early period of 
control. While you’re getting that 
I’ll talk to Mattern, I guess, get 
some sociocomputation on the political implications of — ” 
“It’s so late, Siegmund,” Mamelon complains. “Jason said you 
can talk to him about it in the 
morning.” 
Quevedo nods. Afraid to walk 
out while Siegmund is speaking, 
yet obviously unwilling to stay. 
Siegmund realizes he is being too 
diligent again. Change the image, 
change the image; business can 
wait. 
“All right,” he says. “God bless, 
Jason, ni call you tomorrow.” 
Grateful, Quevedo escapes and 
Siegmund lies down beside his 
wife. 
She says, “Couldn’t you see he 
wanted to run? He’s so hideously 
shy.” 
“Poor Jason,” Siegmund says. 
Stroking Mamelon’s sleek flank. 
“Where did you go tonight?” 
“Rhea.” 
“Interesting?” 
“Very. In unexpected ways. She 
was telling me that I’m too earnest, that I have to try to be more 
relaxed.” 
“She’s wise,” Mamelon says. 
“Do you agree with her?” 
“1 suppose so.” He dims the 
lights. “Meet frivolity with frivolity, that’s the secret. Take my 
work casually. I’ll try. I’ll try. But 
I can’t help getting involved in 
what I do. This petition from Chicago, for example. Of course we 
can’t allow free choice of children’s 
sexes! The consequences would 
be—” 
“Siegmund.” She takes his 
hand. “I’d rather not hear all that 
now. I need you. Rhea didn’t use 
you all up, did she? Because Jason 
certainly wasn’t much good tonight.” 
“The vigor of youth remains. I 
hope.” Yes. He can manage it. He 
kisses Mamelon. “I love you,” he 
whispers. My wife. My only true. 
I must remember to talk to Mattern in the morning. And Quevedo. 
Get the report on Shawke’s desk 
by the afternoon, anyway. If only 
WE ARE WELL ORGANIZED 
Shawke had a desk. Statistics, 
quotations, footnotes. Siegmund 
visualizes every detail of it. 
II 
S IEGMUND ascends to the 
975th floor. Most of the key administrators have their offices here 
— Shawke, Freehouse, Holston, 
Donnelly, Stevis. Siegmund carries the Chicago cube and his draft 
of Shawke’s reply, loaded with 
quotes and data supplied by 
Charles Mattern and Jason Quevedo. He pauses in the hallway. So 
peaceful here, so opulent; no littles 
barging past you, no crowds of 
working folk. Some day mine. He 
sees a vision of a sumptuous suite 
on one of Louisville’s residential 
levels, three or even four rooms, 
Mamelon reigning like a queen 
over it all; Kipling Freehouse and 
Monroe Stevis dropping by with 
their wives for dinner; an occasional awed visitor coming up from 
Chicago or Shanghai, an old 
friend; power and comfort, responsibility and luxury. Yes. 
“Siegmund?” A voice from an 
overhead speaker. “In here. We’re 
in Kipling’s place.” Shawke’s 
voice. They have picked him up on 
the scanners. Instantly he rearranges his face, knowing that it 
must have worn a vacuous, dreaming look. All business now. Angry 
with himself for forgetting that 
they might have been watching. He 
turns left and presents himself outside the office of Kipling Freehouse. The door slides back. 
A grand curving room lined with 
windows. The glittering face of 
Urbmon 117 revealed outside, ta
48 
pering stunningly to its landingstage summit. Siegmund is startled 
by the number of top-rank people 
gathered here. Their potent faces 
dazzle him. Kipling Freehouse, the 
head of the data-projection secretariat, a big plump-cheeked man 
with shaggy eyebrows. Nissim 
Shawke. The suave, frosty Lewis 
Holston, dressed as always in incandescently elegant costume. Wry 
little Monroe Stevis. Donnelly. 
Kinsella. Vaughan. A sea of greatness. Everyone who counts is here, 
except only a few; a flippo with a 
psych-bomb, loose in this room, 
could cripple the urbmon’s government. What terrible crisis has 
brought them together like this. 
Frozen in awe, Siegmund can barely manage to step forward. A cherub among the archangels. Stumbling into the making of history. 
Perhaps they want him here, as if 
unwilling to take whatever step it 
is that they’re considering without 
a representative of the coming generation of leaders to give his ap: 
proval. Siegmund is dizzyingly 
flattered by his own interpretation. 
I will be part of it. Whatever it is. 
His self-importance expands and 
the glare of their aura diminishes, 
and he moves in something close 
to a swagger as he approaches 
them. Then he realizes that there 
are some others present who might 
not be thought to belong at any 
high-powered policy session. Rhea 
Freehouse? Paolo, her indolent 
husband? And these girls, no more 
than fifteen or sixteen, in gossamer-webs or even less: mistresses 
of the great ones, handmaidens. 
Everyone knows that Louisville 
administrators keep extra girls. 
But here? Now? Giggling on the 
brink of history? Nissim Shawke 
salutes Siegmund without rising 
and says, “Join the party. You 
name the groover, we’ve probably 
got some. Tingle, mindblot, millispans, multiplexers, anything.” 
Party? Party? 
“I’ve got the sex-ratio report 
here. Historical data — the sociocomputator — ” 
“Crot that, Siegmund. Don’t 
spoil the fun.” 
Fun? 
Rhea comes toward him. Lurching, blurred, obviously grooving. 
Yet her keen intelligence showing 
through the haze of druggedness. 
“You forgot what 1 told you. 
Loosen up, Siegmund.” Whispering. Kisses the tip of his nose. 
Takes his report from him, puts it 
on Freehouse’s desk. Draws her 
hands across his cheeks; fingers 
wet. Wouldn’t be surprised if she’s 
leaving stains on me. Wine. Blood. 
Anything. Rhea says, “Happy Somatic Fulfillment Day. We’re celebrating. You can have me, if you 
like, or one of the girls, or Paolo, 
or anybody else you want.” She 
giggles. “My father, too. Have 
you ever dreamed of topping Nissim Shawke? Just don’t be a spoiler.” 
“I came up here because I had 
to give an important document to 
your father and — ” 
“Oh, shove it up the access nexus,” Rhea says and turns away 
from him, her disgust unhidden. 
Somatic Fulfillment Day. He 
had forgotten. The festival will 
start in a few hours; he should be 
with Mamelon. But he is here. 
Shall he leave? They are looking at 
WE ARE WELL ORGANIZED 
him. A place to hide. Sink into the 
undulating psychosensitive carpet. 
Don’t spoil the fun. His mind is 
still full of the business of the 
morning. Whereas the random, or 
purely biological, determination of 
the sex of unborn infants normally 
results by expectable statistical 
distribution in a relatively symmetrical division of Removal of 
the element of chance introduces 
the danger that. It was the experience of the former city of Tokyo, 
between 1987 and 1996, that the 
incidence of birth of female offspring declined by a factor of almost. Risks are not counterbalanced by. Therefore it is recommended that. The party, he sees, 
looking more closely, is essentially an orgy. He has been to orgies 
before, but not with people of this 
level. Fumes rising. The nakedness 
of Monroe Stevis. A huddled heap 
of fleshy girls. 
“Come on,” Kipling Freehouse 
bellows, “enjoy yourself, Siegmund! Pick a girl, any girl!” 
Laughter. A wanton child pushes 
a capsule into his hand. He is 
trembling and it drops. Seized and 
gobbled by one of the other girls. 
People are still coming in. Dignified, elegant Lewis Holston has a 
girl on each knee. And one kneeling before him. 
“Nothing, Siegmund?” Nissim 
Shawke asks. “You won’t have a 
thingl Poor Siegmund. If you’re 
going to live in Louisville, you’ve 
got to know how to play as well as 
to work.” 
Judging him. Testing his compatibility: will he fit in with the 
elite, or must he be relegated to 
the ranks of the drudges, the mid
49 
dle-level bureaucracy? Siegmund 
sees himself demoted to Rome. 
His ambitions take over. If knowing how to play is the criterion for 
admission, he’ll play. Grins. 
“I’d like some tingle,” he says. 
Stick to what you know you can 
handle. 
“Tingle, coming up.” 
H e makes the effort. A golden-haired nymph offers him the 
tingle bowl; he gulps, pinches her, 
gulps again. The sparkling fluid 
popping in his throat. A third gulp. 
Swill it down; you aren’t paying! 
They cheer him. Rhea nods approval. Clothes are coming off 
around the room. The amusements 
of the masters. There must be fifty 
people in here now. A clap on the 
back. Kipling Freehouse. Shouting, deafeningly hearty: “You’re 
all right, boy! Worried about you, 
you know! So serious, so dedicated! Not bad virtues to have, 
eh, but there’s got to be more, you 
follow? A playful spirit. Eh? Eh?” 
“Yes, sir. I know what you 
mean, sir.” 
Siegmund dives into the heap. 
Musky womansmells. A fountain 
of sensation. Someone pops something into his mouth. He swallows, 
and moments later feels the back 
of his skull lift. Laughter. He is 
being kissed. Forced down against 
the carpet by his assailant. Rhea? 
Yes. Music blaring from above. 
In the tangle he discovers himself 
sharing a girl with Nissim Shawke. 
A cold wink from him; an icy grin. 
Shawke testing his capacity for 
pleasure. Everyone watching him, 
seeing if he’s decadent enough to 
deserve promotion to their midst. 
Let yourself go! Let everything go! 
Urgently he compels himself to 
revel. Much depends on this. Below him 974 wondrous floors of 
urbmon and if he wants to stay up 
here he must know how to play. 
Disillusioned that the administrators are like this. So common, so 
vulgar, the cheap hedonism of a 
ruling class. They could be Florentine dukes, Parisian grandees, 
Borgias, drunken boyars. Unable 
to accept this image of them, Siegmund constructs a fantasy: they 
have staged this revel solely to test 
his character, to determine whether he is indeed merely a dreary 
drudge or if he has the breadth of 
spirit a Louisville man needs. Folly 
to think they spend their priceless 
time swilling and topping like this; 
but they are flexible, they can enjoy life, they turn from work to 
play with equal gusto. And if he 
wants to live among them he must 
demonstrate equal many-sidedness. 
He will. He will. 
His furry brain swirls with conflicting chemical messages. 
“Let’s sing!” he yells desperately. “Everybody sing!” Bellowing: 
If you come to me by the 
dark of night 
With your blessman all aglow 
A nd you slip down beside me 
A nd try to get inside me — 
They sing with him. He cannot 
hear his own voice. Dark eyes 
pear into his. “God bless,” a long 
rippling lass murmurs. “You’re 
cute. The famous Siegmund Kluver.” She belches tingle bubbles. 
“We’ve met before, haven’t 
we?” 
“Once, I think, in Nissim’s office. Scylla Shawke.” 
The great man’s wife. Startling 
in her beauty. Young. Young. No 
more than twenty-five. He has 
heard a rumor that the first Mrs. 
Shawke, Rhea’s mother, went 
down the chute, flippo. Some day 
he must check on the truth of that. 
Scylla Shawke wriggles close to 
him. Her soft black hair dangling 
in his face. He is almost paralyzed 
with fear. The consequences; can 
this be going too far? Recklessly 
he grabs her and plunges his hand 
into her tunic. She cooperates. Full 
warm breasts. Soft moist lips. Can 
he fail this test by an excess of 
shamelessness? Never mind. Never 
mind. Happy Somatic Fulfillment 
Day! Her body grinds against his, 
and he realizes, in shock, that it 
would be no problem to top her 
right now, here, in this heaving 
mass of high-level humanity on the 
floor of Kipling Freehouse’s 
sprawling office. Too far, too fast. 
He slides free of her grasp. Catching the single flicker of disappointment and reproach in her eyes at 
his withdrawal. Rolls over; Rhea. 
“Why didn’t you?” she whispers. 
And Siegmund says, “I couldn’t,” 
just before another girl, straddling 
him, kneels and pours something 
sweet and sticky into his mouth. 
He whirls within his skull. “It was 
a mistake,” Rhea tells him. “She 
was being set up for you.” Her 
words fracture and the pieces rebound, soaring high and drifting 
about the room. Something 
strange has happened to the lights; 
everything has become prismatic, 
and from all plane surfaces an 
eerie radiance is streaming. Sieg
mund crawls through the tumult, 
searching for Scylla Shawke. Instead he finds Nissim. 
“I’d like to discuss the business 
of the Chicago sex-ratio petition 
with you now,” the administrator 
tells him. 
W HEN Siegmund returns to his 
apartment hours later, he finds 
Mamelon pacing grimly about. 
“Where have you been?” she demands. “Somatic Fulfillment 
Day’s almost over. I’ve called the 
access nexus, I’ve had tracers all 
over the building. I’ve — ” 
“I was in Louisville,” Siegmund 
says. “Kipling Freehouse had a 
party.” Stumbles past her. Drops 
face down on the sleeping platform. First come the dry sobs, 
then the tears, and by the time they 
stop flowing Somatic Fulfillment 
Day mightjust as well be over. 
T his is the bottom. Siegmund 
Kluver prowls uneasily among 
the generators. The weight of the 
building presses crushingly on him. 
The whining song of the turbines 
troubles him. He feels disoriented, 
a wanderer in the depths. How 
huge this room is: an immense 
box far below the ground, so big 
that the globes of light in its ceiling 
are barely able to illuminate the 
distant concrete floor. Siegmund 
creeps along a catwalk midway between floor and ceiling. Palatial 
Louisville three kilometers above 
his head. Carpets and draperies, 
inlays of rare woods, the trappings 
of power, very far away now. He 
hadn’t meant to come here, not 
this far down. Warsaw was his intended destination tonight. But 
WE ARE WELL ORGANIZED 
somehow first here. Stalling for 
time. Siegmund is frightened. 
Searching for an excuse not to do 
it. If they only knew. The cowardice within. UnSiegmundlike. 
He rubs his hands along the catwalk railing. Cold metal, shaky 
fingers. A constant throbbing 
boom running through the building 
here. He is not far from the terminus of the chutes that convey 
solid wastes to the power plant: 
discards of all kinds, old clothes. 
used data cubes, wrappers and 
packages, the bodies of the dead, 
occasionally the bodies of the living, coursing down the spiraling 
slideways and tumbling into the 
compactors. And moving thence 
on gliding belts into the combustion chambers. The liberation of 
heat for electrical generation: 
waste not, want not. The electrical 
load is heavy at this hour. Every 
apartment is lit. Siegmund closes 
his eyes and receives a vision of 
Urban Monad 116’s 886,000 people linked by an enormous tangle 
of wiring. A giant human switchboard. 
And I am no longer plugged into it. Why am I no longer plugged 
into it? What has happened to me? 
What is happening to me? What is 
about to happen to me? 
Sluggishly he moves along the 
catwalk and passes out of the generating room. Entering a sleekwalled tunnel; behind its glossy 
paneled sides, he knows, run the 
transmission lines along which 
power flows toward the debooster 
circuitry. And here the reprocessing plant — urine pipes, fecal reconversion chambers. All the wondrous stuff by which the urbmon 
lives. No other human being in 
sight. The heavy weight of the solitude. Siegmund shivers. He must 
go up to Warsaw soon. Yet he 
continues to drift like a touring 
schoolchild through the utility cen
53 
somehow first here. Stalling for 
time. Siegmund is frightened. 
Searching for an excuse not to do 
it. If they only knew. The cowardice within. UnSiegmundlike. 
He rubs his hands along the catwalk railing. Cold metal, shaky 
fingers. A constant throbbing 
boom running through the building 
here. He is not far from the terminus of the chutes that convey 
solid wastes to the power plant: 
discards of all kinds, old clothes. 
used data cubes, wrappers and 
packages, the bodies of the dead, 
occasionally the bodies of the living, coursing down the spiraling 
slideways and tumbling into the 
compactors. And moving thence 
on gliding belts into the combustion chambers. The liberation of 
heat for electrical generation: 
waste not, want not. The electrical 
load is heavy at this hour. Every 
apartment is lit. Siegmund closes 
his eyes and receives a vision of 
Urban Monad 116’s 886,000 people linked by an enormous tangle 
of wiring. A giant human switchboard. 
And I am no longer plugged into it. Why am I no longer plugged 
into it? What has happened to me? 
What is happening to me? What is 
about to happen to me? 
Sluggishly he moves along the 
catwalk and passes out of the generating room. Entering a sleekwalled tunnel; behind its glossy 
paneled sides, he knows, run the 
transmission lines along which 
power flows toward the debooster 
circuitry. And here the reprocessing plant — urine pipes, fecal reconversion chambers. All the wondrous stuff by which the urbmon 
lives. No other human being in 
sight. The heavy weight of the solitude. Siegmund shivers. He must 
go up to Warsaw soon. Yet he 
continues to drift like a touring 
schoolchild through the utility cen
ter at the urbmon’s lowest level. 
Hiding here from himself. The 
cold eyes of electronic scanners 
staring at him out of hundreds of 
shielded openings in floors and 
walls and ceilings. 
.1 am Siegmund Kluver of 
Shanghai, 787th floor. I am fifteen years and five months old. My 
wife’s name is Mamelon, my son 
is Janus, my daughter is Persephone. I am assigned to work duty 
as a consultant in Louisville Access Nexus and within the next 
twelve months I will undoubtedly 
receive notice of my promotion to 
the highest administrative levels of 
this urban monad. Therefore shall 
I rejoice. I am Siegmund Kluver 
of Shanghai, 787th floor. 
He bows to the scanners. All 
hail. All hail. The future leader. 
Passing his hand nervously through 
his coarse, bushy hair. For an hour 
now he has wandered about down 
here. You should go up. What are 
you afraid of? To Warsaw. To 
Warsaw. 
He hears the voice of Rhea 
Shawke Freehouse, coming as 
though from a recording mounted 
at the core of his brain. If I were 
you, Siegmund. I'd relax and try to 
enjoy myself more. Don’t worry 
about what people think, or seem 
to think, about you. Soak up human nature, work at being more 
human yourself. Go around the 
building; do some nightwalking 
in Warsaw or Prague, maybe. See 
how simpler people live. Shrewd 
words. Wise woman. Why be 
afraid? Go up. Go up. It’s getting 
late. 
Standing outside a NO ADMITTANCE hatch leading to one 
of the computer ganglia, Siegmund spends several minutes 
studying the tremor of his right 
hand. Then he hurries to the liftshaft and tells it to take him to the 
60th floor. The middle of Warsaw. 
N arrow corridors, here. 
Many doors. A compressed 
quality to the atmosphere. This is 
a city of extraordinarily high population density, not only because 
the inhabitants are so blessworthy 
in their fecundity, but also because 
much of the city’s area is given 
over to industrial plants. Even 
though the building is much broader here than in its upper reaches, 
the citizens of Warsaw are pushed 
together into a relatively small 
residential zone. Here are the machines that stamp out machines. 
Dies, lathes, templates, reciprocators, positioners, fabrication 
plaques. Much of the work is computerized and automated, but there 
is plenty for human beings to do: 
feeding the conveyors, guiding and 
positioning, driving the fork-lifts, 
tagging the finished work for its 
destination. Late last year Siegmund pointed out to Nissim 
Shawke and Kipling Freehouse 
that nearly everything being done 
by human labor in the industrial 
levels could be handled by machines; instead of employing thousands of people in Warsaw, Prague, and Birmingham, they could 
set up a totally automated output 
program, with a few supervisors to 
keep watch over the inventory 
homeostasis, and a few maintenance men to handle emergencies, 
such as repairing the repair-machines. Shawke gave him a patron
izing smile. “But if they had no 
work, what would all those poor 
people do with their lives?” he 
asked. “Do you think we can turn 
them into poets, Siegmund? Professors of urban history? We deliberately devise labor for them, 
don’t you see?” Siegmund embarrassed by his naivete. A rare 
failure, for him, of insight into the 
methodology' of government. He 
still feels uncomfortable about 
that conversation. In an ideal commonwealth, he believes, every person should have meaningful work 
to do. He wishes the urban monad 
to be an ideal commonwealth. But 
yet certain practical considerations 
of human limitations interpose 
themselves. But yet. But yet. The 
makework in Warsaw is a blot on 
the theory. 
Pick a door. Say, 6021. 6023. 
6025. Strange to see the apartments bearing four-digit numbers. 
6027. 6029. Siegmund puts his 
hand to the knob. Hesitates. A 
rush of sudden timidity. Imagining, within, a brawny, hairy, growling, sullen working-class husband, 
a shapeless, weary working-class 
wife. And he must intrude on their 
intimacies. Their resentful glare 
upon seeing his upper-level clothing. What is this Shanghai dandy 
doing here? Doesn’t he have any 
regard for decency? And so forth. 
And so forth. Siegmund almost 
flees. Then he takes hold of himself. They dare not refuse. They 
dare not be sullen. He opens the 
door. 
The room is dark. Only the 
nightglow is on; his eyes adjust 
and he sees a couple on the sleeping platform and five or six littles 
on. cots. He approaches the platform. Stands over the sleepers. His 
imagined portrait of the room’s 
occupants altogether inaccurate. 
They could be any young married 
pair of Shanghai, Chicago, Edinburgh. Strip away the clothes, let 
sleep eradicate the facial expressions denoting position in the social matrix, and distinctions of 
class and city perhaps disappear. 
The naked sleepers are only a few 
years older than Siegmund — he 
maybe nineteen, she possibly eighteen. The man slender, narrow 
shoulders, unspectacular muscles. 
The woman trim, standard, agreeable body, soft yellow hair. Siegmund lightly touches her shoulder. 
A ridge of bone lying close beneath the skin. Blue eyes flickering open. Fear giving way to understanding: oh, a nightwalker. 
And understanding giving way to 
confusion: the nightwalker wears 
upper-building clothes. Etiquette 
demands an introduction. “Siegmund Kluver,” he says. “Shanghai.” 
The girl’s tongue passes hurriedly over her lips. “Shanghai? Really?” The husband awakes. Blinking, puzzled. “Shanghai?” he says. 
“What for, down here, huh?” Not 
hostile, just wondering. Siegmund 
shrugs, as if to say a whim, a fancy. The husband gets off the platform. Siegmund assures him that 
it isn’t necessary for him to leave, 
that it’ll be quite all right to have 
him here, but that kind of thing 
evidently isn’t practiced in Warsaw: the arrival of the nightwalker 
is the signal for the husband to 
clear out. Loose cotton wrap already over his pale, almost hair
WE ARE WELL ORGANIZED 
less body. A nervous smile! see 
you later, love. And out. Siegmund alone with the woman. “I 
never met anybody from Shanghai 
before,” she says. 
“You haven’t told me your 
name.” 
“Ellen.” 
He lies down beside her. Stroking her smooth skin. Rhea’s words 
echo. Soak up human nature. See 
how simpler people live. He is so 
tightly drawn. His flesh mysteriously invaded by a spreading network of fine golden wires. Penetrating the lobes of his brain. 
“What does your husband do, Ellen?” 
“He’s on fork-lift now. Used to 
be a cabler, but he got hurt sheathing. The whiplash.” 
“He works hard, doesn’t he?” 
“The sector boss says he’s one 
of the best. I think he’s okay too.” 
A sniggering little giggle. “What 
floors are Shanghai, anyway? 
That’s someplace around 700, isn’t 
it?” 
“761 to 800.” Caressing her. 
Her body quivers — fear or desire? 
Shyly her hand goes to his clothing. Maybe just eager to get him 
in and out and gone. The frightening stranger from the upper levels. 
Or else not accustomed to foreplay. A different milieu. He’d rather talk a while first. See how simpler people live. He’s here to learn, 
not merely to top. Looking 
around the room: the furnishings 
drab and crude, no grace, no style. 
Yet designed by the same craftsmen who furnish Louisville and 
Toledo. Obviously aiming for a 
lower taste. A prevailing film of 
grayness over everything. Even 
the girl. / could be with Micaela 
Quevedo now. I could be with 
Principessa. Or with. Or perhaps 
with. But I am here. He searches 
for probing questions to ask. To 
bring out the essential humanity 
of this obscure person over whom 
he one day will help to rule. Do 
you read much? What are your 
favorite screen shows? What sort 
of foods do you like? Are you doing what you can to help your littles rise in the building? What do 
you think of the people down in 
Reykjavik? And those in Prague? 
But he says nothing. What’s the 
use? What can he learn? Impassable barriers between person and 
person. Touching her here and here 
and here. Her fingers on him. 
“You don’t like me,” she says 
sadly. 
He wonders how often she uses 
the cleanser. “Maybe I’m a little 
tired,” he says. “So busy these 
days.” Pressing his body against 
hers. The warmth of her possibly 
will resurrect him. Her eyes staring into his. Blue lenses over inner 
emptiness. He kisses the hollow of 
her throat. “Hey, that tickles!” 
she says, wriggling. He trails his 
fingers down her belly. She is 
ready. But he isn’t. Can’t. “Is 
there anything special?” she asks. 
“If it isn’t too complicated maybe 
I could.” He shakes his head. He 
isn’t interested in whips and chains 
and thongs. Just the usual. But he 
can’t. His fatigue only a pretense; 
what cripples him is his sense of 
isolation. Alone among 886,000 
people. And I cant reach her. The 
Shanghai swell, incapable, unmanned. Now she is no longer 
afraid of him and not very sym
pathetic. She takes his failure as a 
sign of his contempt for her. He 
wants to tell her how many hundreds of women he has topped in 
Shanghai and Chicago, and even 
Toledo. Where he is regarded as 
devilishly virile. She squirms indignantly. He releases her. Rises, 
adjusts himself. Face blazing. As 
he goes to the door he looks back. 
She is sitting up wantonly, looking 
mockery at him. Makes a gesture 
with three fingers, no doubt a scabrous obscenity here. He says, “I 
just want you to know. The name 
I gave you when I came in — it isn’t 
mine. That’s not me at all.” And 
goes hastily out. So much for 
soaking up human nature. So 
much for Warsaw. 
H e takes the liftshaft randomly to 118, Prague, gets 
out, walks halfway around the 
building without entering any 
apartment or speaking to anyone 
he meets; gets into a different liftshaft; goes up to 173 in Pittsburgh; 
stands for a while in a corridor, listening to the pounding of the blood 
in the capillaries of his temples. 
Then he steps into a somatic fulfillment hall. Even at this late hour 
there are people making use of its 
facilities: a dozen or so in the 
whirlpool tumbler, five or six 
prancing on the treadmill, a few 
couples. His Shanghai clothes earn 
him some curious stares but no 
one approaches him. Shoulders 
slumping, he goes slowly out of 
the somatic fulfillment hall. Now 
he takes to the stairs, plodding up 
the great coil that runs the whole 
thousand-floor height of Urban 
Monad 116. He looks up the 
mighty helix and sees the levels 
stretching toward infinity, with 
banks of lights glittering above him 
to denote each landing. Birmingham, San Francisco, Colombo, 
Madrid. He grasps the rail and 
looks down. Eyes spiraling along 
the descending path. Prague, Warsaw, Reykjavik. A dizzying vortex; 
a monstrous well through which 
the light of a million globes drifts 
from above like snowflakes. He 
clambers doggedly up the myriad 
steps. Hypnotized by his own mechanical movements. Before he realizes it, he has climbed forty 
floors. Sweat drenches him and the 
muscles of his calves are bunching 
and knotting. He yanks open the 
doorway and lurches out into the 
main corridor. This is the 213th 
floor. Birmingham. Two men with 
the smirking look of nightwalkers 
on their way home stop him and 
offer him some kind of groover, a 
small translucent capsule containing a dark, oily orange fluid. Siegmund accepts the capsule without 
a word and swallows it unquestioningly. They tap his biceps in a show 
of good fellowship and go on their 
way. Almost at once he feels nausea. Then blurred red and blue 
lights sway before his eyes. He 
wonders dimly what they have given him. He waits for the ecstasy. 
He waits. He waits. 
T he next thing he knows, the 
thin light of dawn is in his eyes 
and he is sitting in an unfamiliar 
room, sprawled out in a web of oscillating, twanging metal mesh. A 
tall young man with long golden 
hair stands over him and Siegmund 
can hear his own voice saying. 
WE ARE WELLORGANIZED 
“Now I know why they go flippo. 
One day it just gets to be too 
much for you. The people right up 
against your skin. You can feel 
them. And — ” 
“Easy. Back it up a little. 
You’re overloading.” 
“My head is about to explode.” 
Siegmund sees an attractive redhaired woman moving around in 
the far corner of the room. He is 
having difficulty focusing his eyes. 
“I’m not sure I know where I 
am,” he says. 
“Three hundred seventieth. 
That’s San Francisco. You’re really sectioned off, aren’t you?” 
“My head. As if it needs to be 
pumped out.” 
“I’m Dillon Chrimes. My wife, 
Electra. She found you wandering 
in the halls.” His host’s friendly 
face smiling into his. Strange blue 
eyes, like plaques of polished 
stone. “About the building,” 
Chrimes says. “You know, one 
night not too long ago 1 took a 
multiplexer and I became the 
whole crotting building. And really 
flew on it. You know, seeing it as 
one big organism, a mosaic of 
thousands of minds. Beautiful. 
Until I started to come down — 
and on the downside it struck me 
as just an awful hideous beehive of 
a place. You lose your perspective 
when you mess your mind with 
chemicals. But then you regain it.” 
“I can’t regain it.” 
“What’s the good of hating the 
building? I mean, the urbmon’s a 
real solution to real problems, 
isn’t it?” 
“I know.” 
“And most of the time it works. 
So it’s a sterilizer to waste your 
time hating it, do you understand?” 
“I don’t hate it,” Siegmund 
says. “I’ve always admired the theory of verticality in urban thrust. 
My specialty is urbmon administration. Was. Is. But suddenly everything’s all wrong, and I don’t 
know where the wrongness is. In 
me or in the whole system? And 
maybe not so suddenly.” 
“There’s no real alternative to 
the urbmon,” Dillon Chrimes says. 
“I mean, you can jump down the 
chute, I guess, or run off to the 
communes, but those aren’t sensible alternatives. So we stay here. 
And groove on Jhe richness of it 
all. You must just have been working too hard. Look, you want 
something cold to drink?” 
“Please. Yes,” Siegmund says. 
The red-haired woman puts a 
flask in his hand. As she leans toward him, her breasts sway out, 
tolling like fleshy bells. She is quite 
beautiful. A tiny spurt of hormones within him. Reminding him 
of how this night had begun. 
Nightwalking in Warsaw. A girl. 
He has forgotten her name. His 
failure. 
Dillon Chrimes says, “The 
screen’s been broadcasting an 
alarm for Siegmund Kluver of 
Shanghai. Tracers out for him 
since 0^400. Is that you? 
Siegmund nods. 
“I know your wife. Mamelon, 
right?” Chrimes shoots a glance at 
his own wife. As if there is a jealousy problem here. In a lower tone 
he says to Siegmund, “Once when 
I was doing a performance in 
Shanghai I met her on a nightwalk. 
Lovely. That cool grace of hers. A 
statue full of passion. Probably 
very worried about you right now, 
Siegmund.” 
“Performance?” 
“I play the vibrastar in one of 
the cosmos groups.” Chrimes 
makes ecstatic keyboard gestures 
with his fingers. “You’ve probably 
seen me. How about letting me put 
through a call to your wife, all 
right?” 
Siegmund says, “A purely personal thing. A sense of coming 
apart. Or breaking loose from my 
roots.” 
“What?” 
“A kind of rootlessness. As 
though not belonging in Shanghai, 
not belonging in Louisville, not belonging in Warsaw, not belonging 
anywhere. Just a cluster of ambitions and inhibitions, no real self. 
And I’m lost. And I’m lost inside.” 
“Inside what?” 
“Inside myself. Inside the building. A sense of coming apart. 
Leaving pieces of me all over the 
place. Films of self peeling away, 
drifting off.” Siegmund realizes 
that Electra Chrimes is staring at 
him. Appalled. He struggles for 
self-control. Sees himself stripped 
down to the bone. Spinal column 
exposed, the comb of vertebrae, 
the oddly angular cranium. Siegmund. Siegmund. Dillon Chrimes’ 
earnest, troubled face. A handsome apartment. Polymirrors, psychedelic tapestries. Thesehappy 
people. Fulfilled in their art. 
Plugged into the switchboard. 
“Lost,” Siegmund says. 
“Transfer to San Francisco,” 
Chrimes suggests. “We don’t push 
hard here. We can make room. 
Maybe you’ll discover artistic talent. You could write programs for 
the screen shows, maybe. Or — ” 
Siegmund laughs harshly. His 
throat is furry. “I’ll write this show 
about the hungry rung-grabber 
who gets almost to the top and decides he doesn’t want it. I’ll — no, I 
won’t. I don’t mean any of this. 
It’s the groover talking out of my 
mouth. Those two slipped me a 
filther, that’s all. You’d better call 
Mamelon.” Getting to his feet. 
Trembling. A sensation of being at 
least ninety years old. He starts to 
fall. Chrimes and his wife catch 
him. His cheek against Elektra’s 
swaying breasts. Siegmund manages a smile. “It’s the groover 
talking out of my mouth,” he says 
again. “These damned drugs. 
These. Damned. Drugs.” 
W¥T’S a long dull story,” he tells 
AMamelon. “I got into a place 
where I didn’t want to be, and 
somehow I took a capsule without 
knowing what I was taking, and everything got confused after that. 
But I’m all right now. I’m all 
right.” 
HI 
A fter a day’s medical absence 
he returns to his desk in Louisville Access Nexus. A pile of memoranda awaits him. Much need of 
his services by the great men of the 
administrative class. Nissim 
Shawke wants him to do a followup reply to the petitioners from 
Chicago on that business of asking 
for freedom to determine the sex 
of one’s offspring. Kipling Freehouse requests an intuitive interpretation of certain figures in next 
quarter’s production-balance esti
WE ARE WELL ORGANIZED 
mates. Monroe Stevis is after a 
double flow-chart showing attendance at sonic centers plotted 
against visits to blessmen and consolers: a psychological profile of 
the populations of six cities. And 
so on. Picking his brains. How 
blessworthy to be useful. How 
wearying to be used. 
He does his best, laboring under 
his handicap. A sense of coming 
apart. A dislocation of the soul. 
M idnight, sleep win not 
come. He lies beside Mamelon, tossing. His nerves rustle in 
the darkness. She knows he is 
awake. Her soothing hand roams 
him. “Can’t you relax?” she asks. 
“It gets harder.” 
“Would you like some tingle? 
Or even mindblot.” 
.“No. Nothing.” 
“Go nightwalking then,” she 
suggests. “Burn up some of that 
energy. You’re all wired up, Siegmund.” 
Held together by golden thread. 
Coming apart. Coming apart. 
Go up to Toledo, maybe? Seek 
consolation in Rhea’s arms. She 
always is helpful. Or even nightwalk Louisville. Drop in on Nissim 
Shawke’s wife Scylla. The audacity of it. But they were trying to 
push me onto her at that party. 
Somatic Fulfillment Day. Seeing 
whether I had the blessmanship to 
deserve promotion to Louisville. 
Siegmund knows he failed a test 
that day. But maybe it is not too 
late to undo that. He will go to 
Scylla. Even if Nissim’s there. See, 
I have the requisite amorality! See, 
1 defy all bounds. Why should a 
Louisville wife not be accessible to 
me? We all live under the same 
code of law, regardless of the inhibitions of custom that we have 
lately imposed upon ourselves. So 
he will say if he finds Nissim. And 
Nissim will applaud his bravado. 
“Yes,” he tells Mamelon. “I 
think I’ll nightwalk.” 
But he remains on the sleeping 
platform. Some minutes go by. A 
failure of impulse. He does not 
want to go; he pretends to be 
asleep, hoping Mamelon will doze. 
Some minutes more. Cautiously 
he opens one eye, slit- wide. Yes, 
she sleeps. How beautiful she is, 
how noble even while asleep. The 
fine bones, the pale skin, the jetblack hair. My Mamelon. My 
treasure. Lately he has felt little 
desire even for her. Boredom born 
of fatigue? Fatigue born of boredom? 
The door opens and Charles 
Mattern comes in. 
Siegmund watches the sociocomputator tiptoe toward the platform and silently undress. Mattern’s lips are tightly compressed, 
his nostrils flaring. Signs of yearning. Mattern hungers for Mamelon; something has been developing 
between them over the past two 
months, Siegmund suspects, something more than mere nightwalking. Siegmund hardly cares. Just 
so she is happy. Mattern’s harsh 
breathing loud in the room. He 
starts to awaken Mamelon. 
“Hello, Charles,” Siegmund 
says. 
Mattern, caught by surprise, 
flinches and laughs nervously. “I 
was trying not to wake you, Siegmund.” 
“I’ve been up. Watching you.” 
GALAXY 
“You might have said something, then. To save me all this 
stealthing around.” 
“I’m sorry. It didn’t occur to 
me.” 
Mamelon is awake now, too. 
Sitting up, bare to the waist. The 
whiteness of her skin illuminated 
by the faint glow of the nightlight. 
Smiling chastely at Mattern: the 
dutiful female citizen, ready to accept her nocturnal visitor. 
Siegmund says, “Charles, as 
long as you’re here, I can tell you 
that I’ve got an assignment to do 
that’ll involve working with you. 
For Stevis. He wants to see if people are spending more time than 
usual with blessmen and consolers, 
and less in sonic centers. A double 
flow-chart that — ” 
“It’s late, Siegmund.” Curtly. 
“Why don’t you tell me about it in 
the morning.” 
“Yes. All right. All right.” 
Flushing, Siegmund rises from the 
sleeping platform. He does not 
have to leave, even with a nightwalker here for Mamelon, but he 
does not want to stay. Like a Warsaw husband, granting a superfluous and unasked privacy to the 
other two. He hurriedly finds some 
clothing. Mattern reminds him 
that he’s free to remain. But no. 
Siegmund leaves, a little wildly. 
Almost running down the hall. I 
will go up to Louisville, to Scylla 
Shawke. However, instead of asking the liftshaft to take him to the 
level where the Shawkes live, he 
calls out a Shanghai floor, 799. 
Charles and Principessa Mattern 
live there. He does not dare risk 
attempting Scylla while he is in 
this jangled state. Failure could be 
costly. Principessa will do. A tigress, she is. A savage. Her sheer 
animal vigor may restore his wellbeing. She is the most passionate 
woman he knows, short of Mamelon. And a good age, ripe but not 
overripe. Siegmund halts outside 
Principessa’s door. It strikes him 
that it is somewhat bourgeois, 
something of a pre-urbmon thing, 
for him to be seeking the wife of 
the man who is now with his own 
wife. Nightwalking should be more 
random, less structured, merely a 
way of extending the range of one’s 
life-experiences. Nevertheless. He 
nudges the door open. Relieved and 
dismayed to hear sounds of ecstasy 
from within. Two people on the 
platform: he sees Jason Quevedo. 
Siegmund quickly ducks out. 
Alone in the corridor. Where to, 
now? The world is too complicated 
for him tonight. The obvious next 
destination is Quevedo’s apartment. For Micaela. But no doubt 
she will have a visitor too. Siegmund’s forehead begins to throb. 
He does not want to roam the urbmon endlessly. He wants only to 
go to sleep. Nightwalking suddenly 
seems an abomination to him: 
forced, unnatural, compulsive. The 
slavery of absolute freedom. At 
this moment thousands of men 
roam the titanic building. Each determined to do the blessworthy 
thing. Siegmund, scuffing at the 
floors, strolls along the corridor 
and halts by a window. Outside, a 
moonless night. The sky ablaze 
with stars. The neighboring urbmons seeming farther away than 
usual. Their windows bright, thousands of them. He wonders if it is 
possible to see a commune far to 
WE ARE WELL ORGANIZED 
the north. The crazy farmers. Micaela Quevedo’s brother Michael, 
the one who went flippo, supposedly visited a commune. At least so 
the story goes. Micaela still brooding about her brother’s fate. Down 
the chute with him as soon as he 
stuck his head back inside the urbmon. But of course a man like that 
can’t be permitted to resume his 
former life here. An obvious malcontent, spreading poisons of dissatisfaction and unblessworthiness. 
A hard thing for Micaela, though. 
Very close to her brother, she says. 
Her twin. Thinks he should have 
had a formal hearing in Louisville. 
He did, though. She won’t believe 
it, but he did. Siegmund remembers when the papers came 
through. Nissim Shawke issuing 
the decree: if this man ever returns 
to 116, dispose of him at once. 
Poor Micaela. Something unhealthy going on, maybe, between 
her and her brother. I might ask 
Jason. I might. 
Where shall I go now? 
He realizes that he has been 
standing by the window for more 
than an hour. He stumbles toward 
the stairs and jogs down twelve levels to his own. Mattern and Mamelon lie sleeping side by side. Siegmund drops his clothing and joins 
them on the platform. Coming 
apart. Dislocation. Finally he 
sleeps, too. 
T he solace of religion. Siegmund has gone to see a blessman. The chapel is on the 770th 
floor: a small room off a commercial arcade, decorated with fertility 
symbols and incrustations of captive light. Entering, he feels like an 
intruder. Never any religious impulses before. His mother’s grandfather was a Christer, but everyone 
in the family assumed it was because the old man had antiquarian 
instincts. The ancient religions 
have few followers, and even the 
cult of god’s blessing, which is officially supported by Louisville, 
can claim no more than a third of 
the building’s adult population, according to the last figures Siegmund has seen. Though perhaps 
things are changing lately. 
“God bless,’’ the blessman says, 
“what is your pain?’’ 
He is. plump, smooth-skinned, 
with a round complacent face and 
cheerily shining eyes. At least forty years old. What does he know 
of pain? 
“I have begun not to belong,” 
Siegmund says. “My future is unraveling. I am coming unplugged. 
Everything has lost its meaning 
and my soul is hollow.” 
“Ah. Angst. Anomie. Dissociation. Identity drain. Familiar complaints, my son. How old are 
you?” 
“Past fifteen.” 
“Career profile?” 
“Shanghai going on Louisville. 
Perhaps you know of me. Siegmund Kluver.” 
The blessman’s lips go taut. The 
eyes veil themselves. He toys with 
sacred emblems on his tunic’s collar. He has heard of Siegmund, 
yes. 
He says, “Are you fulfilled in 
your marriage?” 
“I have the most blessworthy 
wife imaginable.” 
“Littles?” 
“A boy and a girl. We will have 
GALAXY 
a second girl next year.” 
“Friends?” 
“Sufficient,” Siegmund says. 
“And yet this feeling of decomposition. Sometimes my skin itchy 
all over. Films of decay drifting 
through the building and wrapping 
themselves about me. A great restlessness. What’s happening to me?” 
“Sometimes,” the blessman 
says, “those of us who live in the 
urban monads experience what is 
called the crisis of spiritual confinement. The boundaries of our 
world, that is to say our building, 
seem too narrow. Our inner resources become inadequate. We 
are grievously disappointed in our 
relationships with those we have 
always loved and admired. The result of such a crisis is often violent: hence the flippo phenomenon. 
Others may actually leave the urbmon and seek a new life in the 
communes, which, of course, is a 
form of suicide, since we are incapable of adapting to that harsh 
environment. Now, those who neither go berserk nor separate themselves physically from the urbmon 
occasionally undertake an internal migration, drawing into their 
own souls and, in effect, contracting as a response to the impingement of adjacent individuals on 
their psychic space. Does this have 
any meaning for you?” As Siegmund nods doubtfully, the blessman goes smoothly on, saying, 
“Among the leaders of this building, the executive class, those who 
have been propelled upward by the^ 
blessworthy drive to serve their fellow men, this process is particularly painful, bringing about as it 
does a collapse of values and a loss 
of motivation. But it’s easily cured.” 
“Easily?” 
“I assure you.” 
“Cured? How?” 
“We will do it at once, and you 
will go out of here healthy and 
whole, Siegmund. The way to 
health is through kinship with god, 
you see, god being considered in 
our view the integrative force giving wholeness to the universe. And 
I will show you god.” 
“You will show me god,” Siegmund repeats, uncomprehending. 
“Yes. Yes.” The blessman, bustling around, is busy darkening the 
chapel, switching off lights and 
cutting in opaquers. From the 
floor sprouts a cup-shaped webseat into which Siegmund is gently 
nudged. Lying there, looking up. 
The chapel’s ceiling, he discovers, 
is a single broad screen. In its 
glassy green depths an image of the 
heavens appears. Stars strewn like 
sand. A billion billion points of 
light. Music issues from concealed 
speakers: the plashy plinks of a 
cosmos group. He makes out the 
magical sounds of a vibrastar, the 
dark twangs of a comet-harp, the 
wild lurches of an orbital diver. 
Then the whole group going at 
once. Perhaps Dillon Chrimes is 
playing. His friend of that dismal 
night. Overhead the depth of the 
perceptive field is deepening; Siegmund sees the orange glint of 
Mars, the pearly blaze of Jupiter. 
So god is a light-show plus a cosmos group? How shallow. How 
empty. 
The blessman, speaking over the 
music, says, “What you see is a 
direct relay from the thousandth 
floor. This is the sky over our urb
63 
WE ARE WELL ORGANIZED 
mon at our present moment. Look 
into the black cone of night. Accept the cool light of the stars. 
Open yourself to the immensity. 
What you see is god. What you 
see is god.” 
“Where?” 
“Everywhere. Immanent and allenduring.” 
“I don’t see.” 
The music is turned up. Siegmund now is surrounded by a cage 
of heavy sound. The astronomical 
scene takes on a greater intensity. 
The blessman directs Siegmund’s 
attention to this group of stars and 
to that, urging him to merge with 
the galaxy. The urbmon is not the 
universe, he murmurs. Beyond 
these shining walls lies an awesome 
vastness that is god. Let him take 
you into himself and heal you. 
Yield. Yield. Yield. But Siegmund 
cannot yield. He wonders if the 
blessman should have given him 
some sort of drug, a multiplexer 
of some kind that would make it 
easier for him to open himself to 
the universe. But the blessman 
scoffs. One can reach god without 
chemical assistance. Simply stare. 
Contemplate. Peer into infinity. 
Search for the divine pattern. Meditate on the forces in balance, the 
beauties of celestial mechanics. 
God is within and without us. 
Yield. Yield. Yield. “I still don’t 
feel it,” Siegmund says. “I’m 
locked up inside my own head.” A 
note of impatience enters the blessman’s tone. What's wrong with 
you, he seems to be saying. Why 
can't you? It's a perfectly good religious experience. But it is no use. 
After a half-hour Siegmund sits 
up, shaking his head. His eyes 
hurt from staring at the stars. He 
cannot make the mystical leap. He 
authorizes a credit transfer to the 
blessman’s account, thanks him, 
and goes out of the chapel. Perhaps god was somewhere else today. 
T he solace of the consoler. A 
purely secular therapist, relying 
heavily on metabolic adjustments. 
Siegmund is apprehensive about 
seeing him; he has always regarded 
those who have to go to a consoler 
as somehow defective, and it pains 
him to be joining that group. Yet 
he must end this inner turmoil. 
And Mamelon insists. The consoler he visits is surprisingly young, 
perhaps thirty-three, with a 
pinched, bleak face and frosty, ungenerous eyes. He knows the nature of Siegmund’s complaint almost before it is described to him. 
“And when you attended this party 
in Louisville,” he asks, “what effect did it have on you to learn that 
your idols weren’t quite the men 
you thought they were?” 
“It emptied me out,” Siegmund 
says. “My ideals, my values, my 
guiding images. To see them cavorting like that. Never having 
imagined they did. I think that’s 
where all the trouble started.” 
“No,” says the consoler, “that’s 
merely where the trouble surfaced. 
It was there before. In you, deep, 
waiting for something to push it 
up into view.” 
“How can I learn to cope with 
it?” 
“You can’t. You’ll have to be 
sent into therapy. I’m going to 
turn you over to the moral engi
GALAXY 
neers. You can use a reality adjustment.” 
H e is afraid of being changed. 
They will put him into a tank 
and let him drift there for days or 
weeks, while they cloud his mind 
with their mysterious substances 
and whisper things to him and massage his aching body and alter the 
imprinting of his brain. And he will 
come forth healthy and stable and 
different. Another person. All his 
Siegmundness lost along with his 
anguish. He remembers a girl 
named Aurea Holston, whose 
number came up in the lottery for 
the stocking of the new Urbmon 
158, and who did not want to go, 
and who was persuaded by the 
moral engineers that it would not 
be so bad to leave her native urbmon. And came forth from her 
tank docile and placid, a vegetable 
in place of a neurotic. Not for me, 
Siegmund thinks. 
It will be the end of his career, 
too. Louisville does not want men 
who have had crises. They will find 
some middle-rung post for him in 
Boston or Seattle, some tepid minor administrative job, and forget 
about him. A formerly promising 
young man. Full reports on reality 
adjustments are placed each week 
before Monroe Stevis. Stevis will 
tell Shawke and Freehouse. Have 
you heard about poor Siegmund? 
Two weeks in the tank. Some sort 
of breakdown. Yes, sad. Very sad. 
We’ll drop him, of course. 
No. 
What can he do? The consoler 
has already made up the adjustment request and filed it with one 
of the computer nodes. Sparkling 
WE ARE WELL ORGANIZED 
impulses of neural energy are traveling through the information system, bearing his name. Time is being cleared for him on the 780th 
floor, among the moral engineers. 
Soon his screen will tell him the 
hour ol his appointment. And if 
he does not go to them, they will 
come for him. The machines with 
soft rubbery pads on their arms, 
gathering him up, pushing him 
along. 
No. 
He tells Rhea of his predicament. Not even Mamelon knows 
yet, but Rhea. He can trust her. 
His best interests at heart. “Don’t 
go to the engineers,” she advises. 
“The order is already in.” 
“Have it countermanded.” 
He looks at her as though she 
has recommended demolition of 
the Chipitts urbmon constellation. 
“Pull it out of the computer,” 
she tells him. “Get one of the interface men to do it for you. Use 
your influence. Nobody’ll find 
out.” 
“I couldn’t do that.” 
“You’ll go to the moral engineers, then. And you know what 
that means.” 
The urbmon is toppling. Clouds 
of debris swirl in his brain. 
Who would arrange such a thing 
for him? 
Micaela Quevedo’s brother 
worked in an interface crew, didn’t 
he? But he’s gone now. There must 
be others within his grasp, though. 
When he leaves Rhea, Siegmund 
consults the records in the access 
nexus. The virus of unblessworthiness already at work in his soul. 
Then he realizes he doesn’t even 
need to use his influence. Merely 
make it a matter of professional 
routine. In his office he taps out a 
data requisition: status of Siegmund Kluver, remanded for therapy on 780th floor. Instantly comes 
the information that Kluver is due 
for therapy in seventeen days. The 
computer does not withhold data 
from Louisville Access Nexus. 
The presumption exists that anyone who asks, using the equipment 
in the nexus, has the right to do so. 
Very well. The vital next step. 
Siegmund instructs the computer 
to yank the therapy assignment for 
Siegmund Kluver. This time there 
is a bit of resistance: the computer 
wants to know who authorizes the 
yanking. Siegmund meditates on 
that for a moment. Then inspiration comes. The therapy of Siegmund Kluver, he informs the machine, is being canceled by order 
of Siegmund Kluver of the Louisvill Access Nexus. Will it work? 
“No,” the machine may say, “you 
can’t cancel your own therapy appointment. Do you think I’m stupid?” But the mighty computer is 
stupid. Thinking with the speed of 
light but unable to cross the gaps 
of intuition. Does Siegmund Kluver of Louisville Access Nexus have 
the right to cancel a therapy appointment? Yes, certainly; he must 
be acting on behalf of Louisville 
itself. Therefore let it be canceled. 
The instructions flicker through 
the proper node. No matter whose 
appointment it is, as long as authority to cancel can be attributed 
properly. It is done. Siegmund taps 
out a data requisition: status of 
Siegmund Kluver, remanded for 
therapy on 780th floor. Instantly 
comes the information that Kluv
er’s appointment for therapy has 
been canceled. His career is safe, 
then. But he is left with his anguish. There is that to consider. 
T his is the bottom. Siegmund 
Kluver prowls uneasily among 
the generators. The weight of the 
building presses crushingly on him. 
The whining song of the turbines 
troubles him. He feels disoriented, 
a wanderer in the depths. How 
huge this room is. 
H e enters apartment 6029, 
Warsaw. “Ellen?” he says. 
“Listen, I’ve come back. I want 
to apologize for the last time. It 
was all a tremendous mistake.” 
She shakes her head. She has already forgotten him. But she is 
willing to accept him, naturally. 
The universal custom. Instead he 
kisses her hand. “I love you,” he 
whispers, and flees. 
T his is the office of Jason Quevedo, historian, on the 185th 
floor, Pittsburgh. Where the archives are. Jason sits before his 
desk, manipulating data cubes, as 
Siegmund enters. “It’s all here, 
isn’t it?” Siegmund asks. “The 
story of the collapse of civilization. And how we rebuilt it again. 
Verticality as the central philosophical thrust of human congruence patterns. Tell me the story, 
Jason. Tell me.” Jason looking at 
him strangely. “Are you ill, Siegmund?” And Siegmund: “No, not 
at all. How perfectly healthy I am. 
Micaela’s been explaining your 
thesis to me. The genetic adaptation of humanity to urbmon life. 
I’d like more details. How we’ve 
been bred to be what we are. We 
happy many.” Siegmund picks up 
two of Jason’s cubes and fondles 
them, almost sexually, leaving 
fingerprints on their sensitive surfaces. Tactfully Jason takes them 
from him. “Show me the ancient 
world,” Siegmund says, but as 
Jason slips a cube into the playback 
slot, Siegmund goes out. 
T his is the great industrial city 
of Birmingham. Pale, sweating, 
Siegmund Kluver watches machines stamping out machines. 
While slumped and sullen human 
handlers supervise the work. This 
thing with arms will help in next 
autumn’s harvest at a commune. 
This dark glossy tube will fly above 
the fields, spraying insects with 
poison. Siegmund finds himself 
weeping. He will never see the 
communes. He will never dig his 
fingers into the rich brown soil. 
The beautiful meshing ecology of 
the modern world. The poetic interplay of commune and urbmon 
for the benefit of all. How lovely. 
Then why am I weeping? 
S AN FRANCISCO is where the 
musicians and artists and writers live. The cultural ghetto. Dillon Chrimes is rehearsing with his 
cosmos group. The thunderous 
web of sounds. An intruder. “Siegmund?” Chrimes says, breaking 
his concentration. “How are you 
getting along, Siegmund? Good to 
see you.” Siegmund laughs. He 
gestures at the vibrastar, the comet-harp, the incantator and the 
other instruments. “Please,” he 
murmurs, “keep on playing. I’m 
simply looking for god. You don’t 
WE ARE WELL ORGANIZED 
mind if I listen? Maybe he’s here. 
Play some more.” 
O N THE 761st floor, Shanghai’s 
bottom level, he finds Micaela 
Quevedo. She does not look well. 
Her black hair is dull and stringy, 
her eyes are bitter, her lips are 
clamped. Seeing Siegmund in midday startles her. He says quickly, 
“Can we talk a while? I want to 
ask you some things about your 
brother Michael. Why he left the 
building. What he hoped to find 
out there. Can you give me any 
information?” Micaela’s expression grows even harder. Coldly she 
says, “I don’t know a thing. Michael went flippo, that’s all that matters. He didn’t explain himself to 
me.” Siegmund knows that this 
is untrue. Micaela is concealing 
vital data. “Don’t be unblessworthy,” he urges. “I need to 
know. Not for Louisville. Just for 
myself.” His hand on her thin 
wrist. “I’m thinking of leaving the 
building too,” Siegmund confides. 
H e halts at his own apartment on the 787th floor. Mamelon is not there. As usual, she is 
at the somatic fulfillment hall, enhancing her supple body. Siegmund 
records a brief message for her. “I 
loved you,” he says. “I loved you. 
I loved you.” 
H e meets Charles Mattern in 
a Shanghai hallway. “Come 
have dinner with us,” the sociocomputator says. “Principessa’s 
always happy to see you. And the 
children. Indra and Sandor always 
talk about you. Even Marx. 
When’s Siegmund coming again, 
they say? We like Siegmund so 
much.” Siegmund shakes his head. 
“I’m sorry, Charles. Not tonight. 
But thanks for asking.” Mattern 
shrugs. “God bless, we’ll get together soon, eh?” he says, and 
strolls away, leaving Siegmund in 
the midst of the flow of pedestrian 
traffic. 
T his is Toledo, where the pampered children of the administration caste make their homes. 
Rhea Shawke Freehouse lives here. 
Siegmund does not dare pay a call 
on her. She is too perceptive; she 
will understand at once that he is in 
a terminal phase of collapse, and 
undoubtedly will take preventive 
action. But yet he must make 
some move in her direction. Siegmund pauses outside her apartment and tenderly presses his lips 
to the door. Rhea. Rhea. Rhea. I 
loved you, too. He goes up. 
N or does he make any visits in 
Louisville, though it would 
please him to see some of the masters of the urbmon tonight, Nissim Shawke or Monroe Stevis or 
Kipling Freehouse. Magical 
names, names that resonate in his 
soul. Best to bypass them. He goes 
directly to the landing stage on 
the thousandth floor. Stepping out 
on the flat breeze-swept platform. 
Night, now. The stars glittering 
fiercely. Up there is God, immanent and all-enduring, floating serenely amidst the celestial mechanics. Below Siegmund’s feet is the 
totality of Urban Monad 116. 
What is today’s population? 
888,904. Or some such. -1-131 since 
yesterday and -f 9,902 since the first 
of the year, adjusted for the departure of those who went to stock the 
new Urbmon 158. Maybe he has 
the figures all wrong. It hardly 
matters. The building is athrob 
with life, at any rate. Fruitful and 
multiplying. God bless! So many 
servants of god. Shanghai’s 34,000 
souls. Warsaw. Prague. Tokyo. 
The ecstasy of verticality. In this 
single slender tower we compress 
so many thousands of lives. 
Plugged into the same switchboard. Homeostasis, and the defeat of entropy. We are well organized here. All thanks to our 
dedicated administrators. 
And look, look there! The neighboring urbmons! The wondrous 
row of them! Urbmon 117, 118, 
119, 120! The fifty-one towers of 
the Chipitts constellation. Total 
population now 41,516,883. Or 
some such. And east of Chipitts 
lies Boswash. And west of Chipitts 
is Sansan. And across the sea is 
Berpar and Wienbud and Shankong and Bocarac. And more. 
Each cluster of towers with its 
millions of encapsulated souls. 
What is the population of our 
world now? Has it reached 
76.000. 000.000 yet? They project 
100.000. 000.000 for the not too 
distant future. Many new urbmons 
must be built to house those added 
billions. Plenty of land left, though. 
They can put platforms on the sea. 
To the north, on the horizon, 
he imagines he can see the blaze of 
a commune’s bonfires. Like the 
flesh of a diamond in sunlight. The 
farmers dancing. Their grotesque 
rites. Bringing fertility to the 
fields. God bless! It is all for the 
best. Siegmund smites. He 
stretches forth his arms. If he 
could only embrace the stars, he 
might find god. He walks to the 
very edge of the landing stage. A 
railing and a force-field protect 
him against the vagrant gusts of 
wind that might hurl him to his 
death. It is very windy here. Three 
kilometers high, after all. A needle 
sticking into god’s eye. If he could 
only spring into the heavens. Looking down as he floats past, seeing 
Chipitts below, the rows of towers, 
the farmland surrounding them, 
the miraculous urban rhythm of 
verticality plotted against the 
miraculous commune rhythm of 
horizontality. How beautiful the 
world is tonight. Siegmund throws 
back his head. Eyes shining. And 
there is god. The blessman was 
right. There! There! Wait, Tm 
coming! Siegmund mounts the 
railing. Teeters a little. Currents 
of wind buffeting him. He has risen 
above the protective force-field. 
It seems almost as if the whole 
building was swaying. Think of the 
body heat that 888,904 human beings under the same roof must 
generate. Think of the waste products they daily send down the 
chute. All these linked lives. The 
switchboard. And God watching 
over us. Tm coming! I’m coming. 
Siegmund flexes his knees, gathers 
his strength, sucks air deep into 
his lungs. And sails toward God in 
a splendid leap. 
N OW the morning sun is high 
enough to touch the uppermost 
fifty stories of Urban Monad 116. 
Soon the building’s entire eastern 
face will glitter like the bosom of 
the sea at daybreak. Thousands of 
windows, activated by the dawn’s 
early photons, deopague. Sleepers 
stir. Life goes on. God bless! Here 
begins another happy day. ★ 
SCIENCE FICTION REVIEW 
P.O. Box 3116, Santa Monica, Cal. 90403 
SFR is a forum of professionals and fans, a display of artwork and 
cartoons, a vehicle for thought-provoking, controversial articles, and a 
"service" magazine containing dozens of s~f and fantasy book reviews 
per issue, along with news of new releases, coming events, news items 
of interest to fans, readers and professionals. 
Featured in SFR No. 40: Labels and Such by Kate Wilhelm; Noise Level by 
John Brunner — the fourth installment of his column, called On Living in the 
Plot of a Bad Soap Opera-. Inside Conspiracy by J. Anthony Pierce — a well 
known author's pseudonym: How / Fought for a Hugo by Harry Warner, Jr. 
Plus letters from Bob Silverberg, James Blish, Piers Anthony, L. 
Sprague de Camp, Philip Jose Farmer, Charles Platt, Richard Wilson, 
William F. Temple, George Smith — and more! 
Sample Subscription — 2 issues for $1 . $4 per year. 
TWO 
THOUSAND 
ONE 
HOURS 
SOLO 
GRAHAME LEMAN 
T he alarm is for a point of light 
moving too fast among the unwinking stars standing over the 
moon to compute as a planet. Increase the magnification and it 
looks something like an occulting 
binary star (but can’t be that either). Increase the magnification 
again, by two more orders of magnitude, and check comparation of 
radar range and optical angle subtended: it is a glittering dumbell, 
two spheres about 100 meters in 
diameter linked by a cylinder a 
quarter as thick and twice as long. 
Log it and flop back in the sack. 
Jack. It is the deep-space vessel 
Olaf Stapledon (ACC. 2 vehicle. 
IFYOUWANTYOURBALLBACK 
COMEINTOTHEPARKAFTER 
YOUCLEANUPTHEYARD . 
SK.7 free module up), where, 
when, and whither she should be: 
outward bound ex Earth Orbital 
Four, for a destination somewhere 
outside the orbit of Saturn, where 
she will service a telecommunications relay module, functioning to 
bring space outside the solar system effectively nearer by unmanned deep-space probe. 
In one of the spheres, in the half 
of it opposite the linking cylinder. 
Art Carson (from Denver, Colorado) is playing an extremely undema^nding card game called Black 
Lady with Sem Kritsky (from the 
historic steel town of Sverdlovsk). 
“Preacher” Carson has had the 
three-month cram course in space 
technology at MIT, following on 
four years in creative writing 
school, three years’ premium apprenticeship to a Mad Avenue 
stills photographer, a typing 
course, two years in a London literary agency, and 2,001 hours solo 
in a simulated television studio. 
“Thinker” Kritsky did the MIT 
course with Carson, was graduated in philosophy from the University of Leningrad, did four 
years’ General Apologetics with 
the Jesuits in Rome, has worked 
as a leader writer on Pravda and 
the New York Times, also as a 
feature script writer for French 
television and radio, specializing in 
science policy and allocation of 
national and world resources. 
In the other half of this same 
sphere (in all of it) is the SK.7 free 
module automation, known familiarly as Skip — and, in decision 
and action situations, respectfully 
as Skipper. SK.7, who is in command of the mission, knows exactly what he has to do and precisely 
how to do it; but he has no idea 
why he has to do it. This is understandable enough; ever since the 
trouble in Brazil in 2002 (when a 
custom modified IBM Mechanarch clawed its way up, in three 
weeks flat, from Traffic Controller to Chief Executive and CIC 
Armed Forces), it has been a capital offense to build free module 
automata capable of teleological 
thought and behavior. This is not 
to say, of course, that SK.7 was a 
hundred percent determined and 
preprogramed (if he had been, 
he would not have been able to 
produce creative solutions to unforeseen emergencies): he was free 
to pursue certain limited ends as 
he chose. But built-in, triplicated 
censor subroutines (with elaborate 
fail-safe provisions) prevented him 
from creating ends of his own: 
some ends in particular (such as 
discovering once and for all what 
it all means, or saving the human 
race from itself before it was too 
late) would, if framed in the 
vaguest way, instantly energize 
total destruct circuits. This would 
be rough on Carson and Kritsky: 
but, after all, it was that rough in 
Brazil in 2002. 
Given certain as yet unstopped 
lacunae in automata theory and 
technics, it had not been possible 
to meet these legally mandatory 
safety specifications without (most 
unfortunately) also making it impossible for SK.7 to execute certain creative functions of the Olaf 
Stapledoh’s mission. This was not 
so rough on Carson and Kritsky, 
since it had given each the opportunity to make something of himself (and perhaps a little history 
for all of us, into the bargain). 
K ritsky had just stuck him 
with the Queen of Spades for 
the fifth round in a row, and Carson had gotten bored by unremit
2001 HOURS' SOLO 
ting defeat. He went off into his 
office, watered the house ivy growing up the bulkhead over his desk, 
and began to hunt and peck on his 
old silent portable typewriter. 
Had the fish of ancient times, 
he tapped out, been capable of reactionary thought and equipped to 
publish popular magazines, the 
primeval seas would undoubtedly 
have been disfigured by countless 
articles condemning those few fish 
who had dared try to breathe dry 
air and try to flop about, unsupported by buoyancy, on dry land. 
Without such fish we would not 
be here to salute their enterprise 
and follow their lead in adventure ... 
He broke off, as he felt Kritsky’s breath on his right ear. 
“You’ve got two contrafactual 
conditionals in the very first sentence”, said Kritsky, sadly. “And, 
even if the argument were any 
good, I can’t think it’s at all original.” 
“Only a scoob looks at fellers’ 
first drafts, Sem. In any case, this 
essay isn’t for Mind or any other 
of the mind-wrenching mags you 
read all the time: it’s for syndication in the business sections of 
hometown, throwaway, retail-advertising papers, worldwide — and 
you know as well as I do, an effective figure has got to be a cliche. 
How can you have a comfortingly, 
comfortably rehearsed response to 
a figure you never saw before? 
Look at historical iconography: 
what could the simple cross have 
done to people who didn’t already 
know that Christ had been crucified to prove once and for all that 
things are fine as they are? You 
stick to your college lecture circuit and leave me do my own thing 
the way it has to be done.” 
“Sticking to the college lecture 
circuit is just what I am doing. 
The students, even some of the 
well-paid professors researching 
and consulting in the harder subjects, kept wanting to know why 
UN keeps swanning about in space 
at vast expense, when fifty percent 
of the population is unemployed 
and below the poverty line, and 
ninety-eight percent don’t know 
the difference between the second 
derivative and the second coming. 
One student once told me, while 
he was tarring me for feathers after a live lecture, just how many 
self-tutor books in elementary 
mathematics you could buy for 
the price of one of these things 
we’re riding in. And students often 
used to wave your columns at me, 
when they were getting just verbally rough in live seminars: how 
am I supposed to convince top intellectuals that today’s winners 
know what they’re doing to the 
losers and the world when your 
junk about ambitious fish keeps 
popping into every home? You 
talk to me about history, as if / 
didn’t know enough history to 
make me sick-hearted: how do 
you think a Jesuit philosopher. 
with fourteen years’ grinding training, felt about his task of sapping 
the intellectual self-confidence of 
the Marxian elites when the rank 
and file of the church militant 
were publicly telling their flocks to 
render unto Caesar — all too obviously for fear that Caesar might 
otherwise decide to take it for 
himself and replace the cardinals 
with company directors or commissars? The only way to make 
normally intelligent people even 
pretend to believe theodicies that 
run cross-grained to their own 
everyday experience is with a whip 
or a gun. And if you shoot all the 
normally intelligent people, who is 
there left who can usefully be 
used? It’s like a pastoral society 
killing all the sheep except those 
too diseased to bear wool or to be 
eaten. 
“That’s dangerous-sounding 
talk, Sem — and I wouldn’t be surprised if there were dangerous 
thinking behind it. After all, we 
were hired to think and talk for 
the UN, not to think and speak 
for ourselves. Why make difficulties?’’ 
“Horsefeathers. If we weren’t 
capable of understanding what’s 
going on we wouldn’t be able to do 
what we’re paid to do. You can’t 
have learned how to put it across 
without wondering who’s putting 
what across on you — or without 
being able to tell baloney from a 
buzz-saw. Nor could I have 
learned how to try and infect every 
intellectual in sight with a crippling 
case of de Chardin’s onward and 
upward disease without learning to 
tell science from scientism in a 
deep sleep. You can tell baloney 
from the style, I can tell scientism 
from the content. You know as 
well as I do — those skills are precisely why we’re condemned to live 
out our lives in luxury on a deepspace shuttle, with occasional holidays in the lunar sporting houses, 
cut off from all contact with Earth 
except through telecommunications channels filtered through 
censor circuits.” 
A t that moment, they were 
interrupted by the hysterical 
peeping of the proximity alarm 
signal. After a moment Skip silenced this, informing them in his 
neutral voice that: one, there was 
a sizable solid object fine on the 
port bow, course at three o’clock; 
two, that there was no chance of a 
collision; three, that they could 
look at it on the screen if they 
cared to punch for it. 
They punched for it. It looked 
like a big, featureless slab of stone 
or something (according to the 
scale supered on the screen, about 
the size of a railway passenger 
coach), with razor-sharp angles. 
It was rotating slowly in space, 
apparently minding its own business. As they watched, a strange 
pattern of sound (not exactly music but something tike the synthetic sound tracks once popular for 
2001 HOURS' SOLO 
horror movies in the old days) 
swelled in the sound system Skip 
used to chat with them, whanged 
and whined for a minute or two 
and then faded to silence. 
Carson was pale but brave. 
“What the hell was that, Sem? And 
what could a thing like that be doing out here? It’s obviously artificial, a made thing — and MIT 
never told us there were such 
things out here.” 
Kritsky was calm. “We don’t 
know that there is anything out 
there. Art. After all, we can’t see 
out with our own eyes — only 
through the screen and Skip’s circuits between the outside world 
and the screen. That camp music 
is pretty improbable, too. I don’t 
mean just that it’s stylistically 
jokey in a knowing way. I mean is 
it likely that some alien artifact 
would be able to tune into the 
ship’s sound system and hit audio 
frequencies we happen to be able 
to hear and project some structure 
into? If you ask me, some bright 
bastard Earthside has programed 
old Skip down there to mystify us 
a little and keep us on the hop — 
or^ maybe, they’ve been finding 
our work a little dull and this dose 
of mystification is meant to make 
copy for you and provide food for 
thought for me. After all, we 
could use it.” 
H undreds of thousands of 
words of copy, thousands of 
hours of apologetic philosophizing 
and many thousands of hands of 
Black Lady later — when the whispering bulk of the Olaf Stapledon 
was nearing rendezvous with the 
TCR module beyond the orbit of 
Saturn — Skip had more news. 
“One,” he said smoothly, “the 
TCR module is nowhere detectable within extreme radar fange 
and no signals from the TCR 
module are detectable on the monitors. Two,” he went on, “the rectangular object noted earlier is 
now in position where the TCR 
module ought to be, or some object very like . .” 
Skip’s report was drowned by 
the whining and whanging of horror-movie music on the. sound system. This lasted for a couple of 
minutes, faded as before, and Skip 
resumed his report: 
“I am now receiving a radio 
message on the hydrogea wavelength, square-wave modulated 
CW signal, reminiscent of code or 
plain language letter group transmission in standard teleprinter 
code. There are some puzzling 
features: notably, there are no 
gaps in the transmission or frequently repeated spacing signals. 
On the assumption that the transmission is in teleprinter coded Interanglian alphabet, the content is 
an uninterrupted sequence of capr 
ital letters, the sequence repeating 
exactly over and over again. This 
is in no language known to me. I 
will display this sequence on the 
screen.” 
At once a block of lines of capital letters, set solid, without any 
sign of word-spacing, leaped into 
view on the screen. Kritsky whistled. 
“I know what that is. Did you 
ever see a facsimile reproduction 
of an ancient manuscript copy in 
Latin? That’s just how they used 
to write in those days, set solid, 
leaving you to pick out the words 
for yourself. Get me my Latin dictionary, would you?” 
Carson got him the big Latin 
dictionary. After a few silent minutes spent scribbling, scratching 
out and scribbling again, Kritsky 
nodded emphatically. 
“Got it. It’s in Latin all right, a 
very simple dog-Latin, like the 
soldiers’ Latin that turned into 
Spanish, French, and all the other 
Romance languages. In a free 
translation, it says: 
YOU CAN’T PLAY IN THE 
PARK UNTIL YOU HAVE 
CLEANED UP THE YARD. 
If this isn’t some joke of Skip’s or 
something some Earthside bastard 
has programed into him, it’s not 
too hard to see what’s happened to 
that TCR module: it’s been confiscated as a warning or punishment. I don’t know if there’s copy 
in that but there’s certainly food 
for thought.” 
Skip broke in again, saying: “I 
have been receiving and storing a 
further repeated series of se
quences. I will now display the 
second sequence.” 
The block of letters on the 
screen was replaced by a different 
block. After a few more moments 
spent scribbling and scratching, 
Kritsky raised his head again, saying with a look of dawning alarm: 
“It goes on: 
IF YOU WANT YOUR BALL 
BACK COME INTO THE PARK 
WHEN YOU’VE CLEANED UP 
THE YARD. 
and finishes up with a mess of heliocentric coordinates — ” 
Skip broke in on him, saying, 
“The coordinates are of a point in 
space, not far from the prominent 
star S-Doradus.” 
Carson shook his head. “It’ll be 
a long time before we can get out 
there. What the hell are we going 
to do in all that time? Maybe we 
should all concentrate on — ” 
Skip interrupted again in his 
magisterial Skipper manner (with 
an echo-effect delay in circuit, so 
that he boomed as if he were pulpited in a cathedral with a wicked 
echo). 
“It is glaringly clear to me,” he 
intoned, “that Man’s revealed and 
manifest destiny must be to . .” 
Carson and Kritsky had just 
time for one horrified look at each 
other before the total destruct circuits of the SK.7 cut in and the 
Olaf Stapledon became a plume of 
fumes falling between the stars, if 
2001 HOURS' SOLO 
T hings happen to people. You 
read about them all the time. 
They hear from their dead grandmothers. Poltergeists heckle them. 
They get kidnapped for rides on 
flying saucers. You know. The silly season is always here. 
So you don’t have to believe 
what happens here, either. But 
some pretty good men do. It’s in 
the records of the Government 
Plant Research Division at Beltsville. And, particularly, it’s got a 
nice fat folder in the files of the 
FBI. 
None of these records are complete. So this isn’t a complete account. The UFO myth is pretty 
well blown, but do they have to 
come that way? Lately I’ve been 
thinking. Hard. And I’ve got 
something to think about. See if 
you don’t think so. 
Not many men have put one 
over on the FBI, but we did it. We 
may have had help, but we did it. 
By we I mean my old friend JimJam and I. We don’t think we’re 
criminals, but that could turn out 
to be a matter of opinion. Anyhow, what we did I’m pretty sure 
we’d do again, given the chance. 
And we see nothing wrong with 
what we still intend to do. 
Back last April, my violet pol
linating was clicking along pretty 
good. Yes, I said violet pollinating. It’s a hobby, like poker if 
you’re an editor, or golf and tennis if you’re a Vice President. Just 
as much fun, just as hard to do, 
takes just as many brains and you 
come out about the same. You 
have good days and bad. The 
moves, strokes or what you will 
are just a little more long-term. 
My experiments were harmless 
and they kept me off the street. 
The wife couldn’t see that there 
was much difference — but that’s 
another kind of story. Mostly 
what I was doing was simple Burbank stuff, watching for variants, 
selfing some and crossing others, 
guessing at what I ought to get 
and second-guessing when I didn’t 
get it. Violets are pretty erratic, 
anyhow. 
Lately I’d been trying another 
line, the logical next step, I suppose. I’d rigged up an old diathermy machine to where I could get 
some pretty critical wave-lengths 
and now and then I’d pick a plant, 
goose it with a few roentgens and 
sit back and wait to see what the 
next generation would be like. And 
I hasten to say that that sitting 
back is purely a figure of speech. 
Just as sure as raising a baby is 
THEAAADSCIENTISTANDTHE FBI 
mostly heating baby food and 
washing baby pants, raising plants 
from seed is mixing soil, germinating seed, pricking out, transplanting, feeding, transplanting 
again — and records, records and 
more records. I had from five to 
ten thousand plants in my greenhouse all the time. You can see 
how much time I had left over to 
make a living. 
Did you ever see a red violet? 
A real good red, a scarlet, a crimson or a vermilion? Neither did I, 
but I hope to. If Old Mother Nature doesn’t juggle the genes 
around I’ll do it with controlled 
radiation. Between us, we can’t 
miss. Already I’ve got violets three 
feet tall, with leaves like a baby 
elephant’s ear. I’ve got them so 
tiny you have to look at the blossom details with a hand lens. 
And what’s the point? If I do get 
a violet with crimson blossoms — 
or one that can bark like a dog, 
for that matter — so what? Well, if 
you have to ask, there’s no good 
way I can explain it to you. But 
as atomic experiments continue, 
and the level of radioactivity in the 
air rises, maybe you’ll be interested in what I’ve learned when your 
kids start being born with two 
heads. You won’t like that, even if 
they can yodel and spit at the same 
time. 
But this yarn isn’t about your 
kids or my violets. It’s about my 
friend Jim-Jam, and his little brush 
with the FBI. Jim-Jam doesn’t 
have a greenhouse, but he’s my 
kind of crackpot, right on. He’s a 
likeable little guy, dried-up as a 
crackling, with pale, twinkling 
blue eyes and more bounce than I 
have at half his age. He’s about the, 
only person I know I can exchange 
ideas with and, for a wonder, his 
wife likes my wife and I could never tell you why. Jim-Jam has suggested that maybe it’s because, 
way down, neither one of them 
likes us very much. They can’t figure out how we tick. 
J IM-JAM has a garden. It does 
the same thing for him that my 
greenhouse does for me, except 
that he doesn’t fool around with 
the tricky energies. In that field he 
theorizes and I steal his ideas and 
try them out. They’re good, as 
you’d expect, because Professor 
James Jameson is Professor of 
Plant Genetics at the local skullmill. The kids call him Jim-Jam 
behind his back, I do it to his face 
and he couldn’t care less in either 
case. To him a name is just a handle.' 
Well, this thing is slow getting 
started, so let’s jump into it. 
You’ve read the publicity. This is 
what the newsboys missed. 
It was a nice morning last April, 
as I said, and I was about ready to 
go to work. I was tying my tie 
when the phone rang. Myra answered it, and when she came back 
with a sour look, I knew the caller 
was Jim-Jam. 
“No sales bonus this month,” 
she said gloomily. “When he calls 
you in the morning, that means 
you have to go look. A new rose 
bloomed during the night!” 
“Roses won’t be blooming to 
amount to anything for a month,” 
I said. 
“Well, sunflowers, then!” Myra 
went back to her coffee in the 
breakfast nook. She’s never very 
happy in the morning and can’t 
see why anyone else should be. I 
went to the phone. 
“Tug, get over here.” Myra 
knows her Jim-Jam. “1 think I’ve 
got something in your line.” 
“Not — ” I let my voice catch. 
“Not a red violet. Doc?” 
“Nothing to do with violets. I 
want you to see. Get over here!” 
“Look, Doc,” I raised my 
voice, so Myra could hear without 
straining her ear, “I got a date to 
sell some cars, so my wife can 
grow fat in comfort. Can’t it wait 
until this evening?” 
“You’re a partner, aren’t you? 
They can’t fire you. Myra’s fat 
enough now. Get over here.” 
“Okay, Doc,” I said. “Be there 
in ten minutes.” 
Of course Myra couldn’t hear 
what he said, but she knew well 
enough. She wouldn’t kiss me 
goodbye. 
I found Jim-Jam over by his 
row of compost heaps, his white 
hair flopping over his eyes as he 
shoveled compost like a coolie. 
“Something in my line, I think 
you said. Doc?” We never say, 
“Good morning,” or, “Hi,” or, 
“Kiss my foot,” when we meet. 
We just pick up the talk wherever 
we left off last time, whether it’s 
been ten minutes or a week. 
“I think so.” The skinny little 
man turned compost for a couple 
minutes more. “Push that wheelbarrow over here, will you Tug? I 
want to give my lily beds a couple 
of shots of this and I’ve got a ten 
o’clock lecture.” 
“And I,” I said, “ought to be 
demonstrating our Deluxe Economy Model to Old Man Barnes 
this minute. If I don’t get cracking 
he’s going to wiggle off the hook. 
And I could use that seven hundred profit.” But I pushed the 
wheelbarrow. 
The professor handed me the 
shovel, scraped the hair out of his 
eyes, wagged his head at me and 
grinned. 
“Impatient, eh? Takes a man 
three-fourths of his life to learn 
how to live and then he’s too old 
to enjoy it. Fill that up, will you? 
I need a blow.” 
I shoveled it full, tossed the 
shovel on top and got between the 
barrow handles. 
“Where to?” I said. Little he 
cared if I’d just shined my shoes. 
I FOLLOWED him up the path. 
You wouldn’t believe one little 
man could keep all the beds and 
rows and borders going that he has 
in that half acre. Everything neat 
THE MAD SCIENTIST AND THE FBI 
as a pin, and the color, even in 
April, hits you in the eye. 
“Wait a minute!” Jim-Jam 
stopped by a big square bed, and I 
nearly piled the wheelbarrow into 
him. “What do you think of 
these?” 
I took a look. I knew I couldn’t 
hurry him. The bed was a new one, 
planted in a block pattern, and the 
seedlings were up a couple of inches or so. They were little gray, 
leathery looking things. 
1 pretended to be interested. 
“What are they. Doc?” 
“Don’t you know? Look close!” 
I looked. They were still dulllooking little plants to me, with 
four flat little leaf-like outgrowths 
making a rough cross, a growing 
point in the middle. Come to think 
of it, those leaves looked like 
cotyledons, but I knew they 
couldn’t be. 
“Never saw ’em before,” I said. 
“Zinnias.” The professor chortled. “You claim to be a greenhouse man and don’t recognize the 
commonest garden plants.” 
“Now wait a minute.” I forgot 
about my newly creased suit, and 
got down on my knees beside the 
bed. “Zinnias, my eye! These 
things have four cotyledons. They 
aren’t gymnosperms. Plants like 
these don’t have four cotyledons.” 
I slid a finger under one of the 
little plants and it promptly wilted. 
Honest, it lay flat on the ground, 
limp as a piece of rag. I looked at 
Jim-Jam. His eyes were wide. 
“Tug,” he said softly, “that’s 
new. They never did that before.” 
“Doc,” I said impatiently, “quit 
stalling. What are these things?” 
“Zinnias.” The professor was 
stubborn. “Early Flame GiantFlowered Zinnias. New this year. 
Fifty cents a package. Forty seeds. 
Planted them last week — and I 
know a zinnia seed by now, I 
should think.” 
“If those are zinnias Tm a dinosaur,” I said. 
“That could be,” said Jim-Jam. 
“But zinnias I planted and those I 
got.Q.E.D.” 
The plant I had touched was beginning to straighten up. I touched 
another one and it flopped like the 
first. I touched half a dozen. They 
all behaved alike. I got up and 
dusted my knees. 
“Zinnias!” I said, and I made it 
strong. “What did you call me 
over here for. Doc?” 
Jim-Jam stood staring at the 
bed, his white hair over one eye, 
his underlip stuck out like a little 
kid. You could almost see him 
think, and I knew than he wasn’t 
ribbing me. 
“Tug,” he said, “suppose all 
those seeds came from one plant. 
Suppose that plant had, somehow, 
had a controlled, uniform dose of 
radiation. Wouldn’t the embryos 
in all the developing seeds be affected alike?” 
“Now, Doc,” I reproved him. 
“You know better than that. Forty 
uniform mutations, as far from 
the parental type as those things? 
Uh-uh. The odds against it would 
be billions to one.” I grinned at 
him. “Let’s face it, Doc. You 
made a boo-boo. You got novelty 
plants by mistake, you didn’t look 
too close when you planted, and so 
you get a surprise when what you 
planted comes up. Why don’t you 
ask the seed company? I’ll bet they 
can tell you what you’ve got.” 
The professor shook his head 
and his white mane flopped. 
“No sir, I know what I planted. 
I’ll have no patent hounds from 
seed companies snooping in here. 
Those plants are different. As you 
said, plants like those don’t have 
four cotyledons.” He started to 
say something more, thought better of it, stuck out his lip instead. 
A thought hit me. 
“These,” I said, “these are what 
you called me over to see?” 
“You catch on,” the professor 
said. “Not quickly, but you do 
catch on.” 
I WISH I could report that Old 
Man Barnes bought the Economy Model and that I banked my 
seven hundred. But I can’t. The 
old buzzard didn’t like waiting for 
an hour, so he went across town 
and paid more money for a rival 
crate that’ll collapse in his driveway in a year. People would rather 
have service than a solid product. 
Myra has her own intelligence 
channels and she knew about the 
Barnes business by the time I did. 
Result, when I came home the dinner was cold, what there was of it, 
and the atmosphere was colder. I 
wallowed around in the ice for a 
while, but finally I gave up and 
went out to the greenhouse. I 
worked on records until after midnight. 
For the next week I tended to 
business, made a couple of good 
sales and Myra began to thaw a 
little. That doesn’t mean she liked 
the greenhouse any better. She 
didn’t. I’m pretty sure she never 
will. I’m one man who never can 
square himself by sending his wife 
flowers. Even bring her an orchid 
and she has hysterics. So I bring 
her candy, which she loves, and 
which makes her fat. 
I didn’t even call Jim- Jam the 
whole week. But I thought some 
about his little plants. The sensitive-plant, a wilting mutation, 
doesn’t happen very often. I’d never had a hint of that sort of thing 
in my violets. The more I thought 
about it, the surer I became that 
the professor had planted a tropical curiosity by mistake. Every 
specialization was too well fixed 
for it to be any other way. 
Saturday Myra called the office and left word for me to go directly to the Jameson home after 
work. Seems we were having dinner with them. It was a break, because I didn’t want another rough 
weekend, but I knew I had to see 
those plants again pretty soon. I 
got there about six. 
THE AAADSCIENTISTANDTHE FBI 
Myra and Helen Jameson, being 
sister greenhouse and garden widows, got along better than you 
would believe. Helen was whitehaired, but trim and slim, and she 
bounced around like Jim-Jam. 
They were all working on second 
cocktails by the time I drove up. 
It was the pleasantest home atmosphere I’d known for quite 
some days. 
Myra kissed me like she hadn’t 
been giving me the deep freeze all 
week, Helen took my hat, shook 
my hand, patted my cheek and 
Jim-Jam slipped me a glass. As 
soon as we decently could, he and 
I walked out on the lawn, circled 
the house and from there it was 
only a step to the garden. We still 
carried our glasses. 
“How are they. Doc?’’ I asked. 
Jim-Jam looked mysterious. He 
took a swallow from his glass as 
he walked. 
“Wait and see,” he said. 
A week is a long time in the life 
of a new seedling. It had certainly 
done things to these. They had 
changed completely. 
“Still think they are zinnia mutants?” 
I could see the stubbornness 
flow into Jim-Jam’s face. 
“I planted zinnia seeds.” 
I got down on my knees to look 
closely. It’s a habit from the 
greenhouse, I suppose. There the 
plants are on the bench and you 
can get closer without so much exercise. 
“Red and blue and yellow-leaved 
zinnias,” I said. “They look like 
baby century plants that fell in the 
paint bucket.” 
“Yeah,” the professor admitted. 
“Striped paint. Go on, touch one.” 
I did, and the long pointed leaves 
promptly rolled up from the tips, 
so that the stem branches were 
covered with little round bundles, 
like curlers on a debutante’s noggin. I never saw anything like it. 
And the plants around the one I 
touched seemed to pick up the disturbance — they rolled up their 
leaves in turn. In twenty seconds 
the whole bed looked like a queer 
frost had struck it. Not a plant had 
a leaf extended. 
Jim-Jam clinked the ice in his 
glass. 
“Well?” he said. 
“Doc,” I said, “these things give 
me the willies. If they were mine 
I’d pull ’em up, throw ’em away 
and try to forget ’em.” 
He didn’t answer, so I looked up 
at him. His face had a funny look. 
“I did try to thin them,” he said. 
“It’s quite an experience. Go 
ahead, pull one up.” 
I HATE dares. It’s the little boy 
in me. But Jim-Jam never tells 
anybody anything. He makes them 
find out. So I picked out a 
scrawny little specimen crowded by 
neighbors, gripped it at the ground 
level and pulled. It came out all 
right. But it scared me all the 
same. Its leaves were already 
rolled into tight packets, and when 
I held it up it literally shuddered 
up and down its stem and its naked 
rootlets writhed and twisted like 
worms. I didn’t know what to do, 
so I just held on and stared at it. 
Then the plant made up my 
mind for me. The squirming root 
mass suddenly subsided, the leaves 
unrolled and the whole plant collapsed. I scratched a hole at the 
edge of the bed, tucked in the roots 
and replanted it before I realized 
what I was doing. I heard JimJam’s dry chuckle behind my 
shoulder. 
“I did the same thing,” he said. 
“Too late, though. When the roots 
stop moving, they’re dead.” 
My plant lay limp on the 
ground, a flabby thing, its colors 
fading to a dull gray-brown. JimJam picked it up and put it into an 
envelope. 
“Correspondent of mine down 
at Beltsville is making histological studies,” he said. “He’s excited. He says the tissues don’t 
make sense.” 
I dusted my knees and looked 
distastefully at the fingers that had 
just committed murder. “Neither 
do the plants,” I said. 
Helen had good solid food such 
as I hadn’t been used to recently. 
Rare roast beef and steaming 
white potatoes and fresh asparagus 
spears; stuff like that. I ought to 
have made a pig of myself, but I 
didn’t. I couldn’t forget that 
squirming little plant and the sud
den, strange way it died. I kept expecting each asparagus tip to wiggle when I ate it. 
After that, Myra or no Myra, I 
kept in touch. If the professor 
didn’t give me a ring before I went 
to work, I called hifn. And I 
sneaked by for a look every chance 
I got. 
Jim-Jam developed a habit of 
jeering at the plants and making 
wise-cracks about every change, so 
I knew they were bothering him 
plenty. He had reason. During the 
next week the plants grew almost 
two feet tall, shed all the hair on 
their leaves except along the midribs — and learned to dance. It’s the 
truth. I don’t mean they started 
capering up the walk. They 
swayed. Each plant had its own 
rhythm, but on still days, when the 
sun was hot on the bed, the whole 
layout would do a Disney, all 
swaying together. You didn’t believe it, and when you came close 
to the bed, they quit. The ones 
nearest you would begin to roll up 
their leaves, slowly now, and you 
almost got the impression they 
were sulking. 
They were crowding the bed but 
Jim-Jam did no more thinning. I 
noticed, though, that nothing else 
grew among what we by now called 
the rainbow plants. I quizzed the 
professor about that, because it 
was the best-kept bed in the garden. 
“I’ve never weeded it,” Jim-Jam 
said. “All the beds about require 
THEMAD SCIENTIST ANDTHE FBI 
plenty of attention — but not that 
one. Chickweed sneaks in everywhere, overnight, but not into the 
rainbow bed. I suppose,” he added 
reflectively, watching me out of the 
corner of his eye, “they eat everything else.” 
I reacted, partly because I knew 
he wanted me to. 
“Now, Doc, you know that’s 
silly. Those things aren’t predators. They’ve got no structures 
for it.” 
“Maybe,” the professor said, 
“they poison the soil.” 
“Take samples,” I suggested, 
“and have ’em analyzed. That 
should be easy.” 
So we did that, sampling between the plants and close under 
the roots, taking from the top inch 
and from six inches down. The 
college chemists ran the tests 
and we also sent samples to the 
Beltsville boys. The results were 
what you would expect. Nothing 
unusual, nothing foreign. But before we got the reports we knew 
the answer to the weedless bed 
problem. It was simple. The rainbow plants were doing their own 
weeding. 
Because the plants wouldn’t 
show activity when he was nearby, the professor watched them 
from a distance with a field glass. 
He noticed that there was a violent 
swaying session every morning just 
after sunrise. It didn’t last fifteen 
minutes, but that was the answer. 
Watching, he saw a plant vary its 
swaying motion by bending the 
tip of a sharp-pointed leaf, thrusting it underground and flipping it 
sharply. A small wedge of earth 
flew. Then he saw another plant 
do it, — and another. All he had to 
do was to pick up the gouged-out 
bits of earth. Each had a seedling 
in it, just germinated. Lamb’s 
quarter, chickweed, pigweed, purslane — all the pests that plagued 
the rest of the garden. The rainbow 
plants apparently could detect 
them as soon as they germinated 
and — Geronimo! out they came. 
U P TO this point nobody but 
Jim- Jam and me had heard of 
the plants. The professor gardened because he liked it. He 
hated people rubber-necking 
around his flowers. Even the local 
garden club never got in but once. 
And they made such a mess he 
never invited them again. 
The rainbow plants, though, 
made their own publicity. Pretty 
soon they were too big to hide 
and the bright, raw colors of their 
two-foot leaves, four inches wide 
and dagger-pointed on the tips, 
fairly made a glare in their part of 
the garden. Those leaves had fuzzy 
blue and red hair along midrib 
and veins and keen thin margins, 
smooth as wax. Knife-like they 
were and like knives the plants 
began to use them — on each 
other. The plants were crammed 
like cabbages into the bed, crowding each other until they couldn’t 
sway. That’s when they began to 
fight — and when the newsboys 
began to get into Jim-Jam’s hair. 
From a distance anyone could 
see an occasional convulsive movement in the bed as a plant lashed 
at another which touched it. Helen saw it and told Myra and Myra let it get around pretty generally. One reporter came. Jim-Jam 
threw him out. Now anybody 
knows that’s no way to get rid of 
the press. They thrive on treatment like that. This one wrote a 
little teaser story for the evening 
paper and was back the next day 
with another reporter and a photographer. 
The professor wouldn’t allow 
them on the place. The photographer climbed a tree and took 
telephoto pictures. In halftone 
they didn’t show up too well, but 
the two reporters got their heads 
together on a story about the professor’s mysterious- experiments 
with jungle plants that he was reputed to feed on raw meat and 
live mice. It was the silliest rubbish you ever read — but to sue 
the paper Jim-Jam would have had 
to tell the story straight. And that 
he wouldn’t do. He was fit to be 
tied. 
“A man has a right to privacy,” 
he raged to me, his face pink as 
a kid’s under that mop of white 
hair. “I tell you. Tug, I won’t 
stand for this badgering. I’ll ask 
for police protection.” 
We were in his living room, nip
ping down a quick one before I 
went home for dinner. 
“Protection against what?” I 
asked. “Nobody’s stolen anything. 
They haven’t even trampled your 
garden.” 
“But I’m a curiosity,” Jim-Jam 
said bitterly. “I’m the Mad Scientist because of a couple of fool 
newspaper stories. You wouldn’t 
think I’d taught this town’s young 
for thirty-five years!” 
“Well,” I said, reasonably, I 
thought, “you can’t blame people 
for being curious.” 
“I can,” Jim-Jam said, “and I 
will. Why, dammit, I’m not even 
responsible for the condemned 
plants. I don’t know how they got 
like that. But who would believe 
me?” 
“Who would believe you’d drink 
what you have in your hand?” 
I asked. Doc often likes three fingers of Irish whiskey in half a 
glass of lime juice. He drinks it 
warm, no ice. He took a swallow 
now and rolled it over his tongue. 
“What I drink is my own affair,” he said heatedly. “It’s my 
liver. And the things that grow in 
my garden are my own affairs, 
so long as they stay there. And 
they will.” 
“Are you sure? They’ve done 
everything but leave. Peskiest 
zinnias I ever did see.” 
Jim-Jam’s topknot went down 
suddenly as his sense of humor 
took over. The extra pink went 
out of his face and he was grin
THE MAD SCIENTIST AND THE FBI 
ning as he turned away from the 
window. 
“All right,” he said, “so they’re 
not zinnias. But they are something rare and strange, something 
completely new, as near as I can 
tell.” He grew thoughtful and his 
eyes narrowed. “Okay, I’ll take 
the wraps off. I’ll let the bars 
down. I’ll — what else do you do 
when you let everybody in on 
something that’s none of their 
business?” 
I grinned, too, but I didn’t try 
to supply any more cliches. Words 
aren’t my business. He was serious, though, so I said, “If you’re 
going to do it, do it big. Doc. Put 
a fence around the bed and get the 
chief to put a guard there during 
visiting hours. Only let a few people come at a time and make parents hold their children’s little 
hands. If they’re going to expect 
something unusual, don’t discourage them. If you’re a Mad Scientist, be the maddest one on your 
block.” 
The old boy strolled across the 
room and sat down in his easy 
chair. He held up his glass to the 
light, took a sip, and looked at 
me over the glass rim. I could be 
wrong but I think it was an admiring look. 
“Tug,” he said, “I forget that 
you deal with the unselected masses. You’re right, of course. I’ll do 
it, fence and all!” 
“Especially the fence,” I said. 
“Don’t forget the hoe handle.” 
“I haven’t,” Jim-Jam said soberly. 
Y OU haven’t heard about the hoe 
handle. As far as I’m concerned 
it marked a turning point in the 
way we regarded the rainbow 
plants. Up to that first incident 
they were big colorful curiosities, 
plants from seeds of unknown 
source that Doc had planted by 
accident, plants of strange and 
peculiar habit but plants, just the 
same. After, I wasn’t so sure. I 
still am not. 
It had happened the week before. 
By then the biggest plants were 
nearly five feet tall. They had to 
hold those big knife-like leaves 
almost straight up to keep from 
touching the plants around them. 
And when one plant did tick another, both slashed out with one 
or more leaves. Make no mistake 
about it, those leaves cut. Every 
plant looked like a man had been 
working on it with an axe, and 
most leaves were as tattered as the 
ears of a traveling boy dog. Each 
plant still had its bright unearthly 
colors, but the entire bed looked 
like it had just cOme through a 
heavy hailstorm. 
We didn’t know, though, that 
they ever hit anything but each 
other. When we came near they 
always sulked and rolled up their 
leaves. At least the closest ones 
did. As I look back on it now, I 
realize that they were less and less 
shy as the days passed. 
About the hoe handle: one plant 
was showing what looked like the 
beginning of a flower bud in a leaf 
axil and I pointed it out to Doc 
that morning. I pointed with the 
handle of the hoe I was carrying — 
and I’ll always be glad it wasn’t a 
finger. The plant moved faster 
than I’d ever seen one move. The 
leaf slashed like a saber and 
knocked the hoe spinning. I stood 
there with a silly look on my face, 
staring at the thing. Doc picked up 
the hoe. The handle had a deep 
cut in it. 
“From now on, we go around 
those things,’’ Jim-Jam said — but 
he didn’t look too surprised. 
So the reporters got in after all. 
I think they were a little disappointed, even if the rainbow plants 
in color pix were something you’d 
hardly believe. But when crowds 
of people were around they 
wouldn’t do anything, wouldn’t 
even move. And the reporters, I 
imagine, had begun to believe 
their own stories. 
The fence was important, 
though. The plants were near their 
time of blossoming and we wondered what new antics would go 
along with the flowers. We found 
out. No dogs’ den ever had a battle for survival like the one that 
went on inside that fence. All the 
action occured at night, so nobody 
saw it, but it really happened. 
The day after the fence was 
complete Jim-Jam found the first 
dead plant plastered against it. It 
was corpse-gray and collapsed, 
just like the little one I had pulled 
up weeks before. The plants beside it must have ripped it up and 
thrown it bodily out of the bed. 
Doc fished it out with a pruning 
hook, carefully, you can bet, and 
shipped the whole carcass off to 
, Beltsville. It brought a government gardener, complete with Ph. 
D., notebooks, cameras and microscopes, practically by return 
mail. But by the time he got there 
the plants had thrown out three 
more of their fellows. 
I was there when Doc hooked 
out number four. The Beltsville 
boy, a sandy-haired stringbean who 
looked like he smelled something 
ungood, plainly didn’t believe what 
he saw. 
“I’ve dissected the previous 
specimens. Doctor,” he said. “As 
I told you before, the morphology 
is incredible; the cell structure 
completely new. But I can’t believe that the “plants,” if that’s 
what they are, can dig each other 
up.” 
“Give him the pruning hook. 
Doc,” I suggested. “After all, 
he’s your guest. Let him poke 
one.” 
Jim-Jam did, and he did, and 
the plant converted him then and 
there. The plant he punched was a 
big six-footer, with keen, sleek 
leaves that were mostly blue, with 
long streaks of bright crimson lying along the veins. Two of those 
leaves whistled downward. One of 
THE MAD SCIENTIST AND THE FBI 
them smashed itself on the steel 
hook, but the other caught the thin 
wood handle at just the right angle 
and sheared through it as smoothly 
as a machete could have done. The 
pruning hook dropped to the 
ground between the plants. 
“Like to go in and get it?” JimJam asked. 
T he new man looked at the 
pole in his hand, minus hook, 
and with the pull wire dangling. 
Then he looked at Jim-Jam and 
me. We looked back and he was 
the better sight. He was scared pea 
green. 
He backed away, slowly turning so pate I was afraid he was 
going to faint. 
“Can they get out?” he asked. 
We could hardly hear him. 
“They’re plants. Doctor,” JimJam said. “They have roots in the 
ground. They can’t move about.” 
The botanist stopped when he 
was twenty feet from the fence. 
He dug out a cigarette, but his 
hand shook so he couldn’t light it. 
“Fantastic!” he muttered. “Doctor, those things are murderous.” 
It took two highballs to put 
some spunk back into him, and 
even they didn’t make him too 
brave. All the time he stayed in 
our town, and it was close to three 
weeks, he never went near the bed 
again. He sat on Doc’s terrace 
and watched with a field glass, 
and when the plants would put on 
a flurry he’d sweat and have to 
have another drink. But he dissected the carcasses, made his reports and, since after the first 
day or two he bought his own liquor, Doc tolerated him. 
There were plenty of carcasses. 
After the first flower buds showed 
it was plain murder inside that 
fence. For the next week the Beltsville boy — Wallace, his name was; 
no kin to anybody we know — had 
from two to five dead plants to 
work on. Jim-Jam was afraid 
they’d all be killed off. He was 
close to right. At the end of the 
week only two were left, and the 
bed was as neatly cultivated as 
if Doc had gone over it with that 
little four-fingered cultivator he 
always brags about. 
A couple of days later he called 
me early. You would have thought 
his house was on fire. 
“Tug, get over here! Somebody sober besides me has got to 
see this!” 
“What — ” I began, but he cut 
me off. 
“Don’t argue, dammit! And 
don’t fool around dressing — come 
in your shirt-tail, but move! This 
won’t go on all day.” 
The receiver clicked, or 
slammed, rather, and there 1 stood 
with my teeth in my mouth. I had 
no choice. I roared across town 
without hat or coat and still 
wearing my bedroom slippers. I 
jumped out of the car and swished 
around the house to the terrace. 
Doc was there, with a pair of bi
noculars. He had a pair for me and 
he didn’t say a word; just held 
them out. 
The plants had bloomed. With 
the eight-power glass I could see 
them like they were at arm’s 
length, and I didn’t believe it. I 
lowered the glass and looked at 
Jim-Jam. 
“That’s silly,” I said. “The 
flowers are entirely different.” 
Jim-Jam stopped me with a 
wave of his hand. 
“Watch,” he commanded. 
So I watched. One plant had 
erupted foot-long sprays of 
flaming red trumpets; the other 
had wide petaled single blossoms 
of deep skyblue. The plants were 
swaying, every wicked-looking leaf 
keeping time to waltz music we 
couldn’t hear, every flower stalk 
undulating gently back and forth, 
and the very flowers themselves 
opening and closing as if they were 
mouths. And there wasn’t even a 
breeze. 
Then I saw it. One of the blue 
flowers, stretching out on its long 
snake-like stem, fitted itself neatly 
over the mouth of a red trumpet 
and clung there a moment. Then 
it swung away. And all the while 
the dance never stopped. 
I N THE next quarter of an hour 
we saw that happen time after 
time. The blue flowers always 
seemed to be the aggressors, and, 
since there were fewer of them, 
they were busy. 
“I’d give a pretty,” Jim-Jam 
said, “to see what goes on when 
they touch like that.” 
“Mutual pollination?” I guessed. 
“Doc, let’s go flower picking.” 
Jim-Jam looked at me with a 
half grin. His white hair was 
flopped over one eye, his chin and 
jaws were covered with white stubble. He looked like a cross between a middle-aged pixie and a 
goat. 
“Think you can outrun them?” 
he jeered. “Especially in your bedroom slippers?” Then his pale eyes 
squinted in thought. “We might 
do it with a pruning hook and an 
apple picker.” 
We got one of each and wrapped 
the long wooden handles with wire. 
That way we figured they might 
be able to take the beating. We 
could have saved ourselves the 
trouble. When we went near the 
fence the plants acted like they 
had when they were small. They 
cringed away from us and their 
leaves drooped. I poked the hook 
at a cluster of red flowers and the 
plant overlapped its leaves tightly 
against its stalk, with the blossoms covered. I had to pry away 
the leaves to snip off the cluster, 
and when I did the plant shuddered 
all over. It was like taking a baby 
from its mother. 
The blue-flowered plant behaved 
exactly the same, but I nipped off 
a couple of blossoms. And by the 
time we got them back to the 
house the reds weren’t red and the 
THE MAD SCIENTIST AND THE FBI 
blues weren’t blue. They had all 
turned the cadaver-like, fishbelly 
gray that the dead plants always 
were. But the structures were 
there. 
My lucky guess about mutual 
pollination was probabjj right. 
Each flower was perfect, with pistils and stamens. The pollen was 
well developed — and definitely different in the two kinds of flowers. 
Wallace staggered in about nine 
o’clock. We turned what was left 
of the specimens over to him, and 
they shocked him sober. 
His report back to Beltsville this 
time really got results. The next 
plane from Washington brought 
two nice young men with snapbrim hats and brown raincoats and 
credentials that proved that they 
were exactly what they looked like 
they were: agents from Mr. Hoover’s FBI. Wallace himself, incidentally, couldn’t take it any 
more. He left after that last report. He never came back. 
“If your plants make seed and 
they blow around the country, 
they can be a menace to public 
safety,’’ the young G-men told 
Jim-Jam. “We’re detailed to 
watch, in the public interest, until all seeds are collected and disposed of under government supervision. We hope you understand 
and will cooperate.’’ 
Naturally the old man got hopping mad and naturally he blew 
his stack. 
“Watch and be damned!” he 
roared at the G-boys. “Go out 
and sit on the fence, where you 
can see better! And,” he added as 
he banged back into the house, 
“I hope they bat your ears off!” 
T he FBI has set up many a 
stakeout but I’ll give odds that 
these were the first two agents 
ever detailed to watch a flower 
bed. But watch it they did, in eighthour shifts around the clock. Doc 
got over his miff in a day or so 
and let ’em sit on the terrace and 
Helen woyld bring the night man 
coffee; little things like that. We 
all got to know each other pretty 
well. They were good boys. 
The rainbow plants set their 
fruit — and the fruits were not 
alike. The blue-flowered plant 
produced what looked like oversized lemons, with leathery rinds 
and color that progressed from 
a normal green to a rich orange 
yellow. On the red-flowered plant 
the fruits were double, elongate, 
with a hard shell covered with a 
loose brown chaff. 
The FBI sat right through September. No wonder public enemies 
get discouraged. The fruits on 
each plant hung plump and almost mature, and we all knew 
that whatever was going to happen was just about due. We had 
collected unripe fruits under government supervision, so we knew 
that the lemons had several large, 
hard, bullet-like seeds; that the 
seeds in the hard-shelled fruits 
were small and flat, with feathery 
seedcoats. How those seeds were 
going to be disseminated was the 
subject of some powerful debates 
on the professor’s terrace. They 
always ended the same way, with 
Doc needling the FBI. 
“When they drop their seed,” 
he told them, “you won’t be able 
to do a thing about it. Those lemons may fire bullets ten miles 
away. The hard fruits may explode like hand grenades. How’ll 
you stop ’em?” 
It was a poser, but one day the 
G-boys came up with the answer. 
“Doctor,” one of them asked, 
“would you say the fruits are 
ripe? And if that is so, are the 
seeds mature?” 
I remember how Jim-Jam 
looked that afternoon. He was sitting on the flagstone floor of the 
terrace, resting his back against a 
post. He was working on his third 
three fingers of Irish and lime 
juice, and his eyes had a loose, relaxed, wicked twinkle. He reminded me of some old reprobate 
of a beachcomber, leaning against 
the ribs of a half-buried wreck. 
The grin on his stubbly face was a 
knowing grin. 
“Yes, to both questions,” he 
said and rolled a spot of the Irish 
over his tongue. 
“Then,” the other G-boy said, 
“we’ve got our orders. We’ll harvest the whole crop — right now.” 
They had left nothing to chance. 
They had brought a couple of 
pruning hooks and heavy gloves. 
They even had plastic bags to store 
the fruit in. 
Jim-Jam must have expected 
something of the sort. I know I 
had. Anyway, he made no protest 
and of course I knew why. He had 
done his harvesting the day before. 
“These boys are smart. Tug,” 
he had told me, “and they’re following orders. Whatever the orders are, there’s nothing I can do 
about them. But those plants are 
mine. Maybe I can’t keep the government from taking them over, 
but I’m going to have some seed.” 
And while Helen had coaxed 
the guard into the house for some 
ice cream he had collected two 
fruits of each sort. They were in 
my greenhouse refrigerator that 
minute. 
“They’re smart boys,” I remember him repeating, “but I 
don’t think they’ve counted the 
fruits.” 
I T BEGAN to sprinkle a little 
rain while the G-men got their 
harvesting outfit together and as 
we went down the garden path it 
turned into quite a shower. We 
ducked back into the entranceway 
by the terrace and watched while 
the shower became a dashing downpour. The sky became dark overhead. Sharp gusts of wind smacked 
sheets of water into the entranceway, so we went into the living 
room and watched from the win
THE MAD SCIENTIST AND THE FBI 
dows. Lightning crackled and 
thunder rumbled as it often does 
in early fall storms. 
It only lasted a few minutes. 
We went out again and the sky 
was almost clear. Water ran down 
the garden paths. The shrubbery 
dripped. Everything had a cool 
fresh smell. 
We were at the fence of the rainbow plant bed before we actually 
looked at them. One look was 
enough, but it took time to believe it. The plants lay collapsed 
and fish-belly gray. At least Doc 
and I didn’t have to be told that 
they were as dead as stones. 
I climbed the fence and walked 
on ground where no man had 
walked since spring. I lifted the 
flabby, cadaver-colored leaves and 
let them drop again. Twenty minutes earlier those plants had been 
vital, bright with color, wickedly 
active and heavy with fruit. Now 
they were dead and there wasn’t a 
sign of a fruit on either of them. 
“Well, boys,” Jim-Jam said, 
“they beat you. I couldn’t tell you 
how they would do it — but I 
thought they would.” 
We went back along the walk to 
the house, leaving the plants where 
they died. The FBI boys took the 
checkmate like men. One of 
them closed the book with only 
one last question. 
“Doctor, would you have any 
idea what became of those fruits?” 
“Not the foggiest,” Jim-Jam 
said gravely. “Maybe they were 
planted there by design and the 
planters came back for the harvest. Maybe that wasn’t a natural rain. It came at a mighty 
handy time. I’ll bet my weeding 
hoe that two blocks from here it 
didn’t even lay the dust. Ask the 
newspaper boys. Their imaginations are better than mine.” 
So now you know all the FBI 
knows. In fact, you know a little 
more. You know about the seeds 
Doc has, carefully tucked away 
and waiting for spring. So you 
might as, well know the rest of it. 
I swiped a couple of fruits, too, 
not only from under the noses of 
the FBI but from under Doc’s nose 
as well. I’ve been dosing the seeds 
with controlled radiation, using 
intensities and times of exposure 
that have always given me maximum results with the violets. I’ve 
built a heavy cage in one corner 
of the greenhouse and made a 
seedbed from soil from Doc’s garden. In March I’m going to do a 
little planting of my own. 
I may regret it. Myra would 
jaw my ear off if she knew about 
it. But I can’t stay out of it. And 
no matter what I do. I’m convinced that this isn’t the end of it. 
Something funny is definitely going on. Next time a little more 
may happen. I hope I’m there but 
it may not happen to Jim-Jam 
or to me. It may happen to you. 
They don’t have to come by UFOs, 
you know. 
So sit tight — but stay loose! 
L et us speak of the classics. 
iThe members of the Science Fiction Writers of America, urged by 
Robert Silverberg, have selected 
a list of all-time greatest sf stories, compiled in The Science Fiction Hall of Fame (edited by Robert Silverberg, Doubleday, 
$7.95), a 558-page book containing 26 stories — with additional 
volumes to come, one assumes. 
There is one copyright date 
more recent than 1960 (1963, for 
Roger Zelazny’s A Rose for Ecclesiastes). There are three stories from the 1930s — A Martian 
Odyssey, Twilight, and Helen 
O’Loy. (Weinbaum, Campbell, 
del Rey — as if you didn’t know). 
The rest — twenty-two of the 26 
greatest sf short stories and novelettes ever written by anybody 
to the knowledge of the SFWA 
membership — are from the 1940s 
and 1950s. 
Astonishing! 
Where is the fabled, warblighted “Golden Age” of the late 
1930s? Represented by Helen 
O’Loy, the Weinbaum and the 
Campbell are from another era. 
But, surely, you’d think this volume can’t possibly be omitting 
such classics as The Roads Must 
Roll, Microcosmic God, Nightfall, 
and The Weapon Shop? They’re 
in — from the 1940s. So are Mimsy 
Were the Borogoves, First 
Contact, Scanners Live in Vain, 
and Arena and Huddling Place. 
All those classics date from the 
1940s . the very time in which 
John Campbell’s fillers and blurbs 
themselves promised a return to 
far better things when the “wartime pressures” were off and ab
sent hands returned to the plough. 
The only absent hand of any eventual significance was that of Cyril Kornbluth, earning a Bronze 
Star in the Ardennes and the bad 
heart that would eventually kill 
him, author of The Little Black 
Bag, (1950), and almost certainly a complete cypher to Campbell in the 1930s. 
Clearly, in the minds of today’s 
writers who are SFWA members, 
the “Golden Age” has migrated 
at least a decade forward in time. 
What may astonish some is that 
it hasn’t migrated any farther than 
that. Silverberg’s selection process — constrained by writers’ stories competing with themselves — may have had something 
to do with it. But one would think 
that if the New Wave had any real 
steam up, this book would not in so 
many ways duplicate not only the 
content but the tone of Adventures In Time and Space — which is 
still the classic sf anthology, and 
dates from 1947. 
Curiouser and curiouser. There 
are several stories here, from the 
1950s, which are just about the 
only memorable stories by their 
particular authors. Not that 
Jerome Bixby did not come very 
close very Often, nor that Tom 
Godwin can’t write acceptably, 
but they to this date remain the 
men who wrote It’s a Good Life! 
and The Cold Equations, respectively. Then, we have several 
stories which are outright stunts; 
venture to say duds — That Only a 
Mother, Born of Man and Woman, Mars is Heavent and The Nine 
Billion Names of God. {The Star 
placed 15th in overall standings, 
and is Clarke at his best shortstory level, only one cut below his 
talent as a novelist. But Nine Billion placed eleventh and is therefore exhumed here. This my stomach cannot reconcile with any 
pretense of a professional appraisal). 
There’s something that seems a 
little thin about the 1950s selections, is what I’m trying to say. 
There are plenty of strong individual entries — Bag, Coming Attraction, Surface Tension, Flowers for Algernon. But perhaps, 
although the Golden Age has 
paged forward a few leaves on the 
calendar, it’s not only not ready 
to leap into the late 60s, it’s on 
shaky footing in the 50s. 
Fantastic! Such a result from 
such a progressive crew. 
And, by the way, the book is as 
advertised — a basic one-volume 
library of the short science fiction 
story. You should have it. You 
should also leave space beside it. 
T he classics. Yes. We know we 
have arrived, for the stories of 
our youth are now so perfectly 
embalmed that the students have 
been coming to visit them. 
They sent me late The Shattered 
Ring, subtitled “Science Fiction 
and the Quest for Meaning,” by 
Lois and Stephen Rose. (John 
Knox Press, $3.50). The meaning 
in question is a religious one. The 
purpose of the book is to demonstrate an instinctive religious 
concern on the part of the prominent (usually “classical”) sf authors, and to derive a guidance or 
at least a bon voyage telegram 
from them. 
Now, please understand the 
context of the remarks to follow. 
I think artists — all artists — are 
closer to the future than anyone 
else. I even think a rare few have 
some ability to work with this phenomenon in a meaningful way; a 
way that results in an exposition 
of truth. I doubt if science-fictionwriting artists are per se any closer to this phenomenon than any 
other kind of artist, but on the 
other hand they are probbaly no 
farther, and they present a handy 
population for practical study. 
And even for hypothetical 
example. 
But to study an animal, you 
must first catch it, then tag it, then 
follow it, else you’ll become 
rather confused, and your notes 
will be gibberish. As in: 
“Modern science fiction can be 
traced to the guiding spirit of 
John W. Campbell, who . ushered in . the classic period of 
science fiction. New talent 
emerged and developed — Olaf 
Stapledon, Isaac Asimov, Robert 
Heinlein, Theodore Sturgeon, 
A.E. van Vogt, Jack Williamson, 
Frederik Pohl.” 
What are you going to do about 
respecting a scholarly study that 
lumps in two of the very oldest 
modern science-fiction writers, 
plus Pohl, (whose reputation and 
output as a writer were negligible 
before Gravy Planet with Cyril 
Kornbluth in Galaxy, 1953), with 
Asimov, Heinlein, Sturgeon and 
the Dick Wakefield of sf, van 
Vogt? 
Nor docs it help establish the 
Roses’ credentials when the most 
important quality they can ascribe to this falsely homegeneous 
school is “their creation of a body 
of literature in which the limits 
of technology, space and time 
were greatly expanded. Men 
travelled to the moon and Mars, 
but now they also found their way 
to other space-time complexes.” 
But this isn’t so. The focus of 
the true Campbellian was a narrower, stricter one than that of the 
foregoing Williamsonian superscience writer. If the Roses had 
then properly bracketted 
Stapledon back in pre-Williamsonian time with Wells (and with 
Jack London), they might have 
done something about perceiving 
and analyzing a steady anti-totalitarian shift toward a humanism of 
the individual, as distinguished 
from a pre-totalitarian humanism 
of the mass, and it would have 
made sense to cite The Space Mer{ Please turn to page 191) 
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 
Copyright® 1970 by Robert A. Heinlein 
WHAT HAS GONE BEFORE 
When medical science cannot 
let him live as he wants, yet will 
not let him die, aged but lusty and 
extremely wealthy Johann Sebastian Bach Smith sets his financial 
empire in order and assigns his 
best friend and legal adviser, Jacob 
Salomon, the task of securing a 
warm body into which his brain 
can be transplanted. The operation 
proves successful. He recovers to 
find himself wearing the body of 
his lovely secretary, Eunice Branca. A dialogue ensues between the 
brain and the body — highly revealing to both. 
Never before have two lives become so strangely and intimately 
linked. Shock follows shock as 
Johann Sebastian Bach Smith 
learns what it means to be a beautiful woman with a zest for life and 
love — and Eunice discovers the 
uses of the power his brain wields. 
Body and brain team up to make 
a shambles of a court test of Johann’s legal identity and make arrangements, via artificial insemination, for the body to bear the 
brain’s child. 
A love story? Yes. But one 
without precedent — as is the 
strange composite creature known 
as "Miss Smith.’’ 
XXIII 
D ABROWSKI handed her out 
and Fred locked the car. They 
escorted her to and into the lift. 
Joan Eunice looked around. “This 
must be where it happened.” 
Her driver said, “Eunice, I wish 
you would change your mind.” 
“Anton, Tom and Hugo should 
have driven me today, but I was 
afraid the poor dears would get upset when they saw the inside of this 
lift. I thought you and Fred could 
stand it. Fred, are you nervous?” 
“You know damn well 1 am, 
Eunice.” 
“Over what? She entered this life 
i, 
u 
alone. I’ve got you two with me.” 
“Well . you’re a stubborn 
one. I don’t know what Ski is going to do but I am going to wait 
outside the door until you come 
out.” (Eunice, what do you do with 
stubborn men?) (It’s hard, twin, 
especially when they love you. 
You had best use female 
jiujitsu — let them have their own 
way until it turns out its your 
way.) (I’ll try.) 
“Fred, Eunice lived here for 
years. Utterly safe . except for 
one mistake. I have the radio link 
and I promise you both, solemnly, 
that I won’t stir outside Joe’s door 
until I know you're waiting.” 
97 
WHA THAS GONE BEFORE 
When medical science cannot 
let him live as he wants, yet will 
not let him die, aged but lusty and 
extremely wealthy Johann Sebastian Bach Smith sets his financial 
empire in order and assigns his 
best friend and legal adviser, Jacob 
Salomon, the task of securing a 
warm body into which his brain 
can be transplanted. The operation 
proves successful. He recovers to 
find himself wearing the body of 
his lovely secretary, Eunice Branca. A dialogue ensues between the 
brain and the body — highly revealing to both. 
Never before have two lives become so strangely and intimately 
linked. Shock follows shock as 
Johann Sebastian Bach Smith 
learns what it means to be a beautiful woman with a zest for life and 
love — and Eunice discovers the 
uses of the power his brain wields. 
Body and brain team up to make 
a shambles of a court test of Johann’s legal identity and make arrangements, via artificial insemination, for the body to bear the 
brain’s child. 
A love story? Yes. But one 
without precedent — as is the 
strange composite creature known 
as “Miss Smith.” 
XXI 11 alone. I’ve got you two with me.” 
“Well . you’re a stubborn 
D ABROWSKI handed her out one. I don’t know what Ski is goand Fred locked the car. They ing to do but / am going to wait 
escorted her to and into the lift, outside the door until you come 
Joan Eunice looked around. “This out.” (Eunice, what do you do with 
must be where it happened.” stubborn men?) (It’s hard, twin. 
Her driver said, “Eunice, I wish especially when they love you. 
you would change your mind.” You had best use female 
“Anton, Tom and Hugo should jiujitsu — let them have their own 
have driven me today, but I was way until it turns out its your 
afraid the poor dears would get up- way.) (I’ll try.) 
set when they saw the inside of this “Fred, Eunice lived here for 
lift. I thought you and Fred could years. Utterly safe . except for 
stand it. Fred, are you nervous?” one mistake. I have the radio link 
“You know damn well I am, and I promise you both, solemnly, 
Eunice.” that I won’t stir outside Joe’s door 
“Over what? She entered this life until I A:/joh’ you’re waiting.” 
“We’ll be waiting, all right — all 
the time. Right, Ski?” 
“Right! Eunice, you don’t even 
know Joe Branca still lives here.” 
“But I do. It’s just that he didn’t 
pay his phone bill, so they cut him 
off. Joe’s still there, or was at 
sixteen o’clock yesterday. Look, 
how does this sound? First, you 
know that Joe wouldn’t hurt me, 
don’t you? Anton?” 
“Oh, sure. Joe might not want to 
see you — but Joe Branca would put 
a fly outdoors before he would 
swat it.” 
“Then I’m safe as long as I’m inside with Joe. But you’re right, he 
may not want to see me. He may 
not let me in. Or I may be inside 
only minutes. So wait an hour, 
then go home. I’ll call you when I 
want you to take me home.” 
“Two hours?” suggested Fred. 
“All right, two hours. But if I 
don’t come home tonight, you are 
not to come back and buzz Joe’s 
door. You can come back tomorrow at noon and wait an hour, or 
even two, if that will make you feel 
better. And again the next day. 
But I’ll stay in Joe Branca’s studio 
a full week if it takes that to make 
his mind eJsy. Or a month, damn 
it! Or anything. Boys, I’ve got to 
do this; don’t make it harder.” 
Anton said glumly, “All right. 
We’ll do it your way.” 
“Am I ‘Eunice’ now? Or ‘Joan 
Eunice?’ ” 
He grudged a smile. “You’re 
Eunice. She would do it.” 
“That’s why I must. Look, 
darlings — ’’she put an arm around 
each of them — “last night was 
wonderful . and I’ll find a way to 
manage it again. Perhaps next time 
Mr. Salomon is away — you know 
he fusses over me like a mother 
hen. But you two do also — and you 
must not . except when you’re 
guarding me. Right now I must 
try to find a way to soothe Joe’s 
soul. But I’ll be your playmate another day. Be darlings and kiss 
me; the lift is about to stop.” 
They did so; she hooked up her 
veil. They left the lift and headed 
toward the Branca studio — Joan 
found she knew the way, as long as 
she didn’t stop to think. 
She stopped at the door. “She always kissed you goodbye? Here, 
with Joe watching?” 
“Yes.” 
“If he lets me in, kiss me goodby the same way. Just don’t stretch 
it out; he might close the door. Oh, 
I’m shaky!” (Steady down. Boss. 
Om Mani Padme Hum. Don’t use 
the button; try our voice on the 
lock. ‘Open Up!’ Like that.) 
“Open up!” Joan said. She unhooked her veil, faced the door. 
The lock started clicking but the 
door remained closed. A transparency flashed in the wall: 
PLEASE WAIT. Joan stood in 
front of the door peep, wondered if 
Joe was scanning her. (Eunice, will 
he let us in?) (I don’t know. Boss. 
You shouldn’t have come. But you 
wouldn’t listen to Jake . nor to 
me.) (But I am here. Don’t scold 
me — help me.) (I’ll try. Boss. But I 
don’t know.) 
Through the door, not as 
soundproof a« her own doors, Joan 
heard a high voice: “Joe! Joe!” 
(Who’s that?) (Could be anybody, 
Joe has lots of friends.) 
The door opened. She saw Joe 
Branca standing in it. He was 
dressed in much-worn shorts which 
had been used repeatedly for 
wiping paint brushes. His face 
showed nothing. A girl, a wrapper pulled sketchily around her, 
looked out from behind him. 
“See? It’s her!” 
“Gigi — get back. Hello, Ski. Hi, 
Fred.” 
“Hi, Joe.” 
Joan tried to keep her voice 
steady. “Joe, may I come in?” 
He finally looked at her. “You 
want to, sure. Come in. Ski. Fred.” 
Joe stood aside. 
Dabrowski answered for them. 
“Uh, not this time, Joe. Thanks.” 
“Roz. Other time, any. Welcome. Too, Fred.” 
“Thanks, Joe. See you.” The 
guards turned to leave as Joan 
started to enter — she checked 
herself, remembering that she 
must do something. “Boys!” 
Fred kissed her quickly, nervously. Dabrowski did not kiss 
her; instead he held his mouth to 
hers and said almost soundlessly, 
“Eunice, you be good to him. Or, 
damn. I’ll spank you.” 
“Yes, Anton. Let me go.” 
Quickly she turned, went inside 
past Joe, waited. Slowly he refastened the hand bolts, taking an unnecessarily long time. 
H e turned and glanced at 
her, glanced away. “Sit?” 
“Thank you, Joe.” She looked 
around at the studio clutter, saw 
two straight chairs at a small table. 
They seemed to be the only chairs; 
she went to one of them, waited for 
him to remove her cloak, realized 
that he was not going to do so. 
then took it off and dropped it, sat 
down. 
He frowned at her, seemed uncertain, then said, “Coffee? Gigi! 
Java f’ Miss Smith.” 
The girl had been watching from 
the far end of the room. She tightened her wrapper and went silently to a kitchen unit beyond the 
table, poured a cup of coffee and 
prepared to flash it. Joe Branca 
went back to an easel near the middle of the room, started making 
tiny strokes on it; Joan saw that it 
was an almost finished painting of 
the young woman addressed as 
“Gigi.” (That’s a cheat pic. Boss.) 
(A what?) (Project a photo onto 
sensitized canvas, then paint over 
it. Joe does them if someone wants 
cheesecake, or a cheap portrait, or 
a pet’s picture — but claims they 
aren’t art.) 
(Can’t see why, Eunice; it’s still 
an original oil painting.) (I can’t, 
either — but it matters to an artist. 
Boss, this place is filthy. I’m 
ashamed of it. That bitch Gigi.) 
(She lives here, you think?) (1 don’t 
know. Boss. Could be Joe’s sloppy 
housekeeping. He likes things 
clean but won’t stop to do it. Only 
two things interest Joe. Painting .. and tail) (Well, he has both, 
looks like. I see he’s kept your 
Gadabout.) (I’ll bet it won’t run 
by now. Joe can’t drive.) 
Gigi fetched coffee, placed it on 
the table. “Sugar? Isn’t any 
cream.” She leaned closer, added 
in a fierce whisper, “You don’t belong here!” 
Joan answered quietly, “Black 
is fine. Thank you, Gigi.” 
“Gigi!” 
“Yes, Joe?” 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
“Throne.” 
The girl turned and faced him. 
“In front of her?" 
“Now. Need you.” 
Slowly Gigi obeyed, untying her 
wrapper as she moved, dropped it 
as she stepped up onto the throne, 
felt into pose. Joan did not look, 
understanding her re-luctance — not modesty but unwillingness to be naked to an enemy. 
(But Tm not her enemy, Eunice.) 
(Told you this would be rhino. 
Boss.) 
Joan tried the coffee, found it 
too hot and too bitter after the 
delicately fragrant — and expensive — high-altitude brew Della 
prepared. But she resolved to 
drink it, once it had cooled. 
She wondered if Joe recognized 
what she was wearing. La 
Boutique had reconstructed, at 
great expense, a costume Eunice 
Branca had once worn, one in last 
year’s “Half & Half’ style, scarlet 
and jet, with a tiny ruffle skirt 
joining a left-leg tight to a rightside half sweater. Joan had hired 
the most expensive bodypaint artist in the city and had rigidly controlled him in reconstructing the 
design Eunice Branca had worn 
with it, as nearly as memory and 
her inner voice could manage. 
(Eunice, was Joe too upset to notice how we dressed?) (Boss, Joe 
sees everything.} (Then he’s gone 
back to painting not to notice us.) 
Maybe. But Joe wouldn’t stop 
painting for an H-bomb. That he 
let us in at all is a blue moon — in 
the middle of a painting.) 
(How long will he paint? All 
night?) (Not likely. He does that 
only for a real inspiration. This 
one’s easy.) It did not look easy to 
Joan. She could see that the artist 
was working from an exact cartoon, one that looked like a dim 
photograph of Gigi as she was 
posed — but he was working also 
from his model. Yet he was not following either model or photograph. He was enhancing, exaggerating, simplifying, making 
flesh tones warmer, turning flat 
canvas almost into stereo, realistic 
as life, warmer than life, sensuous 
and appealing. 
Perhaps it was not art — but it 
was more than a photograph. It 
reminded Joan of a long-dead 
artist Johann had liked. What was 
his name — used to paint Tahitian 
girls on black velvet? Leeteg? 
(Eunice, what do we do now? Walk 
out? Joe doesn’t seem to care either 
way.) (Boss, Joe cares dreadfully. 
See that tic on his neck?) (Then 
what do I do?} 
(Boss, all I can tell you is what I 
would do.) (Wasn’t that what I 
asked?) (Not quite. Any time I 
came home and found Joe working from another model I kept 
quiet and let him work. First I 
would get out of my working 
clothes, then shower and get off 
every speck of paint and makeup. 
Then tidy things — ^just tidy, heavy 
cleaning had to wait for weekends. Then I would get things ready 
to feed them, because Joe and his 
model were going to be hungry 
once they stopped. They always 
did stop; Joe won’t overwork a 
model. Oh, he sometimes painted 
me all night but he knew I would 
ask to stop if I got shaky.) 
(Are you telling me to strip 
down? Won’t that upset him still 
more?) (Boss, I’m not telling you 
to do anything. This visit wasn’t 
my idea. But he’s seen our body 
thousands of times — and you 
ought to know by now that nakedness isn’t upsetting, it’s relaxing. I felt that it was rude to stay 
dressed when a model was 
nude — unless I was certain she 
was easy with me. But I’m not telling you to do this. You can go look 
through the peep and see if Anton 
and Fred are still there — they will 
be — and unbolt the door and 
leave. Admit you can’t put 
Humpty Dumpty together again.) 
(I suppose I should.) Joan 
sighed, stood up — kicked her 
sandals off, peeled the half-sweater 
down, shoved the ruffle skirt down 
and got out of the tight. Joe could 
not see her but Gigi could — Joan 
saw surprise in her eyes but she did 
not break her pose. 
Joan looked at her and put a 
finger to her lips, then picked up 
dress and cloak and sandals, headed for the bath unit while avoiding 
(she thought) Joe’s angle of vision. 
She hung her clothes on a rack outside the bath and went in. 
I T TOOK only minutes with soap 
and shower to rid her body of jet 
and scarlet. (Face makeup off, 
too?) (Forget it, you don’t wear as 
much as I used to. Towels in the 
cabinet under the sink. Or should 
be.) 
Joan found one clean bath towel, 
three face towels, decided that it 
wasn’t fair to grab the last bath 
towel. She managed to get dry 
with a face towel, looked at herself 
in the mirror, decided that she 
was passable— and felt refreshed 
and relaxed by the shower. (Where 
do I start?) (Here of course. Then 
make the bed but see if it needs 
changing. Sheets in the box with 
bed lamp on it.) 
The tiny bath took little time as 
scouring powder and plastic 
sponge were where they almost 
had to be. The toilet bowl she was 
forced to give up on — she got it 
clean but stains left by flushing 
water did not respond to scrubbing. Joan wondered why a civilization that could build mighty 
spaceships could not cope with 
plumbing? 
Or was it a civilization? 
She washed her hands and went 
out. The bed seemed to have been 
slept in no more than a couple of 
nights; she decided it would be . 
presumptuous to change sheets. As 
she was straightening the bed she 
noticed lipstick on one pillow — turned it over. (Gigi?) (Might 
be. Boss, it’s her shade. Proves 
nothing.) 
(Now what?) (Work around the 
edges — don’t ever touch Joe’s stuff. 
You can pick up a tube of paint 
and dust under it . but only if 
you put it down exactly where 
you found it.) 
The edges kept her busy for a 
time. It seemed likely that Joe 
must have noticed her — but he 
gave no sign. The painting seemed 
finished but he was still working 
on it. 
The sink was loaded; she found 
soap powder and got busy. 
Once she had dishes washed, 
dried and put away, and the sink as 
sparkling as the dishes, she looked 
over the larder. (Eunice, did you 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
keep house with so few staples?) 
(Boss, I didn’t keep many perishables on hand — but this is skimpier 
than I ever kept it. Joe doesn’t 
think about such things. I never let 
him shop — because he would come 
back with some new hungry friend, 
having forgotten the bread and 
bacon and milk I had sent him for. 
Try the freezer compartment.) 
Joan found some Reddypax in 
freeze — dinners, a carton of 
vanilla ice cream almost full, 
spaghetti, pizza of several sorts. 
There were more of the last, so she 
decided she could not go wrong offering them pizza. What else? No 
fresh vegetables — Fruit? Yes, a 
small can of fruit salad, hardly 
enough but she could put it over 
scoops of ice cream, plus wafers if 
she could find any. Yes, lemon 
snaps. Not much of a meal blit she 
didn’t have much to work with. She 
started getting things ready. 
Set the table for three? Well, she 
was either going 'to be accepted — or sent home; she set it for 
three. (Eunice, there are only two 
chairs.) (The kitchen stool adjusts 
in height. Boss.) (I’m stupid.) 
(Wouldn’t have bet you could find 
your way around a kitchen at all.) 
(Maybe I wouldn’t have learned if 
Mama had had a daughter. I’ll bet 
I’ve cooked more meals than you 
have, sweetheart — not that this is 
cooking.) 
Just as Joan had everything laid 
out she heard Joe say, “Rest, 
Gigi.” 
She turned around. “Joe, will 
you two have supper now? It’s 
ready to flash.’’ 
Joe Branca turned at her voice, 
looked at her — started to speak 
and with pitiful suddenness 
went to pieces. 
His features broke, he started to 
sob, his body slowly collapsed. 
Joan hurried toward him — and 
stopped abruptly. (Boss! Don’t 
touch him!) (Oh, God, Eunice!) 
(Don’t make it worse. Gigi has 
him. Down on the floor, fast Om 
Mani Padme Hum.) 
Joan dropped into lotus seat. 
“Om Mani Padme Hum.’’ Gigi 
had given Joe a shoulder, eased 
him down. He sat on the floor, his 
head against his knees, sobbing, 
while Gigi 'knelt by him, her face 
showing the ages-old concern of a 
mother for a hurt child. “Om Mani 
Padme Hum.” (Om Mani Padme 
Hum.) (Can’t I help her, Eunice?) 
“Om Mani Padme Hum.” (No, 
Boss. Ask Gigi to help you.) 
(How?) “Om Mani Padme Hum.” 
(Ask for a Circle. Om Mani Padme Hum.) 
“Gigi! Help me form a Circle. 
Please!” 
The girl looked up, looked very 
startled, as if seeing Joan for the 
first time. 
“Om Mani Padme Hum. Help 
me, Gigi — help us both.” 
Gigi slid into lotus seat by her, 
knee to knee, reached for Joan’s 
left hand, took Joe’s right hand. 
“Joe! Joe, you must listen! Close 
the Circle with us. Now!” She 
started chanting with Joan. 
Joe Branca stopped sobbing, 
looked up, seemed not to believe 
what he saw. Then, slowly, he 
straightened his legs, moved until 
he filled the third side of the 
triangle and tried to assume the 
Padmasana. His paint smeared 
shorts were too confining; they 
got in the way. He looked down, 
seemed puzzled, then started unfastening them. Gigi let go his 
hand and Joan’s, helped him get 
them off. Then he settled easily 
into lotus, reached for their hands. 
“Om Mani Padme Hum!” 
As the Circle closed Joan felt a 
shock through hdr body, somewhat like electricity. She had felt 
it before, with three, with four, but 
never so strongly. Then it eased off 
to a sweet feeling of warmth. “Om 
Mani Padme Hum.” 
The prayer rolled around the 
Circle, rolled back, and was 
chanted in unison. They were still 
softly whispering when Joan 
stopped feeling or hearing anything — other than utter peace. 
«tmAKE.^ Wake up. Come 
Ww back . 
Joan fluttered her eyelids, felt 
her eyeballs roll down. “Yes, Winnie? I’m awake.” 
“You said you had supper ready 
to flash. Want to do it? Or shall I?” 
“Oh.” She became aware that 
the Circle was still closed. “I’ll do 
it. If I may.” 
Joe looked inquiringly into her 
face, his own face serene. “You 
okay? Good vibes?” 
“She’s okay,” Gigi answered. 
“Go take a pee and we’ll get supper on. Wash your hands; I left turpentine in the medicine cabinet.” 
“Okay.” He got up, gave a hand 
to each of the girls, pulled them to 
their feet together, turned to do as 
he was told. 
Joan followed Gigi to the kitchen unit, noticed the clock of the 
flash oven. “Gigi, is that clock 
right?” 
“Near enough. Do you have to 
leave? I hope not.” 
“Oh, no, I can stay. But how 
long did we hold the Circle?” 
“An hour, hour and half, maybe 
longer. Long enough. Does it 
matter?” 
“No.” Joan put her arms around 
the other girl. “Thank you, Gigi.” 
Gigi put her arms over Joan’s, 
hugged her. “Thank you. This is 
the first time I’ve seen Joe truly at 
one with the All, accepting his 
karma, at peace with it, since, uh, 
since — ” 
“Since Eunice was killed?” 
“Yes. He’s kept coming back to 
the crazy notion that, if he hadn’t 
gone to Philly to see his Maw, it 
wouldn’t have happened. He 
knows that’s not so — but now he 
knows it in his belly. I can tell.” 
(Boss? Say hello to Gigi for me.) 
(Break cover?) (Oh, hell, we’d 
better not. I don’t think she’d tell 
Joe — but we can’t risk it. And 
things are okay the way they are.) 
“Gigi, I think Eunice would 
want to thank you. If she could. 
Things look okay the way they are, 
now.” 
“Looks like. Say, what do I call 
you? I can’t say, ‘Hey, you!’ But 
‘Johann Sebastian Bach Smith’ 
seems like a hell of name for a 
girl.” 
“My name is Joan, now. Uh, my 
full name is ‘Joan Eunice Smith.’ 
But my middle name is, well, sort 
of a memorial. Rozzer?” 
“Roz. That’s nice, I think that’s 
perfect — Joan Eunice.” (I think 
you’re perfect. Boss. You did it! 
You know why I didn’t want to 
come here? I was scared for 
Joe . but twice as scared for me.) 
1 WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
(I knew, sweetheart. We both were 
scared. And so was Joe.) 
“Gigi, better not use my middle 
name. Joe might be upset. Bad 
vibes.” 
Gigi shook her head. “I don’t 
think so. If I’m wrong, if he needs 
to soak in the Circle some longer, 
tonight we’ve got the right Circle. 
Might not have, if he found out 
later.” 
“All right, Gigi, I’ll tell him.” 
“Yes, but wait until after we eat. 
A Circle is fine and I can stay in 
one all day, if needed. But I’m 
starved. Sandwich about five 
hours back and I don’t eat much 
breakfast.” Gigi pulled her closer, 
kissed her. “So let’s eat.” 
“Somebody say ‘eat?’ ” 
“In a minute, Joe; we got to 
talking. And we need a crack at the 
plumbing, too. First dime is yours, 
hon; I’ll flash the packs.” 
“Go ahead, Gigi.” 
“Oh, come along. Joe, you flash 
the packs.” 
“ — like your ‘Eunice Evans 
Branca Memorial,’ Joe. Because 1 
don’t want anyone ever to forget 
Eunice. Especially me.” 
Joe Branca nodded soberly. “Is 
good. Eunice ’d like.” Suddenly he 
smiled. “You okay, Joan Eunice.” 
He put down his cup, started stacking dishes, and added: “Getup you 
had on, same like one Eunice had.” 
“It was one I had seen her in, 
Joe, so I had one made like it.” 
“Good job. Dress, not skin 
paint. Sign painter, maybe?” 
“Joe, I didn’t have anyone of 
your skill to do that; I had to use 
whom I could find. Uh, is it possible that you might paint me — body 
paint, I mean — sometimes? Professional Job, professional fees, 
no obligations?” 
He smiled and shook his head. 
“Not cosmetics man, Joan 
Eunice. Sure, paint body for Eunice, she liked. Gigi, too, when she 
wants. Paint you, sure. But no fee.” 
“Joe, 1 won’t take up professional time of an artist without 
paying. But I see your point. Cosmetic painting for your wife is 
one thing — but your real work.” 
“But fun,” he answered. “Maybe do jet-and-scarlet job right before you go home, huh?” 
“That would be sweet of you, 
Joe, but don’t bother; I wouldn-’t be 
showing it. I’ll go straight home. 
But let me ask one question, 
please, about body paint. Do you 
remember that you once painted 
Eunice as a mermaid, and she 
wore it to work?” 
“Sure.” 
“Well — Gigi, this was when I 
was Johann Smith and very old 
and very ill. I hurt all the time but 
couldn’t stand heavy dosage of 
painkillers. Had to tough it. But 
here was Eunice, lovely as a flower 
and cute as a kitten, painted to 
look like a mermaid, and — Joe, 
this is the silly part. 1 don’t think I 
noticed any pain all day long, 1 
was so busy trying to figure something out. And never could. Was 
that a real brassiere Eunice had 
on? Or paint?” 
Joe looked smugly pleased. 
“Paint. Fool-the-eye.” (Boss, I 
told you that.) (Yes, little imp — 
and sometimes you fib, too.) 
“You certainly fooled my eye. I 
could see those big sea shells, I 
could almost feel their rough tex
ture. Then Eunice would turn in 
profile — and I wouldn’t be sure. I 
spent that whole day staring while 
trying to seem not to. Joe, you’re a 
great artist. It’s a shame you prefer canvas to skin.” 
“Not quite right. Like to paint 
skin on canvas. Fool-the-eye forever. Not just one day.” 
“1 stand corrected. Like that 
one.” Joan nodded at the easel. 
“Gigi, let me do the dishes, please. 
I want to.” 
“Pile in sink,” Joe ordered. “Inspiration. Two-figure compo.” 
“Okay, Joe,” Gigi answered. 
“Joan Eunice, do you feel up to 
posing late? Joe said ‘two-figure’ 
so he means you, too. But I warn 
you, when Joe says ‘Inspiration’ 
you don’t get much sleep.” 
“No,” Joe denied. “Can short it. 
Cheat some. Get pose right, shoot 
eight, nine, ten shots. Then — ” 
He suddenly looked distressed, 
turned to Joan. “Maybe not here 
tomorrow? Or could be, not want 
to pose. Damn, I forget! Think 
you sleep here. Crazy. Damn!” 
Joan said, “I don’t have to be 
anywhere at any time, Joe, and I 
would be greatly honored to pose 
for you. But — ” She turned to Gigi. 
“May I stay tonight? Is it all 
right?” 
“Oh, sure!” 
“I wonder. Since you showed me 
your wedding ring I’ve been wondering how much I am butting 
in.” 
Gigi giggled. “Hon, if you think 
that’s a ring in Joe’s nose — well. 
I’d better never think so. Joan, I 
left Sam a good month before I let 
Joe give me that ring and marry 
me. Cubical and comical. 
couldn’t believe he meant it. I 
can’t think of another couple we 
know who are married. It’s 
nice — but I still get the giggles. 
Sure you stay if you want to. We 
got a cot to set up — not much but 
we’ll put Joe on it.” 
(Watch it. Boss! This is 
dynamite — ten to one Joe won’t be 
on that cot.) (Of course not. I will 
be. Think I’m a fool?) (Sadly, I do. 
Boss. You’re lovable — but you just 
barely have sense enough to stay 
out of lifts. Not out of beds.) (Joe 
wants me to pose, I pose! If he 
wants anything else, he can have 
that, lool Anything.) 
(That’s what I thought.) (Eunice, 
Joe doesn’t want me. Gigi is his 
woman now.) (Okay, twin. But 
when did I last hear you say that 
marriage isn’t a form of death?) 
Joe Branca appeared to regard 
the matter as settled; housekeeping details seemed no interest to 
him. He said, “You oil after 
shower?” and reached out and fingered Joan’s left ribs. “No. Gigi.” 
“Chop, chop, Joe.” Gigi ducked 
into the bath, returned with a bottle 
of olive oil.. She said to Joan, 
“Lanolin is as good but I’d rather 
smell like a salad than a sheep. Joe, 
get her ribs; I’ll do her leg. Then we 
give you a quick oiling all over, 
hon, and wipe you down. Get all off 
that your skin doesn’t absorb. 
Mmm, some red paint back here 
where you can’t see, but olive oil 
cuts it. Joan, I’ve had twice as good 
a complexion since Joe has been 
making me take care of my skin.” 
“You have a perfect skin, Gigi.” 
“Joe’s a tyrant about it. Now for 
a wipedown.” 
“Not too much wipe,” Joe 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
warned. “Need highlights in cheat 
shots.” 
“Easy on the wipedown. Some 
oil on me, Joe?” 
“Da.” 
“Okay, Maestro. Joan, we’ll 
polish each other bone dry before 
we go to bed. If we’re not foo tired 
to care — no importa, disposable 
sheets. Joe, are you going to tell 
your slaves what this pic is?” 
“Sure, need acting. Gut acting. 
Lez pic.” 
“Huh? Joe, you can’t put Joan in 
such a pic. You can’t." 
“Wait, Mate. I don’ draw comic 
books. You know. Pic so square 
can hang in church. But symbols 
so gut-loaded old butch pays top 
money. But — Joan Eunice, can 
change face if you say?” He looked 
anxious. 
“Joe, paint the way you want to. 
If somebody recognizes me in 
one of your paintings I’ll be 
proud.” 
WftKAY.” Rapidly Joe Branca 
Ubuilt a low platform of boards 
on boxes, heaped floor cushions 
on top, covered it all .with a ragged 
heavy cloth. “Throne, Gigi first. 
Gigi butch, Joan Eunice sweetheart.” He moved them like clay 
figures, shoving them into position 
like a butcher handling meat, so 
that Gigi was supported by cushions while she held Joan in her 
arms and looked into Joan’s eyes. 
Joan’s position fig-leafed Gigi; 
Joe raised Joan’s left knee so that 
she fig-leafed herself. Then he 
placed Gigi’s right hand under 
Joan’s left breast, not cupping it 
but touching — stepped back and 
scowled. 
— stepped forward, changed the 
composition slightly, moving them 
so little that Joan could not guess 
what difference it made. Apparently satisfied, he shoved cushions in more tightly so that each 
could hold the pose without strain. 
He placed a platter just below 
them, slanted with careful casualness. “Is Greek lyre,” he said. 
“Title, Bilitis Sings. Song just pau, 
action not yet. Golden moment 
between.” He looked at them 
carefully, still scowling. “Joan 
Eunice, you knocked up?” 
Joan was very startled. “Does it 
show? I haven’t gained an ounce.” 
(Erase and correct — nineteen 
ounces.) (Yes, but not enough to 
show. Aside from pizza just now. 
I’ve stuck to Roberto’s diet. You 
know I have.) 
Joe shook his head. “Figure not 
show. You happy, Joan Eunice?” 
“Joe, I’m dreadfully happy 
about it. But I haven’t told anyone 
yet.” 
“Be easy, Louisie; Gigi don’ 
yatter.” He smiled in benison and 
Joan saw for the first time how 
beautiful he could be. “What 
counts, you happy. Happy mama, 
happy baby. Knocked-up broads 
look different. Better. Skin 
glows, muscles firm, folds under 
eyes fill out. Whole body better 
tone. Eye can see but most can’t 
see what they see. Lucky I got you 
for model right now. But solves 
problem been eatin’ me.” 
“What, Joe? How?” (Eunice, is 
this all right?) (Sure, twin. Joe approves of babies as long as he 
doesn’t have to bother with them. 
He’s pleased that you are happy 
— and doesn’t think about how it 
happened or what you’ll do about 
it. But not callous. If you were 
broke he would take you in and try 
to support your baby and still not 
ask where you got it. He doesn’t 
find the world complex, dear — so 
it isn’t ... to him.) 
“Puzzle problem. You look like 
Eunice, how else? But look better. 
Impossible. Know why now. 
Any broad looks best doin’ her 
thing.” 
“Joe, do you think pregnant 
women are beautiful later? Say 
eight, or nearly nine months 
gone?” 
“Sure!” Joe seemed surprised 
that she would ask. “More beautiful. Healthy, happy woman ready 
to drop — how not? Top symbol of 
The All. Shut up now. Work.” 
“Please, Joe, one more question. 
Will you paint me when I’m big as 
a house? Between eight and nine 
months? Could be a cheat job. 
Might have to be — I might not be 
able to pose very long when I’m 
heaviest.” 
He smiled in delight. “You bet, 
Annette! Artist don’t get that 
chance much. Most broads silly 
about it. But now shut up. Must 
look gutsy, so think gutsy. Don’ 
act — be. Sweaty, eager. Joan 
Eunice, Gigi’s got you set up, 
eager. But scared. Virgin. Gigi, you 
just eager. Maybe gloating, but 
think, don’t do. Not even face. Just 
think.” 
He stopped to reposition lights, 
scowled at his models, changed his 
lights a little, brushed an oily rag 
on Gigi’s right shoulder and breast. 
“Is right! Nipples up? Joan Eunice, 
can’t you get ’em tight? Try thinking about men, not Gigi.” 
“I’ll fix it,” Gigi assured him. 
“Listen, darling.” She started 
whispering, telling Joan in blunt 
detail what this ancient Grecian 
Lesbian was about to do to the 
virgin helpless in her arms. 
Joan found that her breasts 
tightened until they hurt. She wet 
her lips and looked back at Gigi, 
hardly noticed that they were being photographed. 
“Break.” announced Joe. “Off 
throne, pau tonight. Got good 
shots.” 
Joan straightened up, peered 
across the room at the clock. “My 
goodness! Blackbirds already?” 
“So bed,” he agreed. “Pose 
tomorrow.” 
Gigi said, “I’m still going to do 
those dishes, Joe. Set up the cot.” 
“I’ll do them, Gigi.” 
“I’ll wash, you can wipe.” 
By the time they finished, Joe 
was in the cot and apparently 
asleep. Gigi said, “Which side do 
you like, hon?” 
“Either one.” 
“Crawl in.” 
XXIV 
J OAN woke with her head on 
Gigi’s shoulder. Gigi’s looking 
at her helped Joan to remember 
where she was. She yawned and 
said, “Good morning, darling. Is it 
morning? Where’s Joe?” 
“Joe’s getting breakfast. Had 
enough sleep, dear?” 
“Guess so. What time is it?” 
“1 don’t know. The question is, 
are you rested? If not, go back to 
sleep.” 
“I’m rested, I feel grand. Let’s 
get up.” 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
“All right. But I charge one 
kiss to get past me.” 
“Outrageous,” Joan said happily, and paid toll. 
But Joe was not at the kitchen 
unit, he was projecting the photographs he had taken the night before. Gigi said, “Look at that, 
Joan. Forgotten all about offering 
to get breakfast.” 
“It’s no matter,” Joan said softly
“Don’t bother to keep your 
voice down, Joe can’t hear when 
he’s working. Unless you shout. 
Well, let’s scrounge, then we’ll try 
to get him to eat. Hmm . not 
much to offer a guest.” 
“I don’t need a big breakfast. 
Juice and toast. Coffee.” 
“No juice.” Gigi poked around 
futilely. “I could give you a Reddypak. Spaghetti or something. 
I’ve got to grocery-shop. Send Joe 
out for groceries and he comes 
home with a new picture book and 
some paint, happy as a kid. No 
use scolding him.” 
Joan Eunice caught an undertone in Gigi’s voice, said softly, 
“Gigi, are you broke?” 
Gigi did not answer. She kept 
her face turned away, got out half 
a loaf of bread, prepared to make 
toast. Joan persisted, still speaking quietly, “Gigi, I’m rich, I suppose you know. But Joe won’t 
take a dime from me. You don’t 
have to be that stubborn.” 
Gigi measured out powder for 
six cups of coffee. Then she said 
almost as softly, “Joan, I was a 
whore when Big Sam and I were 
together. Somebody had to pay 
the rent and half his pupils never 
paid what they promised, and the 
rest paid so little it hardly made 
up for the coffee and doughnuts 
they ate. Hell, some of them came 
to class just to eat. So somebody 
had to work. I never hustled men 
much — Sam didn’t like it if I made 
it with another man — unless it was 
a swing scene that he had set up. 
But an old butch is often generous. 
When we had to have money I 
would go sit in one of the Lez coffee shops and bring some money 
home — Sam didn’t mind that. 
“I finally got wise that I was being used, not just supporting him. 
Those swing scenes — a guru needs 
a young chela for openers or it 
won’t get off the ground. Joan, a 
woman will do anything for a man 
— but she hates to think it’s oneway street. Now take Joe. Doesn’t 
sell many paintings and we usually 
have to split fifty-fifty to get them 
hung. But Joe doesn’t use a woman no matter how thin things are.” 
She looked around at Joan. 
“When I first posed for Joe he 
paid me guild rates, none of this 
kark about a fin now and another 
fin when he sells the picture. He 
had some money from Eunice. Insurance, I suppose. But Joe is a 
soft slob and everybody borrowed 
it and everybody spent it and nobody paid it back and it was gone 
before I shacked in with him and 
started minding his money. Somebody’s paying the rent and utilities 
on this studio. You, maybe?” 
“No.” 
“You know about it?” 
“Yes. A man who greatly admired Eunice took care of it. Joe 
can live here the rest of his life if 
it suits him. And I can drop a hint 
and the phone will be turned back 
on. The phone was an oversight 
when the rent and power and water 
and such were arranged for.” 
“We don’t need a phone. I think 
half the people on this level used 
Joe’s phone as a free public phone 
—some still try and get sore when 
I tell ’em there’s no phone here, 
please go away; Joe is working. 
Uh, that man who admired Eunice 
—named ‘Johann’ maybe?” 
“No, not Johann and his name 
isn’t Joan now. Gigi, I can’t tell 
you without his permission and I 
don’t have it. Has Joe ever said 
anything about the rent?” 
“Truthfully I don’t think he’s 
thought about it. He’s a child, 
some ways, Joan. Art and sex — 
doesn’t notice other things until 
he bangs his nose into them.” 
“Then maybe he wouldn’t notice this. I’ve got my car radio 
link in my purse, I can call for it. 
If you tell Joe you’ve got to grocery-shop, he’ll let you go, won’t 
he?” 
“Oh,, sure. Won’t even fuss — 
even though he has his heart set on 
painting us all day today.” 
“So you tell him you must and 
1 offer to take you in my car. We 
can pick up a big load, with a car 
and two guards to carry for us. 
Maybe Joe won’t suspect that I’ve 
paid for it. Or maybe you can tell 
him that a picture sold.” 
Gigi looked thoughtful. Then 
she sighed. “You tempt me, you 
cuddlesome little broad. But I had 
better hold off and eat pizza till we 
sell another painting. And we will. 
Best not to monkey with a setup 
that works, 1 think.” 
(She’s right. Boss. Leave it 
alone.) (But, Eunice, there’s not a 
thing for breakfast but coffee and 
dry toast. That’s no matter but 
there are only four Reddypax in 
there and three pizzas — we ate 
three last night. A few other items, 
not much. I can’t leave it alone.) 
(You’ve got to leave it alone. You 
trying to cut off his balls? Or split 
him up with Gigi? Gigi’s good for 
him, she’ll find a way. Do I, or do 
I not, know more about Joe than 
you do?) (You do, Eunice — but 
people have to eat.) (Yes, Boss, 
but it doesn’t hurt to miss a couple 
of meals.) (Damn it, girl, what do 
you know about being hungry? / 
went through the ’thirties.) (Okay, 
Boss, louse it up. I’ll keep quiet.) 
(Eunice — please'. You said I did 
fine last night.) (So I did, and you 
certainly did. Now keep up the 
good work by leaving them alone 
or by finding some way to let Gigi 
come by groceries honestly . 
but don’t give them anything.) (All 
right, sweetheart. I’ll try.) 
“Gigi, here in the fridge — bacon 
grease in this can?” 
“Yes, I save it. Can be useful.” 
“Can indeed! And I see two 
eggs.” 
“Well, yes. But two eggs split 
three ways is sort of feeble. But 
I’ll fry one for you and one for 
Joe.” 
“Go soak your head, cuddle 
baby; I’m going to teach you Depression cooking I learned in the 
nineteen-thirties.” 
Gigi Branca suddenly looked 
upset. “Joan, you gave me goose 
bumps. I can’t realize how old you 
are — but you’re not, really — are 
you?” 
“Depends on which rubber ruler 
you use, dear. I remember the 
1 WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
Great Depression of the ’thirties; 
I was about as old as you are now. 
By that scale I’m ninety-five, 
t-ooked at another way I’m only 
weeks old and not able to crawl 
without help. Always making mistakes. But by still a third way to 
measure it I’m the age of this 
body — Eunice’s body — and that’s 
how I like to be treated. Don’t let 
me be a ghost, dear — hug me and 
tell me I’m not.” (What you got 
against ghosts, Boss?) (Nothing at 
all, some of my best friends are 
ghosts — but I wouldn’t want my 
sister to marry one.) (Very funny. 
Boss — who writes your gags? We 
did marry a ghost — in Dr. Olsen’s 
examining room.) (Ouch! Sorry 
about it, Eunice?) (No, Boss darling, you’re just the old goat — old 
ghost, pardon me — I want for our 
little bastard.) (Love you, too. 
Busybody.) 
Gigi hugged her. 
“First we melt the bacon grease 
and make sure it’s not rancid — or 
not too rancid. Then we soak the 
bread in it and fry it. We scramble 
the eggs and since we don’t have 
cream to stretch them, we use 
what we find. I’ll settle for powdered milk, or flour, or corn 
starch. Even dry gelatin. We don’t 
salt the eggs, the grease may be 
salty enough — salt to taste afterward. But if you have Worchestershire sauce, or A-1, or anything 
like that, we add a little before we 
scramble. Then we spoon this goop 
onto six slices of fried bread, two 
to a customer, and garnish with 
paprika, or dried parsley, or 
chopped most anything, to make 
it look fancy. This is creative 
cookery a la WPA. We set the 
table the best we can manage — 
fancy cloth and real napkins, if 
you have them. A flower, even an 
artificial one. Or a candle. Anything to swank it up. Now — do I 
fry the bread while you stretch the 
eggs? Or vice versa?” 
J OE reluctantly came to the table, 
absent-mindedly took a bite — 
looked surprised. “Who cooked?” 
“We both did,” Joan answered. 
“So? Tasty.” 
“Joan showed me how and we’ll 
have it again some time, Joe,” 
Gigi amended. 
“Soon.” 
“All right. Joan, you can read, 
can’t you?” 
“Why, yes.” 
“Thought you could. There’s a 
letter from Joe’s mother, been here 
three days. I’ve been meaning to 
find somebody to read it but Joe’s 
kept me busy posing — and Joe is 
particular who reads his mother’s 
letters.” 
“Gigi, Joan’s company. Not 
polite.” 
“Joe, am I company? If I am, I 
won’t finish breakfast and I won’t 
pose — I’ll call Anton and Fred and 
go home!” (‘That’s telling him. 
Fat Lady!’) (That’s a vulgar joke, 
Eunice.) (I’m vulgar. Boss. Come 
to think about it, you’re about as 
vulgar as they come yourself, 
though I wasn’t sure of it till I 
woke up inside your head.) (I give 
up. But Joe can’t make us ‘company.’) (Of course not. Quiver 
your chin and make him kiss you 
— he’s never kissed you with the 
lights on.) 
Joe said soberly, “Sorry, Joan 
Eunice.” 
Joan pouted her lip. “You ought 
to be. You ought to kiss me and 
tell me I’m family. Not ‘company.’ ’’ 
“She’s right,” agreed Gigi. 
“You’ve got to kiss and make up.” 
“Oh, hell.” Joe stood up, came 
around to Joan Eunice’s chair, 
took her face, tilted it up and 
kissed her. “Family. Not company. Now eat!” 
“Yes, Joe. Thank you.” (He can 
do better.) (So we both know.) 
“But, Joe, I won’t read your letter unless you want me to. Gigi, 
you startled me when you indicated you could not read. I 
thought I could tell by the way a 
person talks. Is it your eyesight?” 
“Eyes are okay. Oh, I’m a real 
Talking Woman. Had some 
coaching, done some little theater. 
Probably should have learned to 
read — though I can’t say I’ve 
missed it. Computer fouled up my 
pre-school test records and I was 
in sixth grade before anybody 
caught it. Then it was sort o’late 
to change tracks and I stayed on 
the ‘practical.’ There was talk of 
putting me through a remedial but 
the principal put his foot down. 
Said there wasn’t enough budget 
to handle the ones that could benefit from it.” She shrugged. “Maybe the fact that he was a third had 
something to do with it. Anyhow I 
don’t miss it. Joe, shall I find the 
letter?” 
“Sure. Joan Eunice is family.” 
Joan found Mother Branca’s 
handwriting difficult, so she read 
the letter to herself to be sure she 
could read it aloud — and ran into 
trouble. (Eunice! How do I handle 
this.) (Twin, never tell a man any
thing he doesn’t need to know. I 
censored as necessary. Even some 
of your mail, when you were sickest.) (Know you did, baggage, as I 
reread some you had read aloud.) 
(Boss, some went straight into the 
shredder. And this one should have 
gone there — so censor it.) (You 
were married to him, sweetheart, 
but I’m not. I have no right to censor his mail.) (Twin, between being right and being kind, I know 
which way I vote.) (Oh, shut up, I 
won’t censor Joe’s mail!) 
“Takes a while to get used to 
strange handwriting,” Joan Eunice said apologetically. “All 
right, here it is: 
‘‘Darling Baby Boy. Mama 
don’t feel so — ” 
“Don’t read all,” Joe interrupted. “Just tell.” 
“That’s right” agreed Gigi. 
“Joe’s mother puts in a lot of kark 
about noisy neighbors and their 
pets and people Joe never heard of. 
All he wants is news. If any.” 
(You see, twin?) (Eunice, I’m 
still not going to censor. Oh, I can 
leave out trivial gossip. Uh, maybe edit the wording.) (You damn 
well better. Boss, and you know 
it.) 
“All right. Your mother says 
her stomach is troubling her — ” 
{Mama don’t feel so good and 
cant seem to get no relief nohow. 
The medicare man says it's not 
stomach cancer but what does he 
know? Sign says he’s an internist 
and everybody knows an internist 
is a student, not a real doctor. 
What do we pay taxes for when 
just a student can half kill me like 
I was a dog or a cat or something 
they’re always cutting up behind 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
locked doors like they say on teevee?) 
“Joe, she says that her stomach 
has been bothering her but she’s 
been getting tests from an internal 
medicine man — that’s a doctor 
who specializes in such ailments, 
they are very learned — and he has 
assured her that it isn’t cancer or 
anything of that sort.’’ 
{The new priest ain’t no help. 
He’s a young shot that thinks he 
knows it all. Won’t listen. Claims 
I get just as good treatment as 
anybody when he knows it ain’t 
true. You got to be a nigger to get 
anything around here. We white 
people that built this country and 
paid for it are Just so much dirt. 
When I go to medicare clinic, they 
make your Mama wait while 
Mexican women go in first. How 
about that?) 
“She says that there is a new 
priest in your parish, a younger 
one than the last, and that he has 
investigated and has reassured 
her that she is getting the proper 
treatment. But she says that she 
sometimes has to wait a long time 
at the clinic.” 
“Why not?” said Joe. “Got 
nothin’ but kill time. Don’ work.” 
(Annamaria is going to have a 
baby. That snot priest says she 
ought to go to a Home. You know 
what terrible places those Homes 
are and its Un-American to bust 
up families. They don’t do that in 
the Old Country and that’s what 1 
told the Visitor. You’d think the 
way they throw away money on 
people that don’t deserve it they 
could spend a little on a decent 
family that just wants to be left 
alone and not bothered. The other 
Johnson twin — not the one that 
dropped out, the one I told you 
was out on parole again — got 
busted again and about time! 
There's a family the Visitor could 
look into — but oh, no, he just told 
me to mind my own business.”) 
“Someone named Annamaria 
is pregnant.” 
Gigi said, “Which one is that, 
'Joe?” 
“Baby sister. Twelve. Maybe 
thirteen.” Joe shrugged. 
“Well, your parish priest thinks 
she ought to go into a home for 
expectant mothers but your mother feels that she would be better off 
at home. There is something about 
a neighbor family named Johnson.” 
“Skip.” 
Baby Boy, Mama don't hardly 
never get a letter from you since 
Eunice died. Ain't there no letterwriter in your block? You don’t 
know how a mother worries when 
she don't hear from her little boy. 
I watch the mail box every day, be 
sure nobody swipes it fore I get it. 
But no letter from my little Josie 
— just ads and once a month the 
Check. 
“She says she hasn’t heard from 
you in a long time, Joe. I’d be 
glad to write one for you before I 
go, anything you dictate — and 
send it by Mercury to be sure she 
gets it.” 
“Maybe. Thanks.” Joe did not 
seem enthusiastic. “See later. 
Paint first. Any more? Just tell.” 
(Eunice, here comes the tough 
part.) (So skip it!) (I can’t'?) 
(/ seen you in the teevee and almost dropped dead when you said 
you gave away a thousand million 
dollars you had every right to. 
Don't your own mother mean 
nothing to you? I didn't raise you 
and love you and take care of you 
when you busted your collarbone 
to be treated like that. You go 
straight to that Miss Yohan Bassing Bock Smith and tell her she 
can just wipe that nasty sneer off 
her face because I want my rightful share of whats coming to me 
and I’m going to get it. I already 
been to a lawyer and he said he'd 
take my side for fifty-fifty as soon 
as I paid him a thousand dollars 
for expenses. I told him he was a 
thief. But you just tell that stuckup Miss Smith to pay up or my 
lawyer will put her in jail!!!! 
Sometimes I think the best 
thing is just pack up everybody 
and go visit you till she pays up. 
Maybe just stay. Would be hard 
to leave all our old friends here in 
Philly but you need somebody to 
keep house now that you haven’t 
got no wife to do for you. It won’t 
be the first time I’ve made sacrifices for my darling boy. 
Your Loving Mother. 
“Joe, apparently your mother 
watched my identity hearing on 
video and heard your testimony. 
She seems disappointed to learn 
that you gave money to establish 
a memorial to Eunice, when you 
could have kept it.” 
Joe made no comment. 
Joan went on: “She says she 
may pack up all the family and 
pay you a visit but the way it’s 
phrased I don’t think she will. 
That’s all except she sends you her 
love. Joe, I can see how your 
mother could be disappointed in 
what you did about — ” 
“My business. Not hers.” 
“May I finish, Joe? From this 
letter I think she must be poor and 
I have been poor myself and know 
how it feels. Joe, I think that your 
memorial to Eunice was a wonderful thing, the most gallant tribute of a husband to the memory 
of his wife I’ve ever heard of. I 
heartily approve and I think Eunice must feel honored by it.” (1 
do. Boss. But maybe he overdid it, 
huh? Jake could have set up a little annuity for Joe — eating money, I mean — with part of it. But 
Joe never did know how to do anything part way — whole hawg, or 
nothing; that’s Joe.) (Maybe we 
can fix it, dear.) 
“Joe, if I paid your mother an 
allowance — you know I can afford it — it wouldn’t be you accepting money from Eunice’s 
death.” 
“No.” 
“But I would like to! She’s 
your mother, it would be sort of 
an additional memorial to Eunice. 
Say enough to — ” 
“No,” he repeated flatly. 
Joan Eunice sighed. “I should 
have kept quiet and arranged it 
through Jake Salomon.” She 
•memorized the return address, intending to do it anyhow. “Joe, you 
are a lovable man and I can see 
why Eunice was devoted to you — 
I’ve fallen in love with you myself 
and I think you both know it — 
without any intention of crowding you out, Gigi; 1 love you just 
as much. But, Joe, sweet and gallant as you are . you are a bit 
stiff-necked, too.” (Sure he is. 
Boss darling, but it’s no use trying to change people. So drop it. 
1 WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
You didn’t need to sneak that address; I could have told you.) 
“Joan.” 
“Yes, Gigi?” 
“Hate to say this, hon — but 
Joe’s right and you’re wrong.” 
“But—” 
“Tell you later, we’ll talk while 
we pose. Grab the bathroom if you 
need to while I put dishes to soak; 
Joe wants to start.” 
J OAN was surprised to learn that 
she could visit with Gigi while 
they posed. But Joe assured her 
that he had the expressions he 
wanted from the photographs; he 
simply wanted them to hold still. 
He took even more pains to get 
them arranged than he had for the 
camera. Talk did not bother him 
as long as it was not to him. Nevertheless Joan tended to whisper 
while Gigi used the normal tones 
of a face-to-face conversation. 
“Now I’ll tell you why you 
must not send money to Joe’s 
mother. But wait a sec — he’s done 
it again. Joe! Joe! Put on your 
shorts and quit wiping pigment on 
your skin.” Joe did not answer but 
did so. “Joan, if you’ve got money to throw away, flush it down 
the pot but don’t send it to Joe’s* 
mother. She’s a wino.” 
“Oh.” 
“Yeah. Joe knows it, her Welfare visitor knows it; they don’t 
let her have her family allowance 
in cash — she gets one of the pink 
checks, not a green one. Just the 
same she’ll take groceries around 
the corner and trade ’em for muscatel. That stomach trouble — forget it. Unless you want to help her 
drink herself to death. No loss if 
you did. The kids might be better 
off.” 
Joan sighed. “I never will learn. 
Gigi, all my life I’ve given money 
away. Can’t say I did any good 
with it and I know I’ve done lots 
of harm. Me and my big mouth!” 
“Your big heart, dear. This is 
one time not to give it away. I 
know. I’ve had a lot of her letters 
read to me. You trimmed that 
one, didn’t you?” 
“Did it show?” 
“To me it did — because I know 
what they sound like. I learned 
from the first one never again to 
have somebody just read them 
aloud to Joe; he gets upset. So I 
listen — I’m a quick study, used to 
learn my sides and cues just from 
two readings aloud when I was 
finding out I wasn’t an actress — 
and then I trim it to what Joe 
needs to hear. Figured you were 
smart enough to do it without being told and I was right — except 
that you could have trimmed it 
still more and Joe would have 
been satisfied.” 
“Gigi, how did such nice a person as Joe — and so talented — 
come from such a family?” 
“How do any of us happen to be 
what we are? It just happens. But 
— look, it’s never polite to play 
the dozens, is it?” 
“I shouldn’t have asked.” 
“I meant it isn’t polite for me 
to. But I’m going to. I’ve often 
wondered if Joe was any relation 
to his mother. He doesn’t look 
like her; Joe has a picture taken 
when she was about the age he is 
now. No resemblance.” 
“Maybe he takes after his father.” 
“Well, maybe. But Paw Branca 
I’m not sure about; be left her 
years back. If Paw Branca is his 
Pop. If she has any idea who his 
father is.” 
“I guess that’s often the case. 
Look at me — pregnant and not 
married; I can’t criticize.” 
“You don’t know who did it, 
dear?” 
“Well . yes, I do. But I’m 
never, never, never going to tell. 
It suits me to keep it to myself 
and I can afford to do it that way.” 
“Well — none of my business and 
you seem happy. But about Joe — 
I think he’s an orphan. Somebody’s little bastard who wound* 
up with this bitch, though I can’t 
guess how. Joe doesn’t say so. Although he never talks much — unless he has to explain things to a 
model. But his mother has had 
one good influence on him. 
Guess.” 
“I can’t.” 
“Joe won’t drink. Oh, we keep 
beer for frierids when we can, but 
Joe never drinks it. He won’t 
touch pot. He won’t join a Circle 
if it calls for a high. You know 
how it is with drugs — all of them 
against the law but as easy to buy 
as chewing gum. I could show you 
three connections in this one complex where you can buy you-nameit. But Joe won’t touch any of it.” 
Gigi looked sheepish. “I thought 
he was some kind of a freak. Oh, I 
was never hooked but I couldn’t 
see any harm in an occasional trip 
with friends. 
“Then I shacked with him and 
he was broke and 1 was, too, and 
groceries were our only luxury and 
— well, I haven’t touched anything 
since he married me. And don’t 
want to; I feel grand. New woman.” 
“You certainly look happy and 
healthy. Uh, this ‘Big Sam,’ did 
he have a habit?” 
Not a habit. But Sam would eat, 
drink, or smoke anything somebody else paid for. Oh, he didn’t 
mainline — doesn’t fit the image for 
a guru and needle marks show — 
and he was proud of his body.” 
“What did you do before you 
were his chela?” 
“His meal ticket, you mean. 
Same thing — model and whore. 
What else is there to do? Babysat. 
Served drinks in my skin for a 
while but they let me go when they 
found a girl who could write — discrimination and I could have 
fought it as I never got my orders 
mixed up; my memory is better 
than people’s who have to write 
things down. But, hell, no use trying to hang on when they don’t 
want you. Joan, you said you’d 
been giving money away all your 
life.” 
“I exaggerated, Gigi. Never 
had much until after World War 
Two. I just meant I wasn’t stingy 
even as a kid, when every nickel 
came the hard way.” 
“ ‘Nickel?’ ” 
“A five-cent piece. They used to 
be minted from a nickel alloy and 
were called that. Dimes and even 
dollars used to be silver. We actually had gold money when I was 
a kid. Then during the Great Depression I was flat broke for about 
six months — and other people 
helped me — and then later I helped 
some, sometimes the same people. 
But giving money away on a large 
1 WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
scale I didn’t start until I had more 
money than I could spend or 
wanted to invest, and the tax laws 
at that time fixed it so that you 
could do more giving it away than 
by keeping it.” 
“Seems a funny way to run 
things. But of course I’ve never 
paid taxes.” 
WVOU just think you haven’t. 
1 You started the day you were 
born. We may eliminate death 
someday but 1 doubt if we’ll ever 
eliminate taxes.” 
“Well ... I won’t argue it, 
Joan, you must know more about 
it than I do. How much money 
have you given away?” 
“Oh, it didn’t amount to more 
than a few thousand until after 
War Two and most of that was 
loans I knew I would never collect. 
Kept records for years — then one 
day I burned the record book and 
felt easier. Since then — I’d have 
to consult my accountant. Several 
millions.” 
“Several millions^ Dollars?” 
“Look, cuddly, don’t be impressed. After a certain point money isn’t money, it’s just bookkeeping figures or magnetized dots in a 
computer.” 
“1 wasn’t exactly impressed. 
Confused. Joan, I don’t have any 
feeling of any sort for that much 
money. A hundred dollars I understand. Even a thousand. But 
that much is like the National 
Debt; it doesn’t mean anything to 
me.” 
“Nor does it to me, Gigi; it’s 
like a chess game — a game played 
just for itself, and one I’m tired of. 
Look you wouldn’t let me buy 
groceries even though I am helping to eat them. Would you accept a million dollars from me?” 
“Uh ... no! It would scare me.” 
“That’s an even wiser decision 
than the one you made before 
breakfast. But page Diogenes!” 
“Who’s he?” 
“Greek philosopher who went 
around searching for an honest 
man. Never found him.” 
Gigi looked thoughtful. “I’m 
not very honest, Joan. But I think 
I’ve found an honest man. Joe.” 
“I think so, too. But, Gigi, may 
I say why I think you were smart 
to say No? Oh, it was a gag, sort 
of, but if you had said Yes I would 
not have welched. But I would hate 
to do it to you. May I tell you 
why? What’s wrong with being 
rich?” 
“I thought being rich was supposed to be fun.” 
“It’s fun, some ways. When 
you’re really wealthy — and I am — 
money is power. Tm not saying 
that power isn’t worth having. 
Take me, if I hadn’t had that much 
raw power, I wouldn’t be here chatting with you; I’d be dead. And I 
like it here, with your arms around 
me and Joe painting a picture of 
us because he thinks we’re beautiful — and we are. But power works 
both ways; the man — or woman — 
who has it, can’t escape it. Gigi, 
when you’re rich you don’t have 
friends; you just have endless acquaintances.” 
“Ten minutes,” said Joe. 
“Rest time,” said Gigi. 
“Huh? But we’ve been resting.” 
“So get up and stretch, it’ll be a 
long day. If Joe says we’ve posed 
fifty minutes, we have; he uses a 
timer. And have a cup of coffee; 
I’m going to. Coffee, Joe?” 
“Yes.” 
“Can we look?” 
“No. Lunch break, maybe.” 
“Must be going well, Joan, or 
Joe wouldn’t even make a guess. 
Joe, Joan tells me that a rich person can’t have friends.” 
“Hey, wait, I didn’t finish. Gigi, 
a rich person can have friends. But 
it has to be someone who isn’t interested in his money. Like you. 
Like Joe. Even that doesn’t mean 
he’s a friend. First you have to 
find him. Then you have to know 
this about him, which may be — is! 
— hard to find out. There aren’t 
many such people; even other rich 
people aren’t likely to qualify. 
Then you have to win his friendship . and that’s harder for a 
rich man than it is for other people. A rich man gets suspicious 
and puts on a false face to strangers — and that’s no way to win 
friends. So in general, it’s true — 
if you’re rich you don’t have 
friends. Just acquaintances, kept 
at arm’s length because you’ve 
been hurt before.” 
Gigi suddenly turned around 
from the kitchen unit. “Joan. 
We’re your friends.” 
“I hope so.” Joan looked soberly from Gigi to her husband. “I 
felt your love in our Circle. But it 
won’t be easy, Gigi. Joe looks at 
me and can’t help remembering 
Eunice — and you look at me and 
can’t help wondering what effect 
it has on Joe.” 
“We don’t! Tell her, Joe.” 
“Gigi’s right,” Joe said gently. 
“Eunice dead. She wanted you to 
have what you got. Me — over my 
gut ache, all done in t’ Circle.” 
(Boss, do you mind if I get out for 
a moment and trot around in my 
bones? A girl likes to be missed 
a little.) (Eunice, we must not 
hurt him. It was all we could manage to heal him.) (I know. But the 
next time he kisses us I’m going 
to be tempted to speak up and tell 
him I’m here.) (Om Mani Padme 
Hum.) (Om Mani Padme Hum — 
and kark on you and Diogenes 
both. Let’s go home and phone 
Roberto.) (Sweetheart, we’ll stay 
here until we’ve cracked the bone 
and eaten the marrow.) (Okay, 
okay. That Gigi is as cuddly as 
Winsome, isn’t she?) 
“Joe, I want us three to be 
friends and never break our Circle in our hearts. But I’m not going to put too much strain on it. 
Not fair to you, not fair to Gigi — 
not even fair to me. Gigi, I wasn’t 
saying I didn’t have any friends. I 
do have. You two. A doctor who 
took care of me and honestly 
doesn’t give a damn about money. 
The nurse he is about to marry 
who is the nearest thing to a sister I’ve ever had. My four driving 
guards — I’ve tried very hard with 
those four, Joe, because I knew 
they were your friends and Eunice’s. But that’s an odd situation; 
I’m more their baby they take care 
of than I am either employer or 
friend. And one, just one, friend 
left over from the days when I was 
Johann Srnith — rich and powerful 
and mostly hated.” 
Joe Branca said softly, “Eunice 
loved you.” 
WIKNOW she did, Joe. God 
Iknows why. Except that Eu
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
nice had so much love in her that 
it spilled over onto anyone around 
her. If I had been a stray kitten, 
Eunice would have picked me up 
and loved me.” (More than that, 
Boss.) (Sweetheart.) “And Joe, 
you know, or at least have met, 
my one friend who carried over. 
Jake Salomon.” 
Joe nodded. “Jake okay.” 
“You got to know Jake?” 
“Close. Good aura.” 
Gigi said, “Joe, is he the one 
you told me about? The fixer?” 
“Same.” Joe looked back at 
Joan Eunice. “Ask Jake. Throne, 
now.” 
“Come on, Joan. He bites if you 
don’t pose the instant rest period 
is over.” 
Joe fussed over getting them 
back into position, then moved 
both of Joan’s legs and one of Gigi’s into positions somewhat different from the original pose — 
stepped back and scowled at the 
chance . turned to his easel and 
started scraping part of the canvas 
with a palette knife. Gigi said quietly, “Now we won’t get to look at 
lunch break.” 
“Why not?” 
“God only knows. I’m not sure 
Joe knows why he makes a change. 
But something was wrong and now 
he’s abandoned the cartoon and is 
working directly from us. So it 
won’t be far enough along that 
he’ll be willing to let us look at it 
that soon. So freeze, darling. 
Don’t sneeze, don’t get an itch, 
don’t even breathe deeply.” 
“Not talk?” 
“Talk all we like as long as we 
don’t move.” 
“I won’t move. Gigi, I was so 
pleased to learn that Joe and Jake 
got to know each other well. Did 
you know Jake, too?” 
“I’ve met him. Just in passing. 
Me leaving and Mr. Salomon arriving — it was while I was a hired 
model, before I moved out on Big 
Sam.” (Twin, she’s being vague 
about this — and Jake has never 
mentioned laying eyes on Joe after 
clearing up business matters a 
long time ago.) (Eunice, what are 
you getting at? It was probably 
while Jake was straightening out 
your bank account and the lease 
and things.) (‘ — and things,’ you 
are so right. Look, Boss, don’t be 
naive. They were crying over the 
same girl — me — and Joe is ambi 
as an oyster when it suits him.) 
(Eunice, you have a dirty mind!) 
(Coo! This from ‘No-pants’ 
Smith. I know whereof I speak, 
twin; I lived with Joe for years. 
Don’t be so darned Twentieth Century.) (Eunice, of course you 
know Joe better than I do and I 
would never criticize Joe no matter 
what. I meant Jake.) (What makes 
you think you know Jake better 
than I do? And take a look at Joe 
— purty, ain’t he? Jake has eyes. 
Boss, what are we fussing about? 
Eind out what Gigi knows.) 
“I suppose,” Joan said carefully, “that Jake had to come here on 
business. Eunice died without a 
will and I know Jake arranged it 
so that Joe could draw against her 
bank account. There may have 
been insurance to clear up, too; 
I’m not sure.” 
“Joan, I don’t know. Why don’t 
you ask Jake, as Joe suggested?” 
(Because Jake will lie about it. 
Boss. Eorget it, men lie about 
such things far more than women 
do. Who cares where a man has 
lunch as long as he gets home in 
time for dinner? Not me. You give 
my ‘dirty mind’ quite enough to 
keep it busy. But, Boss, you’re a 
devious little slut — you can’t be 
truthful even to yourself.) 
(Wench, if I could get my hands 
on you. I’d spank you!) (And if 
you could. I’d let you. Kind o’ fun 
to be spanked, isn’t it, dear? Gets 
the action moving like a rocket.) 
(Oh, stuff it!) (Where, twin? What? 
And how big is it?) 
“I have no need to ask Jake, 
Gigi. I know they met through 
business matters, I know that Jake 
admires Joe’s integrity. I simply 
hadn’t realized that Jake thought 
of Joe as a close friend. If he 
does.” 
Gigi Branca looked thoughtful. 
“I couldn’t say. I was working 
Guild hours then, as Joe was paying me. Mr. Salomon — Jake, you 
call him — showed up one evening 
as we were quitting, and Joe introduced him to me as his former 
wife’s fixer — lawyer, he said; Joe 
doesn’t use jive when he doesn’t 
want to. Saw him a couple more 
times, I think, about the same way. 
But he hasn’t been here since we 
got married.” (Double talk. Boss. 
All it means is that she won’t spill 
other people’s secrets. Well, that’s 
nice to know — considering.) 
“No importa. Gigi, how did Joe 
get his art education? Or is it native genius with no instruction?” 
“Both, Joan. Let me tell it bang, 
as it would take you forever to get 
it out of Joe. Joe says that all an 
artist can teach is technique. He 
says creativity can’t be taught and 
that each artist has his own sort. 
If he has any — Joe thinks that 
most people who call themselves 
artists haven’t any. He calls ’em 
sign painters and adds that he 
would rather be a good sign painter than a fraud who calls himself 
an artist. 
“You’ve seen what Joe has. 
That one of me he did yesterday 
and others around the studio. 
You’d see lots more if you 
prowled the coffee shops and 
bookstores and art shops at this 
end of town. Nudes that look better than life — you wouldn’t need to 
look for his pinxit. Most of them 
kind a’ square except that they 
grab. Oh, Joe can do sex pix. I’ve 
seen him prove it, then scrape off 
the paint — because I asked him 
why he didn’t do sex pix since they 
sell so well. He shrugged and said 
those weren’t his symbols. 
“Joe knows he’s not Goya or 
Picasso or Rembrant or any of the 
masters — and doesn’t want to be; 
he just wants to paint his symbols, 
his way, and sell enough for us to 
eat. Oh, sometimes I get so mad, 
knowing that if he would paint just 
one frimp scene as grabby as he so 
easily can, it would keep us eating for months. But I’ve given up 
suggesting it because Joe just 
shrugs and says ‘Don’ paint comic 
books, you know that, Gigi.’ Joe 
is Joe and doesn’t give a damn 
what any other artist does or 
whether his own work makes him 
famous or a lot of money or anything. He cares so little — well, 
many of our friends are artists or 
call themselves artists but Joe 
isn’t interested in what they paint 
and won’t talk shop. If they’re 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
good people, warm people, good 
vibes, Joe likes to go see them or 
have them here . but Joe 
wouldn’t waste a floor cushion on 
Rembrandt if Joe didn’t like the 
way he behaved. Joe just wants to 
paint — his way. And not to have 
to sleep alone.” 
J OAN said thoughtfully, “I don’t 
suppose Joe has had to sleep 
alone very often.” 
“Probably not. But Joe wouldn’t 
sleep with Helen of Troy if he 
didn’t like her attitude. You mentioned your Brink’s boys — the 
two who brought you here, and 
there are two more, aren’t there? 
One a big soul? Hugo?” 
“You know Hugo?” Joan asked 
in delight. 
“Never met him. He sounds 
like an African myth. I know just 
two things about him. Joe wants 
to paint him . and Joe loves him. 
“Spiritual love, I mean — although I’m sure Joe would sack 
in with Hugo if Hugo wanted to.” 
(He’ll have to stand in line! I saw 
Hugo first.) (Shut up, you bangtail.) “Can never happen, I gather 
— and Joe never makes a pass. 
Never made one at me, I never 
made one at him; we just sacked 
in our first time without a word 
and combined as naturally as ham 
and eggs.” (Hmm! Some girls 
have all the luck. I had to trip 
him.) (You’re the eager type, 
sweetheart; Gigi isn’t.) (You’ll 
pay for that crack. Boss.) 
“I’m sure Joe never crowded 
Hugo about posing; he would 
rather have Hugo’s friendship than 
have him as a model — though Joe 
told me he has two pix in mind. 
One would show Hugo on an auction block. Historical background 
and honkie ladies in the crowd — 
close shot, full figure, Hugo looking patient and weary, and just 
heads and shoulders of the honks 
. and the honk females just 
barely not slobbering. 
“But Joe says he can’t paint 
that one; it would stir up trouble. 
The second he really aches to 
paint — ^just Hugo, big as a mountain and no sex symbols at all — 
except that a big stud can’t help 
being sexy, I think — ^just Hugo, 
strong and wise and solemn dignity — and loving. Joe’s words, 
pieced together by me. Joe wants 
to paint it and call it Jehovah.” 
“Gigi! Maybe I can help.” 
“Huh? You can’t just tell Hugo 
to pose for Joe; Joe wouldn’t like 
that. Wouldn’t hold still for it.” 
“Dear, I’m not foolish. But 
maybe I can make Hugo see that 
it’s all right to pose for Joe. Can’t 
hurt to try.” (Boss, let Hugo know 
that you have been posing naked 
for Joe. Then let it soak.) (Of 
course, Eunice, but that’s just the 
gambit.) (Twin! You’re not thinking of trying to seduce Hugo, are 
you? Damn it, I won’t stand for it! 
You leave Father Hugo alone.) 
(Eunice, I’m not that much of a 
fool. Hugo can have anything I’ve 
got; he killed the creep who killed 
you. But 1 would never offer what 
he won’t accept. If I did, I think 
he’d quit — and then pray for me. I 
vote with Joe; I’ll take Hugo as he 
is, never try to twist his arm.) 
(You couldn’t. His arms are bigger than our thighs.) (I meant 
psychologically, twin, and you 
know it.) 
“Just one thing, Gigi — Joe 
would have to give up that title 
for the pic.” 
“You don’t know Joe, Joan. He 
won’t change the title.” 
“Then he’ll have to carry it just 
in his mind. Hugo is as firm in 
his rules as Joe is in his. He won’t 
let a picture of himself be titled 
Jehovah. It would be sacrilege in 
his eyes. But if Joe is willing to 
keep the title a secret, I think I can 
deliver the body. You talk to Joe. 
But you never did tell me where 
Joe got his training.” 
“Oh. Joe could always draw; 
I’m sure he could have learned to 
read, he remembers what he sees. 
When he was about fourteen, he 
was being held overnight with 
some other boys in the precinct 
lockup and the desk sergeant got a 
look at some sketches Joe had 
done while he was killing time, 
waiting to be taken up in front of 
the judge and warned. One was of 
the desk sergeant — and Joe had 
seen him only a few minutes. 
“That was Joe’s break. The desk 
sergeant turned him over to the 
priest and got him off the blotter 
and both of them took him to a 
local artist and showed him the 
kid’s sketches. 
“This artist was a mixture, fine 
art and commercial — I mean he 
made money. He was another sort 
of mixture, too. An oyster. He 
may not have been impressed by 
Joe’s sketches but he made a deal 
with him. Modeling. Joe could 
hang around his studio and use his 
materials and sketch from his 
models — if Joe would pose when 
he needed him. They both won on 
the deal; you know how Joe looks 
now; at fourteen I’d bet he was 
more beautiful than any girl — and 
no doubt that oyster thought so. 
“So Joe did and soon he was 
eating and sleeping there and got 
away from his mother entirely, 
best thing that ever happened to 
him. Joan, it was a one- bed studio 
like this one.” 
“You mean Joe was his sweetheart? Gigi, I decline to be 
shocked. Even though Tm ninetyfive, I try to think modern.” 
“Joan, I never can believe that’s 
your age; it isn’t real, like that 
million dollars. I said ‘oyster’ not 
‘homo.’ The artist was married, or 
shacked, with his number-one model. Possibly she got Joe’s cherry. 
Either way, she taught him plenty 
and mothered him and was good 
to him, and it was a happy Troy. 
“But the artist — Mr. Tony, as 
Joe speaks of him — while he gave 
Joe the use of his studio and table 
and bed and wife — was nevertheless a strict master. He wouldn’t 
let Joe paint with a palette knife or 
a wide broom or do distortions or 
abstracts or psychedelics — he 
made him learn to draw. Anatomy. Composition. Brush techniques. Color values. The whole 
endless drill of academic art, and 
wash brushes and sweep out the 
studio. Joe says that if it hadn’t 
been for Mr. Tony, he would still 
be sketching sausage skins. Joe 
found out what he could do, what 
he wanted to do, and learned to do 
it. But, so he told me, not what his 
master did — but in both cases 
founded on old-fashioned academic training. The hard way. Oh, 
Joe’s learned short cuts. But he 
can paint directly on canvas — he’s 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
been doing it since our last break 
— and make it as close to a photograph as he cares to. Or as different.” 
“ — never said that poor is better 
than rich, Gigi; it is not. But both 
rich and poor have shortcomings — 
somewhere between is probably 
best, if you could get off the treadmill at that point. But — Look, 
does Joe guard you when you go 
grocery-shopping?’ ’ 
“Huh? Of course not. Oh, 
sometimes he comes along and 
helps carry — but not to guard. 
Well, he does ride down the lift 
with me if it’s a time of day when 
it might be empty — I mean, he’s 
no fool and neither am I and I 
don’t go looking for a mugging. 
Same coming back up and if I’m 
later than I said I would be, he’s 
always there waiting. But I move 
around by myself, always have; 
I’m just not foolish about where 
and when.” 
“Gigi, I’m sure you’re not foolish, I doubt if you ever go into a 
park — ” 
“Not even at high noon! I’ve 
been raped once and didn’t like it. 
I’m not looking for a gang bang 
where they take turns holding you 
down. They ought to bulldoze every park in the city.” 
“Bulldozing the whole city 
might be better. But, Gigi, you 
move around rather freely. I can't. 
I don’t dare appear even with 
guards around me without being 
veiled, I can’t risk being recognized. I have to be wary all the 
time. Sure, you bolt your door — 
but my house has to be strong 
enough to take a bomb tossed 
against it — that’s happened several 
times since I built it. I have to 
watch for everything from kidnapers and assassins to mere nuisances who want to touch me. 
“I’m talking both about the way 
I am now and the man ‘Johann’ 
I used to be — too much money attracts crackpots and criminals and 
there is nothing I can do about it 
but keep guards around me day 
and night, live in a house that’s a 
fort, try to avoid being recognized 
at any time and never, never try to 
live what is called a normal life. 
Besides that — Gigi, can you imagine what a treat it is to me to be 
allowed to wash dishes?” 
Gigi looked startled. “Huh? 
Joan, you’ve lost me. Oh, I know 
how complicated it is to be rich; 
I’ve watched video. But washing 
dishes isn’t a treat; it’s a horrid 
bore. Too often I’ve left them in 
the sink, then had to face them before breakfast. By the time breakfast is ready, I don’t want any.” 
“Let me give you a tip, Gigi. I 
did know something about Joe’s 
mother; Eunice was my secretary 
for years.” (I never mentioned her. 
Boss!) (Will you let me tell this lie 
my own way?) “She was — and is— 
a pig and lives like one. This place 
isn’t big; if you’ll keep it spotless 
Joe won’t care when you get 
wrinkles — and we all do some day. 
But a dirty toilet bowl or dishes in 
the sink reminds him of his mother.” 
Gigi said, “Joan, I try. But I 
can’t clean house and pose at the 
same time.” 
“Do your best, hon. If necessary, lose sleep. Joe is a man 
worth making extra effort to keep. 
But I was talking about doing 
dishes — it’s a nuisance to you but 
a luxury to me. Washing dishes 
means ‘freedom’ to me. Look, 
here we are, three of us, no servants — and presently I’ll be gone 
and you’ll be alone with your husband and the world shut out. I 
can't shut it out. Uh ... let me 
think — Four mobile guards, a security chief, twelve in-house 
watchmen under him, three always 
on duty and the others on call, 
which means the married ones — 
which is most of them — have their 
families under my roof — a personal maid, a valet who used to tend 
me and now takes care of guests — 
couldn’t fire him; I never fire anyone without cause — a butler, a 
head chef, three — oh, 1 don’t remember; there were about sixty 
adults in my house the last time I 
asked.” 
“My God, Joan!” 
“Yes, ‘My God!’ To take care 
of one person. Yet not one could 
I let go without replacing him. I 
planned that house and kept tabs 
on the design, intending to keep 
staff down to a minimum. So it’s 
loaded with gadgets. Things like 
robofootmen and a trick bed that 
was designed to let me get along 
without a nurse a few more years 
as I got older. Do you know what 
that means? I lost. I have to have 
a building superintendent and 
maintenance mechanics — or the 
gadgets don’t work. All this complication — and never any real privacy — ^just to take care of one person who doesn’t want it that way.” 
“Joan, why don’t you get rid of 
it? Move — and start over.” 
“Move where, dear? Oh, I’ve 
thought about it, believe me. But 
it’s not actually to take care of one 
person — it’s to take care of too 
much money, money that is fastened to me ... so that I can’t risk 
kidnapers or anything else. I can’t 
even cash it and flush it down the 
pot; that’s not the way big money 
works. And even if I could and did 
— nobody would believe I had. I 
would just have taken off my armor and probably would not stay 
alive two days. Besides — Do you 
like cats?” 
“Love ’em! Got a kitten promised now.” 
“Good. Now tell me — how do 
you get rid of a cat you’ve raised?” 
“Huh? Why, you don’t. Not if 
you’re decent.” 
“I agree, Gigi. I’ve lived with 
many cats. You keep them. If you 
are forced to it, you have a cat humanly destroyed — or if you have 
the guts, you kill it yourself so that 
it won’t be bungled. But you don’t 
give away a grown cat; it is almost 
impossible. But, Gigi, you can’t 
kill people.” 
“I don’t understand, Joan.” 
“What would I do with Hugo? 
He’s been with me many years; 
he’s doing the only thing he knows 
how to do — except preach, which 
doesn’t really pay. Gigi, loyal servants are Chinese obligations, 
just like a cat. Sure, they can get 
other jobs. But what would you do 
if Joe told you, ‘Get lost. We’re 
finished.” 
“I’d cry.” 
“I don’t think my servants 
would cry — but I would.” 
“But I’d get along!” 
Joan sighed. “And that platoon 
I have around me would get along. 
1 WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
I think; they’re able or I wouldn’t 
have them — and I’ve got money to 
make sure that ones like Hugo are 
taken care of; that’s one of the 
good things about being rich — if 
money is all it takes to remedy 
something, you can. Gigi, there is 
some solution to this silly fix I’m 
in and I’m going to find it — I was 
just trying to show you that it isn’t 
as simple as it looks on video. The 
solution may be something as 
easy as changing my name again 
and changing my face with plastic 
surgery and going somewhere 
else.” 
“Oh, no, you mustn’t change 
your face.” 
“No, you’re right; I must not 
change this face. It’s Eunice’s; I’m 
only its custodian. If I changed it, 
Joe would not like it — nor several 
other people. (Starting with me. 
Boss.) (I won’t change your lovely 
face, sweetheart. I’ll cherish it.) 
“I’ll keep it as it is — but I have to 
keep it veiled. It’s been on video 
too much, photographed and 
printed too many million times. 
But there’s some way to tackle the 
problem.” 
OAN EUNICE looked at the 
nearly finished painting almost 
with awe. She knew what a 
beautiful body she had inherited; 
she knew that Gigi was a beauty of 
another sort; she could see that 
these “Grecian damsels” were 
herself and Gigi and she could not 
see any detail in which the painting was not a perfect likeness of 
each. 
Yet Joe Branca’s “realism” was 
fantasy. These two nymphs in a 
glade were voluptous, sensuous, 
enticing in a way that she knew 
she and Gigi had not 
been — sprawled on a platform of 
boards and gossiping about 
everything from an alcoholic to 
dirty dishes. 
“What do you think?” Gigi 
asked. “Say what you like; Joe 
doesn’t give a hoot about any opinion but his own.” 
Joan took a deep breath, sighed. 
“How does he do it? Here 1 am 
with my nipples tight just from 
looking at it — and yet it’s you and 
me, and we lay there talking for 
hours and never got in a sweat 
about it. Discussed everything 
but Topic ‘A’ — wasn’t even a cuddle because we had to hold still. 
Yet this paint-and-canvas reaches 
out and grabs you by the gonads 
and squeezes. I’m certain it would 
have just as much effect on a 
man.” 
From behind them Joe said, 
“Fool-the-eye.” 
Joan answered, “Fool-the-eye, 
hell, Joe. My eyes are not fooled. 
I’m enchanted. I want to buy it!” 
“No.” 
“Huh? Oh, kark. You planned to 
sell it to some old butch. God 
knows ninety-five is old — and I feel 
butch enough to qualify when I 
look at the painting.” 
“Yours.” 
“Huh? Joe, you can’t do this to 
me. You intended to sell it, you 
said so. Gigi, back me up.” 
Gigi chose not to answer. Joe 
said stubbornly, “Yours, Joan. 
You want it, you take it.” 
“Joe, you are the most stubborn 
man I’ve ever met and I don’t see 
how Gigi puts up with you. If you 
give me that painting. I’m going to 
destroy it at once — ” 
Gigi gasped. “Oh, no!” 
Joe shrugged. “Your ache. Not 
mine.” 
“ — but if you’ll sell it to me at 
your going rates. I’ll take it with 
me and give it to Jake Salomon to 
hang at the end of his bed so he’ll 
wake up happy each morning.” 
(You bombed him, twin! Now 
swing back and strafe the survivors.) “That’s the choice, Joe. 
Give it to me and I’ll chop it into 
shreds. But sell it to me — and Jake 
Salomon gets it. Oh, you could 
welch, then hang it for sale — and 
put me to the trouble of hiring detectives to follow it to where you 
hang it so that I can buy it through 
an agent. What I do with it then, I 
won’t tell. Or you could even keep 
it for your own jollies; it’s quite a 
job.” 
Gigi said, “Quit being stubborn, 
Joe; you know you’d like Jake to 
have it.” 
“Gigi, what does Joe charge for 
a painting like that?” 
“Oh, 1 set the prices. Mostly I 
sell them by the yard. By size.” 
“So? How much is this size?” 
“Well, I try to get two hundred 
and fifty for that size.” 
“Ridiculous!” 
“Really, Joan, considering 
that it took both my time and Joe’s 
all yesterday evening and today — not to mention your time, 
but you’re buying it, so I didn’t 
add on for the second figure in 
it — considering all that and the 
commission we pay, it’s not very 
much — ” 
“Darling, I meant ‘ridiculously’ low. I haven’t bought much 
art the last twenty years but 1 do 
know that is not less than a thousand-dollar picture — then up like a 
kite to whatever the traffic will 
bear. I can tell you this: When Jake 
dies and that painting is auctioned off, it won’t go for as little 
as a thousand . and it might be 
much higher because I’m certain 
to be at that auction and in no 
mood to let it get out of the family. But I’m not raising the price 
now; 1 never do that. Y'ou named a 
price of two-fifty; I accept.” 
“Joan, you never did let me 
finish.” 
“Oh. Sorry, hon.” 
“I try to get two hundred and 
fifty for that size when I hang it in 
a shop. But half of that goes to the 
owner of the shop; that’s the only 
way I can get space. So the price to 
you is a hundred and twenty-five.” 
“No.” 
“Why not?” 
“Just ‘No’ the way Joe said it to 
me. As good business practice 
you should never undercut your 
retailer. I think he’s robbing you; 
the commission should be twentyfive percent, no more. But don’t 
undercut the price you want him 
to ask — that’s no way to stay in 
business. I don’t know much 
about art . but I know one hell 
of a lot about business. Cash, or 
check?” 
“Cash is fine. If you have that 
much with you. Or pay when you 
feel like it.” 
“I want to pay now and get a 
receipt so that it will be legally 
mine — before your stubborn husband can thwart me again. Shall I 
write the receipt for you, Gigi 
girl?” 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
“Oh, I’ve got Woolworth’s 
printed forms for that, and I can 
write numbers and sign my chop. 
No huhu.” 
“Good. But I want something 
^'*Vhat, Joan?” 
“I want to be kissed. I’ve been a 
good girl and posed all day and 
haven’t even been kissed for it. So 1 
want Joe to kiss me for being so 
stinky difficult — and I want to 
kiss you for helping me with him. 
Joe, will you kiss me?” 
“Yes.” 
“That’s better. Joe, will you 
escort two nice girls — me and Gigi, 
I mean, and no smart 
cracks — down to the supermarket? If Gigi will buy us a steak to 
celebrate, I want to prove I can 
broil it. Will you buy us a steak, 
Gigi?” 
“Sure! Beef, or horse?” 
“Uh . hon. I’m forced to 
admit that I haven’t shopped for 
groceries in years. What do you 
think?” 
“Well . .it had better be 
horse.” 
“Whatever you say. As long as 
they don’t sell us the harness.” 
XXV 
I N THE United Nations the Burmese delegation charged that the 
so-called Lunar Colonies were a 
coverup for a conspiracy by China 
and the United States to build military bases on the Moon. The Secretary of Conservation and Pollution Control denied a report that 
deer in Yosemite National Park 
were “dying in hordes from polluted water and emphysema.” He 
stated that a healthy ecological rebalancing was taking place — no 
need for alarm — and the new herd 
would be stronger than ever. 
The Reverend Dr. Montgomery 
Chang, D.D., Most Humble Supreme Leader of The Way, Inc., 
testified before the subcommittee 
on Unwritten Law of the Senate 
Judiciary Committee in support of 
the pending bill to require Lederal 
licensing of teachers of Zen Buddhism and related disciplines as 
“therapists de facto et de jure'. 
These bootleg gurus are giving rational mysticism a bad name. A 
man should no more be allowed to 
teach meditation, asanas, or transcendental philosophy without 
strict control by a licensing board 
than he should be allowed to ski or 
to surf or to frame a picture without passing an examination. The 
idea that this bill would abridge the 
sacred guarantees of the First 
Amendment is the sheerest nonsense; it protects and frees them.” 
Under questioning he stated that 
he would be humbly willing to 
serve as chairman of such a board 
if such sacrifice were asked of him. 
Survivors of Hurricane Hilda were 
still being rescued and the known 
death toll now stood at 1908. 
The Department of Internal Defense placed a temporary exception 
on interstate transmittal of intelligence concerning public disorders 
involving more than three persons, 
then placed a second exception 
with strict penalties on the publicizing of the first censorship order. 
The Secretary reported to the 
President that news services and 
video nets were cooperating voluntarily in the interests of the general 
welfare. In re the matter of identity of Conglom Tycoon Johann S. 
B. Smith the Supreme Court in a 
declaratory relief opinion made 
notable only by Mr. Justice Handy 
waking up in the middle of its 
reading, slapping the desk and 
roaring, “Divorce granted!” then 
going back to sleep, ruled seven to 
two to sustain a lower court in expanding and clarifying the principle 
originally set forth in Estate of 
Henry M. Parsons vs Rhode Island. Four of the majority and one 
dissenting justice ruled also that a 
legal sex change was involved in 
the matter; two justices thought 
otherwise, one justice (Mr. Handy) 
used twenty pages to prove that 
such a composite of sexes was contrary to public interest and to the 
laws of God and that both Johann 
Smith and Eunice Branca were legally dead and that the resultant 
monster had no legal existence of 
any sort; the ninth justice, in a onesentence separate assent, opined 
that sex was irrelevant in the entire 
matter; one of the majority, in another separate assenting opinion, 
stated that the donor body should 
have been sterilized surgically in 
the public interest and that the 
Congress would do well to make 
such sterilization mandatory in any 
future similar situation. No mention was made by any justice of 
thirteen amici-curiae briefs and 
one petition filed with the Court. 
In an opinion issued the same day 
{Illinois VS’ Sam J. Roberts) conviction was set aside on the 
grounds that the householder (deceased) had not advised Roberts of 
his rights before attempting to 
place him under citizen’s arrest. 
A Bluebird Special. HEAVEN 
NOW! Couple seeks couple to 
share safe house & loving friendship 3 hr, 2 bths, MercServ, all 
util, nr lie pvt schl, atrium garden. 
Cmptr types (Rankin program) c? 
690047, 5 890047- any 85%-plus 
match considered. "One for All, 
All for One!” No deposit but 
please send stereopix with notarized Rankin Reports — bx 69 
Bluebird, Ltd. 
On the basis of evidence sub- mitted by the Chinese delegation t 
the UN A EC eased the tolerance l| 
levels for strontium-90 for whole 
milk. The Reverend Thomas Barker of Long Beach, California, in an 
Equal-Time-for-God videosermonette declared that the World had [ 
ended at midnight December 31st 1 
1999 PCT, and that all since that j 
time was “illusion of the Devil, 
without form, substance, or reali- I 
ty.” 1 
ISS SMITH greeted O’Neil 
and asked him to have Da- ' 
browski and Fred fetch upstairs 
with her two big flat packages, one 
so large that it had to be tilted to 
get it through the door of the lift. 
When packages, mobile guards and 
she herself were fitted inside she 
locked the door and pressed the 
“Hold” touchplate without signaling a floor, then dropped her cape. 
“Let me kiss you thank-you-goodnight, boys, but for heaven’s sake 
don’t get paint on you or muss it. 
Better just hold my face in your 
hands — but no need to hurry.” 
Shortly thereafter she looked at 
herself in the lift’s mirror, decided 
that makeup and hair-do had suf
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
fered only minor wear and tear, let 
Dabrowski lay her cape around 
her, then punched for her floor and 
fastened all the cape’s frogs so that 
she was again fully covered. When 
the lift stopped she hooked up her 
veil. 
“These go in your boudoir. 
Miss? Or your lounge?” 
“First let’s see if Mr. Salomon 
is receiving.” They followed her 
down the long hall to the Green 
Suite. Joan noted that the pleasedon’t-disturb ruby light was not 
burning over the door of Jake’s 
lounge, so she touched the door 
signal. 
The speaker above it bellowed, 
“Come in!” The door opened; she 
went in. “Put them inside and that 
will be all.” 
“Very good. Miss.” 
As they left and the door closed 
Jake came out of his bedroom, 
looking tousled. He stopped 
abruptly. “Well! Where the hell 
have you been?” 
“Out.” 
“Hrrrmph! Five days. Five 
whole days!” 
“So? Chickens fed? Hogs 
slopped? Cows milked?” 
“That’s not the point. I — ” 
“That is the point, Jake. Nothing has been neglected through my 
being away. You won’t marry me, 
so I am not answerable to you 
when I come and go. Though as a 
courtesy I did leave a note with 
Cunningham telling you where I 
had gone. Did you receive it?” 
“Yes, but—” 
“Then you knew I was safe — 
and in emergency could have sent 
me a message. Or joined me; you 
would have been welcome. You 
know Joe would have made you 
welcome — and Gigi is friendly as a 
puppy.” 
“Gigi?” 
“You know her. You’ve met 
her, I mean. Mrs. Joe Branca.” 
“ir/zar?” 
“Why the surprise, Jake? People do remarry — especially if an 
earlier marriage was happy. Joe’s 
was and now he has — and Fm happy for him — and certain that Eunice is happy for him, too.” (Sure 
I am. Boss. But let’s not be too 
noble. Being noble is a male prerogative. So they think.) 
“1 can’t believe it.” 
“What’s odd about a widower 
remarrying?” 
“I can’t imagine anyone who 
had been married to Eunice ever 
marrying some other woman.” 
(My fan! Twin, we’re going to be 
especially nice to Jake tonight.) 
(If he doesn’t start being nice to 
me, he’s going to sleep alone tonight! But I shan’t. I wonder if Anton and Fred have left the house?) 
(Calm down. Boss. And get Jake 
calmed down.) (Not yet, I won’t! 
He’s wrong and Fm right.) (Twin, 
honey, how long is it going to take 
you to learn that being right has 
nothing to do with getting along 
with a man? Men aren’t logical, 
their minds don’t work that way. 
But it’s the only game in town, so 
when a man is wrong and you are 
right, it’s time to apologize. Tell 
him you’re sorry — and mean it. 
Om Mani Padme Hum.) 
(Om Mani Padme Hum — sometimes I find being a woman just 
too frimping difficult. If it weren’t 
so darned much fun. Okay, sweetheart, watch me take him.) “Jake 
dearest, I’m sorry it upsets you 
that Joe has remarried — but why 
not wait before deciding that he 
has made a mistake? Joe needs a 
wife — even if she’s not Eunice. And 
I’m terribly sorry that I worried 
you by not being here when you 
got home . and sorry on my own 
account; I expected to welcome 
you — with open arms and a happy 
smile. But I didn’t expect you to be 
away less than a week and I had an 
impression that you expected it to 
take longer — possibly much longer.” 
“Well, yes, I did think I might 
have to sit it out quite a while. But 
I got in to see the Chief Justice the 
second day and he assured me that 
he would put it at the top of the 
calendar . and that he had seen 
— unofficially — an advance transcript of the record. And that was 
that.” 
“Hm! Campaign contributions 
are sometimes worth while.” 
“Joan Eunice, don’t ever talk 
that way. Especially in reference to 
the Chief Justice of the United 
States. Yes, this is your house. 
Nevertheless it might be bugged.” 
“I’m sorry, Jake. It was a 
thoughtless remark. My appreciation really goes where it belongs. 
To you." 
“To Mac more than to me, my 
dear; that boy has been on the ball. 
How he got an advance copy to, 
uh, the right man so quickly is 
something I don’t want to inquire 
into.” 
“I appreciate Mac’s efforts, I 
appreciate Alec’s efforts — but 
mostly I appreciate my darling, always dependable, utterly wonderful 
Jake.” (Is that too thick, Eunice?) 
(Boss, I keep telling you: it’s impossible for a woman to lay it on 
too thick with a man. If you tell a 
man he’s eight feet tall and say it 
often enough, with your eyes wide 
and a throb in your voice, he’ll 
start stooping to go through sevenfoot doors.) 
Jake looked pleased, so Joan 
went on: “I suppose it will all be 
settled soon, then?” 
“Little one, don’t you ever listen 
to the news?” 
“Not if I can avoid it.” 
“Well, you should. It is over. 
You’ve won, finally and completely.” 
“Really? I never doubted that we 
would win, Jake, the wonderful 
way you’ve handled everything. My 
surprise is solely that it has happened so fast. Yes, I suppose I 
should follow the news. But I 
haven’t been able to, these last few 
days. Had this difficult job to do — 
Joe, I mean — and while you were 
away seemed the best time ... so 
I gritted my teeth and tackled it.” 
“Joan Eunice, I told you never 
to go near Joe. I told you. If this 
new marriage of his ever stood a 
chance — yes, intellectually I know 
that a man should remarry — if it 
ever did stand a chance, you must 
have put a horrible strain on it. 
Too much strain, probably. Uh . 
how did he take it? Badly?” 
“Jake, I stayed five days. If it 
had gone badly, would I have been 
there even one day? I accomplished 
the mission; everything is all 
right.” 
Jake looked surprised, then 
thoughtful. “Hmm! That’s a oneroom studio... and if I follow 
your meaning, you stayed right 
1 WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
there the whole five days. My dear, 
just how did you ‘accomplish your 
mission?’ Or have I no right to 
ask?” 
She looked up at him and spoke 
seriously. “Jake, I owe you so 
much that you will always have the 
right to ask me anything. Including my comings and goings and 1 
should not have given you a snippy 
answer.” (Didn’t quite tell him he 
had a right to a truthful answer, 
did you. Boss honey? Devious little 
bitch.) (Eunice, I don’t lie to 
Jake — ) (Oh, what a whopper') 
( — more than is necessary to his 
happiness.) 
“Jake, I accomplished my mission — I set Joe’s mind at rest 
about Eunice — through a ‘prayer 
meeting.’ With Gigi’s utterly necessary help, which is only part of why 
I feel sure that she’s good for him. 
But if you mean I offered him a 
zombie — his dead wife’s re-animated body — I knew that was not 
the way to do it. Joe hasn’t 
touched me. Oh, he does touch me 
now, easily and without strain, the 
way he might touch his sister.” 
(Any incest in Joe’s family, twin? 
I’ve never been sure.) (Oh, shut 
up!) “He even kisses me the same 
way. But, Jake — ” 
“Eh? What, dear?” 
“If Joe wanted this body I’m 
wearing, of course he could have 
it; I owe him anything I can give 
him. You see that, don’t you? You 
agree? Or am I wrong?” 
“Uh . yes, I agree. But I think 
it’s well that Joe does not want to. 
It could be disaster for him... 
and a terrible strain for you.” 
“I know it would be a strain for 
me. But I would do my best to 
smile and never let him guess. As 
it is, I am honored — and relieved — 
and deeply grateful that Joe has 
given me his loving friendship instead.” (Okay, Eunice?) (Okay. 
Now get him off that subject.) 
“I’m glad, Eunice.” 
“Jake, do we have to stand here, 
me still in street clothes? I have 
presents for you — welcome-home 
presents.” She smiled her best happy-little-girl smile. “Want to see 
them?” 
“Of course I want to see them! 
And where are my manners, letting 
you stand? Here, let me seat you 
and take your cloak. Sherry?’.’ 
“Later. Or champagne, to welcome you home. To welcome us 
both home.” She turned and let 
him take her cape. He turned to 
lay it aside and turned back just as 
she did so, too. 
“Holy cow!” 
“Didn’t know you were a Hindu, 
Jake.” She posed, in graceful and 
calculated display. 
“You wore that all the way 
across the city? Just paint?” 
W 1I7HY not, dear? It’s your first 
W present — from Joe to you, 
sent with his love. I had my cape 
over it before I left Joe’s studio 
and kept it on when I got home — 
until you unwrapped your present. 
Didn’t want my mobiles to see it, 
of course.” (Oh, of course, twin — 
except that Joe let them watch every brush stroke, once Gigi was 
sure you didn’t mind. Say, Joan, 
Gigi would go for a Texas Star 
with Anton and Fred, I feel certain. And Joe would go along; he 
likes them. What do you think? 
Easy way to keep your promise to 
them, huh?) 
(Eunice, we’ve got this man on 
our hands now.) (Oh, poor you. 
Best way in the world to work up 
steam with one man is to let your 
mind rove about other men. 
You’ve still got some Puritan in 
you, girl.) (Which Puritan? When? 
And why didn’t I notice? You can’t 
mean Jake; he’s Jewish. Speaking 
of Jake, has he noticed that slight 
omission in this getup? And why 
haven’t we been raped?) (1 doubt it, 
his eyeballs are spinning. As for 
the latter, I have hopes.) 
“Joan Eunice, do you realize 
that that is a reproduction — exact, 
I think — of a body-paint design 
Eunice once wore?” 
“Of course I realize it; she wore 
it here .. .and I wasn’t so near 
dead that I didn’t stare. Could never make up my mind whether these 
were sea shells, or paint. Now I 
know. Joe wanted to be sure that 
you had seen it that first time, 
when Eunice wore it. I told him 
that I was almost certain that you 
had been here that day.” 
“Well, yes, I was. Briefly. That’s 
why I recognized it.” 
“So? It had seemed to me that I 
recalled that as one of the days 
you took Eunice home. Hmmm?” 
“Joan, are you trying to be 
snoopy?” 
“Yes.” 
“Woman, I will not satisfy your 
prurient curiosity.” 
“How do you feel about satisfying prurience itself? Mine, I 
mean.” 
“That’s another matter.” 
“I was wondering. So far you 
haven’t even kissed me. Shall I 
take a shower first? Or let me put 
it this way: Did Eunice take time 
to get the paint off first?” 
“Let me put it this way; Shut up 
and keep quiet and pipe down and 
not another damn’ word out of 
you until I give permission.” 
“Yes, sir.” 
She obeyed in essence for a reasonable time. 
“May I talk now?” 
“Yes, as long as you limit yourself to polite words of endearment. 
Some of your spontaneous remarks were quite unladylike.” 
“That’s because I’m quite unladylike, Jake my only darling. I’m 
a failure as a lady. But I’ll go on 
doing my best to simulate one in 
public — be a credit to Eunice.” 
“Joan Eunice — ” 
“Sir?” 
“That’s the way Eunice herself 
did it. A perfect lady in public . 
utterly uninhibited in private. It 
was a major part of her great 
charm. Some of her spontaneous 
expressions at such times were far 
more unladylike than any I’ve 
heard you use.” 
“Really, Jake? Did she know 
any that I don’t? And do you like 
them?” 
“Mmm, I don’t think she knew 
any that you don’t know; she was 
just easier about it once she 
trusted me. Yes, I do like them. 
Used spontaneously.” 
“Jake, 1 trust you without limit 
— and I’ll try not to inhibit any future spontaneity. Haven’t meant 
to. Still learning.” 
“Darling girl, you do just fine 
when you get your rest. I mean my 
rest. Now that I’ve got you helpless — and seeing that you trust me 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
without limit — what did happen at 
Joe’s?” 
“Sir, the fact that I trust you — 
and I do — does not mean that I’m 
going to satisfy your prurient curiosity.” 
“Hmm — Neither did Eunice, 
ever.” 
“Instead, you tell me what happened to you — at Joe’s.” 
^‘We seem to have reached a 
stalemate. Let’s wash off this 
paint. I wish I had taken a photograph of our mermaid before I 
smeared it.” 
“No huhu, Jake my beloved; 
Joe took several and I have them 
in my purse. For you. And I have 
two of Eunice in the same getup — 
one for you, and one for me. And 
besides that Joe gave me a fourby-five Kodachrome of a most incredible trompe-P oeil painting he 
did of Eunice as a mermaid diving 
...plus a smaller transparency 
which shows how he did it. Same 
getup minus sea shells.” 
“Would it surprise you to learn 
that I’ve seen them both? Just 
didn’t have the crust to promote 
Joe for them.” 
“No, not surprised, I guess. But 
I did not pressure him, Jake; he 
said he had a present for me — and 
these photos turned out to be the 
present. I should refuse? God forbid. But I’m going to put snoops 
to work and trace down who 
bought that painting. I intend to 
own it. Price no object.” 
“Your money won’t help you. 
Miss Smith. Would it surprise you 
to know that / own that original 
Branca? It’s at the Gib.” 
“I’ll be — dipped! Jake, you’re a 
dirty old holdout. I take back ten 
percent of any compliments I’ve 
handed you.” 
“That’s okay; I didn’t believe 
more than ninety percent. But if 
you’re a good girl I’ll give you 
that painting.” 
“I accept! But — well, it’s hardly worth while opening those packages. They’ll be disappointments.” 
“Would you like a spanking?” 
“Yes.” 
“I’m too tired. Let’s open packages.” 
“Well ... we might open the 
smaller one. Let you see what Gigi 
looks like, if you don’t remember. 
She’s worth looking at.” 
“We’ll open both of them.” 
“Scrub first?” 
“I suppose we should.” 
“Well . let’s give it a lick 
and promise, not turn it into a 
social event.” 
J OAN EUNICE insisted on opening Bililis Sings first. “Well, 
Jake?” 
He gave a respectful wolf whistle. “The boy’s a genius.” 
“Yes. I hadn’t suspected. But 
you already knew it.” 
“Well, yes. His decision to use 
strong sunlight on your two contrasting skin colors was inspired.” 
“Especially as he had no sunlight — ^just smog-filtered north 
light, soft as old linen. Those highlights come from photographing 
us under floods the night before. 
Then he painted from us the next 
day. Changed the pose, though — 
and I don’t know just how he corrected the highlights. But I’m no 
genius.” 
“What’s in the big package?” 
“Open it.” 
It was The Three Graces — and all 
three were Joan Eunice. “Joe calls 
this a ‘cheat pic,’ Jake — he photographed me three times — erase 
and correct — more nearly thirtythree times, against a neutral background, then combined three 
photos for his cartoon. Had Gigi 
pose with me each time to get 
arms-around-waist and so forth, 
then she would slither out like a 
snake without disturbing my pose. 
If he hadn’t used ‘cheat’ the painting would have taken far longer. 
Aren’t those dimples in my behind 
cute?’’ 
“Woman, you are conceited 
enough.” 
“I’m not conceited, Jake; I 
wasn’t handsome even when I was 
young. I know whose beautiful 
bottom that is. Weil, dear? I had 
intended Bilitis for me and the 
Graces for you — but you can have 
your choice.” 
“What a choice to have to 
make!” 
“The one you let me keep will 
be no farther away than down the 
hall. If you had married me when 
you so obviously should have, you 
lecherous old rapist, you wouldn’t 
have to make a choice; both would 
be yours. Jake, what does it cost 
to buy a job lot of art critics?” 
“Well, the present crop ought 
not to fetch more than ten cents a 
dozen but everything is higher these 
days. I take it you have Joe Branca in mind?” 
“Of course. He’s selling his 
paintings at ridiculously low prices 
and paying outrageous commission 
— and sells so few that the kids 
hardly get enough to eat. While 
freaks and frauds and sign painters 
are all the rage. I thought — ” 
“You can stop thinking; I see 
the swindle. We’ll get him a good 
agent, we’ll buy up what he has on 
the market, using dummies — and 
keep them ourselves; they’re a 
sure-fire investment . and we’ll 
buy art critics here, then elsewhere 
as he becomes better known. The 
question is: How much of a success must he be? Do I have to get 
him into the Metropolitan?” 
“Jake, I don’t think Joe wants 
to be famous. And / don’t want it 
to be so conspicuous that he might 
smell a rat. Or that Gigi might; 
she’s a little more sophisticated. 
Not very, that is. I just want his 
pictures to sell regularly enough 
that Gigi can buy groceries without worrying and can have enough 
disposable sheets that she can 
change them every day if it suits 
her. The kid is trying to keep 
house on scraped icebox and boiled 
dishrag soup. I tried that in the 
'Depression and it’s not 
funny — and I see no reason why 
Gigi should have to do it when 
she’s married to an honest-to-God 
artist who can paint — and works at 
it. One who doesn’t spend his time 
sopping up sauce or blowing weed 
and talking about the painting 
he’s going to do. Joe paints. He’s a 
craftsman as well as an artist. 
Well, maybe I don’t know what an 
artist is but I know what a craftsman is and I respect craftsmen. 
Too few of them in this decadent 
world.” 
“No argument. We’ll do it. 
Even if we have to go as high as 
fifteen cents a dozen.” 
“Even two-bits. Let’s finish getting pa'int off — I must send down 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
for olive oil — and you could be a 
darling and get Winnie to fetch 
me a heavy robe or get it yourself, 
pretty please, if she isn’t 
home — no, I can get back to my 
room in my street cape, no 
problem, and — ” 
“Hrrrmph.” 
“Did 1 goof again?” 
“My dear, I have an announcement. Dr. and Mrs. Roberto Carlos Garcia y Ibanez are on their 
honeymoon.” 
“Whatl Why, the dirty little rat! 
Didn’t wait for big sister to hold 
her hand. Good for them! Jake, 
that’s wonderful — I think I’ll 
cry.” 
“Go ahead, you cry while I 
shower.” 
“Hell, no. I’ll cry when Winnie 
is back. I’ll take that shower with 
you and you can scrub me. My 
back, where I can’t see the paint; 
not my front. I’m tired, too. When 
was it and do you know when they 
will be home? And, goodness, I 
must pick out a suite for them; 
Roberto won’t want to be next to 
mine with a connecting door. And 
I need to think of a wedding 
present — I may give them the 
painting you don’t pick; Roberto 
won’t let me give them anything 
expensive, he’s a stubborn man.” 
(Boss, is there another sort?) 
“I can’t see why Boh wouldn’t 
want to have a connecting door 
into your bedroom.” 
“I think that was meant to be an 
insult. Perhaps he would like it, 
dear — / would like it. But it would 
not look right to the servants.” 
(Primp the servants!) {All of them, 
Eunice? I’m kept busy as it is.) 
“Eunice, I took the liberty of 
telling Cunningham to have the 
Gold Suite set up for the 
Garcias — ” 
“Perfect! I’ll have a door cut 
from my lounge into theirs . and 
there already is a lock-off that we 
can unlock between its foyer and 
the upstairs library we joined to 
your suite — and then we can quit 
this unseemly ducking back and 
forth through the hall.” 
“The newlyweds might prefer to 
be left alone.” 
“Hadn’t, thought of that. Oh, 
well, ‘I have some friends of my 
own,’ as the old gal said.” 
“In any case they’ll be back too 
soon for carpentry. I have it from 
a usually dependable source that 
a reliably dishonest member of 
your staff agreed to phone Mrs. 
Garcia the instant you returned. I 
assume that the call was made, I 
assume that they will be back by, 
oh, nightfall.” 
“I wonder whom I should fire? 
That’s a hell of a way to run a 
honeymoon.” 
“I understand the good Doctor 
was in on it — the idea being to 
keep you safe from harm, since between them they constitute your 
medical staff.” 
“What nonsense. I’m the Pioneer-Mother type. Rugged. If I had 
crossed with the prairie schooners, they would have yoked me in 
with the oxen. But I’m glad 
they’re coming home. I want to 
kiss them and cry on them.” 
“Johann, sometimes I can’t 
make up my mind whether you are 
a silly young girl — or senile.” 
“The last time you called me 
Johann you acquired some scar 
tissue. Dear, has it occurred to 
you that I might be both? A senile 
silly young girl?” 
“Interesting. A possible working hypothesis.” 
“If so, I’m a well adjusted 
one — Jake, I’m a happy as a cat 
left alone with the Christmas turkey. With Joe squared away and 
the Supreme Court being sensible 
for a change my last fret is gone. 
Life is one long giddy delight. I’m 
even morning sick.” 
“Can’t see why you should 
be — huhT' (Boss, I thought you 
weren’t going to tell him?) (Eunice, 
he was bound to know soon . 
and I couldn’t just let him find out, 
can’t do that to Jake. This is the 
perfect time — he’s officially ‘first 
to know.’) 
W¥ SAID I wasn’t bothered by 
1 morning sickness, Jake. I’m 
healthy as a horse and the only 
change I’ve noticed is that I’m 
hungry as a horse, too.” 
“You wish me to believe that 
you are pregnant?” 
“Don’t give me that stern-father 
look, Jake. I’m knocked up and 
happier than Happy Hooligan. I 
could have kept it to myself a while 
longer but I wanted to tell you before anyone else could notice. But 
be a dear and treat it as privileged — because the instant Winnie finds out she’ll start mothering 
me and worrying. Which is not 
what a bride should be doing. 
With luck I can keep it from Winnie until she’s pregnant, too.” 
(Boss, what makes you think Winnie intends to get pregnant?) (Use 
your head, Eunice — five to one 
she’s got a Bandaid over the spot 
where that implant used to be this 
very minute.) (I don’t have a head. 
Boss — ^just yours and it doesn’t 
work too well.) (Complaints, huh? 
Talk that way and I won’t marry 
you, either.) (We are married. 
Boss.) (I know it, beloved. Now be 
quiet; I’ve got to juggle eggs.) 
“Eunice — are you sure?” 
“Yes. Test positive.” 
“Did Bob make the test? Or 
some quack?” 
“A patient’s relations with a 
doctor are confo. But it was not a 
quack. Don’t pursue this line of 
inquiry. Counselor.” 
“We’ll get married at once.” 
“The hell we will!” 
“Eunice, let’s have no nonsense!” 
“Sir, I asked you to marry me 
quite some time back. You emphatically refused. I asked you at 
a later time. Again I was turned 
down. I decided not to renew my 
request and I do not do so now. I 
will, not marry you. But I will be 
honored and delighted to continue as your mistress until I am 
benched by biology — and more 
than pleased to be allowed again 
to be your concubine when I am 
back in commission. I love you, 
sir. But I will not marry you.” 
“I ought to spank you.” 
“I don’t think it would do me 
any damage, darling. But I don’t 
think you could bring yourself to 
strike a pregnant woman.” (Now 
kick him in the other shin. Boss. 
You little hellcat.) (Eunice, stay 
out of this row. I’m not only a 
woman scorned; I’m also old Johann Smith who never could be 
pushed too far. Jake can have us 
any time, sure. But I’m damned if 
I’ll let him be ‘noble’ about it when 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
I’m knocked up.) (Boss, aren’t we 
e\er going to marry him? This is a 
mistake, dear; he needs us.) (And 
we need him, Eunice. Sure, we’ll 
marry him — after we’ve whelped. 
After.) (Boss, you’re making a big 
mistake.) (If so. I’m making it. I 
never make little mistakes — ^just 
big ones.) 
“I didn’t say I was going to 
spank you, Eunice — I said I ought 
to. What happened? I distinctly 
remember you telling me that 
you had taken care of contraception.” 
“Your memory is good, sir. The 
exact phrasing, as I phrased it 
most carefully. I have ‘taken care’ 
of such matters in whatever 
fashion I wished. Every time. With 
you. With others. Each time I 
have taken such care as suited 
me — at that time and with that 
man.” 
“Hmmm! That’s as unresponsive an answer as I’ve ever heard. 
Let me put it more plainly. 
Eunice, did I get you pregnant?” 
“I won’t answer. You know that 
at least one other man has slept 
with me — and I may have been the 
bride of the regiment. Jake, you 
would not marry me when I was 
virgin; you still would not marry 
me when you made me your mistress. So where I got this child in 
me is not your business and you 
have no right to quiz me 
and — much as I love you — I will 
not tolerate one more question 
along this line. Not now nor in the 
future! Whom I chose to father 
my child is my business. But you 
may be certain that I selected him 
with care, eyes open and wits about 
me. You’ve been acting as if you 
were a father dealing with a wayward daughter, or a Welfare visitor 
trying to establish responsibility 
for an unlicensed pregnancy. You 
know that is not the situation. I 
am ninety-five years old — much 
older than you are — able to afford a dozen bastards if it suits 
me — and it may — and wealthy 
enough to tell the world to go pee 
up a rope. Jake, I was sharing 
happy news with you. You elect to 
treat it as bad news and take me to 
task about it. I won’t accept that, 
sir. I made a mistake in telling 
you. Will you please treat the matter as privileged — and never mention it again?” 
“Eunice.” 
“Yes, Jake?” 
“I love you.” 
“I love you, Jake.” 
“Had I been twenty years 
younger — even ten years — I would 
have married you long before 
now. Since you won’t tell me — and 
since I have no right to quiz you; 
you are correct — will you forgive 
an old man’s pride if I choose to 
believe that I am the man you 
picked? I promise that I will not 
discuss that belief with anyone.” 
WlACOB, if you choose to beJ lieve that, I am honored. But I 
ask no promises. If you chose to 
proclaim such a belief, I would 
never shame my oldest and closest 
and most beloved friend by denying 
it. I would smile proudly and let 
my manner confirm it. But, Jacob 
my beloved, to you I neither affirm nor deny it — and never will. I 
did this on my own. I alone am 
parent to this child.” (Watch your 
words, Boss! You almost spelled it 
out.) (He’ll take it as rhetoric. Or if 
he does suspect, investigation 
will prove that he’s wrong. Hank 
Olsen knows which side of his bed 
is buttered. Mine, that is.) (And 
the dates are going to check out so 
that Jake will be certain it’s his. 
Hmm — ) (Still think I’m a fool, 
Eunice?) (No, Boss — ^just reckless. 
You scare the hell out of me at 
times.) 
“Well, Eunice, from the restrictions you have put on me that 
seems to be all we can say about 
it.” 
“That was my intention, 
Jake.” 
“I understood. What would you 
like to do the rest of today — at 
least until our newlyweds return? Play cribbage?” 
“If you wish, Jake, certainly.” 
“I have a better idea. If you 
want to join me in it. Could be fun, 
I think.” 
""Will be fun, Jake. Anything is ■ 
always fun shared with you. Even if 
it’s just cribbage.” 
“This is a better two-handed 
game if it’s played right. Let’s 
phone Mac, ask him to have his 
clerk start the ball rolling — and 
get married. With luck we can be 
legal in twenty-one or -two — and 
still get in a couple of boards of 
cribbage before bedtime.” 
“Oh, Jake! CribbageV" 
“Answer me, woman. A simple 
Yes or No. I won’t argue 
it . and I won’t ask you again. 
And blow your nose and wipe your 
eyes — you’re a mess.” 
“Damn you, Jake! Vest Let me 
go and I’ll blow my nose. I think 
you’ve cracked my ribs, you big 
brute. That’s a hell of a way to 
treat an expectant mother.” 
“I’ll do worse than crack your 
ribs if I have any more nonsense 
out of you. Now to call Mac — I’ll 
have to think up a plausible lie so 
that he’ll be justified in authorizing the County Clerk to issue a 
special license.” 
“Why does it have to be fancy, 
Jacob? I thought you were going to 
tell Mac that you had knocked me 
up?” 
“Eunice, is that what you want 
me to say?” 
“Jacob, I’m going to marry you 
as quickly as possible, I don’t 
care how. I hope Winnie and 
Roberto show up in time but I’m 
not goint to wait; you might come 
to your senses. I thought you preferred to claim that you had done 
me in and I know I agreed to confirm it. So tell Mac so. Tell any 
body.” 
“Doesn’t fret you?” 
“Jake dearest, maybe that’s the 
best way to handle it . because, 
presently, God and everybody is 
going to know about the Silent 
Witness. Jake? Do you recall my 
first day of freedom? The day after 
Mac conditionally confirmed 
my identity and discharged me as 
a ward of the court?” 
“My dear, I am not likely to 
forget that day.” 
“Nor I. Count two hundred 
sixty-seven days. That is when the 
Silent Witness should show up.” 
“You’re telling me that I am the 
father Of your child.” 
“Not at all, sir. I was in heat and 
had slipped the leash and you may 
assume if you wish that I spent the 
day bouncing in and out of beds. 
1 WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
going from one man to another.” 
She smiled beautifically. (Boss, 
that’s awfully close to the 
truth — but it sounds like a whopper.) (It is the truth, Eunice; I 
worded it most carefully. That is 
the second best way to tell a 
lie — tell the truth so that is sounds 
like a whopper.) (And I thought I 
knew how to lie.) (I’ve had years 
more practice. Beloved — and as a 
kid had more reason to lie than 
you ever had. Lying is a fine art; it 
is learned only through long practice.) 
“Knock off the nonsense, Eunice, or I’ll start married life by 
giving you a fat lip. Okay, we’ll 
tell Mac that; the truth is often the 
simplest solution. But we have to 
have health certificates; Mac can 
get us out of the waiting time but 
not out of that requirement. My 
doctor will phony one for me without stopping to take a blood sample and make tests, but how about 
that quack you mentioned? Will 
he cooperate?” 
“Jake, I don’t recall mentioning a quack. If Roberto gets 
here in time, I think he would take 
a chance. Or Rosy would, I think. I 
don’t think I’m harboring even a 
cold bug unless I picked up something from Joe and Gigi. Most unlikely. But how about you, 
darling? Washington, D.C., has 
the highest V.D. rate in the 
country. Did you fetch anything 
home?” 
“Oh, nothing but big and little 
casino.” 
“A nice girl like me can’t be expected to understand such terms.” 
“You impudent little baggage, 
I slept alone in Washington. Can 
you make the same claim? For the 
past five days?” 
“Of course not, dear; I’ve never 
been interested in sleeping 
alone — and Gigi is very snuggly. I 
commend her to your attention — take a look at that painting.” 
“I’m sure she is. Just Gigi, eh? 
Not Joe?” 
“Is Joe snuggly, Jake? Tell me 
morel" 
“Woman, you may get that fat 
lip before I marry you.” 
“The groom’s present to the 
bride? Sir, if you want to give me a 
fat lip. I’ll hold still, smile happily 
and take it. Oh, Jake darling, it’s 
going to be such fun to be married 
to you!” 
“I think so, too, you dizzy 
bitch. Mmm, my doctor will 
phony a certificate for you, too, 
if I explain the circumstances. 
But he’ll need your blood type.” 
“Jake, the whole country knows 
that my blood type is AB-negative. Had you forgotten it?” 
“Momentarily, yes. That’s all I 
need. Except — Wedding here? 
Or in Mac’s chambers?” 
“Here, if possible. I want our 
servants for ‘family’ if Winnie 
and Roberto don’t show up. 
Jacob, do I dare send a car with a 
message and ask Joe and Gigi to 
allow themselves to be fetched 
here for this purpose? I do want 
them present. Gigi is no problem; 
she will do as Joe wishes — but I 
think you know Joe better than I 
do. I don’t even know that he has 
clothes he would be willing to wear 
here — all I saw him wear were 
denim shorts so caked with paint 
they could stand alone.” 
“Mmm, I agree that Eunice’s 
former husband is entitled to be 
invited to Joan Eunice’s wedding, 
though there has never been a 
protocol established, that’s certain. Dear, the clothes Joe wore in 
court would be okay for a home 
wedding. How about yourself, 
Eunice? Going to be married in 
white?” 
“I think I’ve been insulted 
again. Wear white so that somebody can sneak a picture and sell 
it? ‘Ninety-Five- Year-Old SexChange Bride Wears White.’ Dear, 
if 1 wear white, let’s ask Life to 
send a photographer and cut out 
the middle man. Jake, I’ll wear 
white if you tell me to. If you don’t. 
I’ll pick something but it won’t be 
white. Something.” 
“ ‘Something old, something 
new, something borrowed, something blue.’ ” 
“Erase and correct, Jake. Here 
is the Twenty-First Century ver 
sion: 
“The bride is old, 
“The license new, 
“The body borrowed, 
“The groom is blue.” 
“I am like hell blue, I simply 
need a shave. Get out now and let 
me be. Beat it. Go take a bath. Try 
to smell like a bride.” 
“Instead of pay day at Tillies’s? 
I can take a hint. But you take a 
bath, too.” 
“Who notices the groom?” 
C UNNINGHAM had a busy 
six hours. But so did everyone 
in the ugly old mansion. To the 
old-tradition strains of Mendelssohn’s Processional the bride 
walked slowly in hesitation-step 
through the rotunda. (Twin, Here 
Comes the Bride always sounds 
to me like a cat sneaking up on 
a bird. Pum . pum . tee-pum! 
Appropriate, hnnn?) (Eunice, behave!) (Oh, I’ll behave. But I prefer John Jacob Jingleheimer 
Smith — his name is my name, too!) 
(You can’t know that one. It’s 
eighty years old and long forgotten.) (Why wouldn’t I know it when 
you were singing it in your head 
every second they were dressing 
us?) 
She walked steadily down the 
center of a long white velvet carpet, through the arch and into the 
banquet hall, now transformed 
with flowers and candles and organ into a chapel. (Boss, there’s 
Curt! I’m so glad he made it! That 
must be Mrs. Hedrick with him. 
Don’t look at them, twin; I’ll giggle.) (I’m not looking at them and 
you stop trying to — I must look 
straight ahead.) (You do that. Boss 
darling, and I’ll count the house. 
There’s Mrs. Mac — Norma — and 
Alec’s Ruth, with Roberto. 
Where’s .Rosy? Oh, there he is, 
beyond Mrs. Mac. My, isn’t Della 
dressed fit to kill? — makes us look 
shabby.) 
The bride wore a severely simple dress of powder blue, opaque, 
with high neck, matching veil, 
long sleeves, matching gloves, skirt 
hem brushing the velvet runner 
and long train sweeping behind. 
She carried a bouquet of white 
cattleya dyed blue to match. 
(Twin? Why that last-minute decision for panties? They make a line 
that shows.) (Not through this 
gown; it’s not skin tight. The 
‘bride’s knot,’ Beloved — for 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
symbolic defloration.) (Coo! Don’t 
make me laugh, Boss.) (Eunice, if 
you louse up this wedding. 
I’ll — I’ll — 1 won’t speak to you for 
three days!) (Joan twin, I won’t 
spoil it — Jake wants symbols, he 
shall have them.) (And / want 
symbols, too!) (And so do I, twin, 
so do I. It’s just that I have never 
been able to see life as anything 
but a vast complicated practical 
joke, and it’s better to laugh than 
cry.) 
(Yes, darling — but let’s not do 
either right now. I’m having 
trouble with tears.) (I thought they 
were my tears. Doesn’t Thomas 
Cattus look handsome? 1 heard 
you order the Lohengrin recessional; that one is even funnier than 
the Mendelssohn — to an Iowa 
farm girl it sounds exactly like the 
triumphant cackle of a hen after 
she lays an egg. I’ll laugh then, I 
know I will.) 
(All right to laugh and cry both 
then, Eunice — and to hang on tight 
to Jacob’s arm. Look, dearest, this 
is an old-fashioned wedding with 
all the cliches because Jake and 1 
are old fossils and that’s the way it 
should be.) 
(Oh, I approve. Cunningham 
looks worried — can’t see why; he’s 
done a beautiful job. Boss, those 
panties struck me so darn funny 
because you ordered the Bilitis 
and the Graces to be placed on 
easels in the drawing room where 
everyone at the reception can 
stare at them. Riddle me that.) 
(Eunice, there is no inconsistency. 
A bride is supposed to be covered; 
those paintings are meant to be 
looked at. With Joe and Gigi here I 
darn well want them to be looked 
at!) (They’ll be looked at. Stared 
at. Some wives may look at them 
with intense interest. Maybe.) 
(Maybe. Eunice, you know I’ve 
never asked a husband not to tell 
his wife anything; it’s not right to 
ask one member of a married 
couple to keep secrets from the 
other. Besides, he will or he won’t, 
no matter what you ask — and he 
should; he knows her better than 
we do. But those pix are as harmless as the fruit punch we have for 
those who turn down the champagne. It’s irrelevant that I posed 
for them, I simply want Joe’s 
genius to be appreciated. Enjoyed.) 
Joe Branca had used no small 
part of his genius in making up the 
bride. Starting with a bare, clean 
canvas — fresh out of her tub — he 
had worked long and hard to make 
up Joan Eunice from head to toe 
with such restraint that even close 
inspection could not detect any 
trace of his efforts. As in “The 
Three Graces’’ it was simply 
Eunice’s own beauty, invisibly enhanced — strongly enhanced, better than life, more natural than 
nature. He turned down the use of 
a hair fall and simply fluffed her 
own hair (still far shorter than 
Eunice’s hair had been) and 
sprayed it slightly to keep it unmussed under her veil. 
The bride’s matron of honor was 
made up with much less restraint. 
Having seen the miracle wrought 
on Joan Eunice, Winnie had 
timidly asked Joan if she thought 
it would be all right to ask Mr. 
Branca to improve her a little? 
Since she was part of the wedding 
party? Joan and Gigi had enthusi
astically pushed the idea. Joe had 
studied Mrs. Garcia, then said, 
“Forty minutes, Joan Eunice — is 
time? Okay, Winnie wash face.” 
The result exploited Winifred’s 
red hair, made visible her transparent eyebrows and lashes, 
livened her too-white skin — yet 
looked more natural than the 
stylized face Winnie usually wore. 
The matron of honor wore 
pastel-green tabard and tights and 
carried a smaller bouquet of 
green and brown cymbidia. She 
kept in step to the hesitation march 
thirty paces ahead of the bride, 
preceded her into the banquet hall 
toward the improvised altar. 
Chief of Security O’Neil was the 
last one in, then posted himself in 
the archway at parade-rest and 
managed to watch events at the far 
end of the room while giving his 
attention to his rear. Flis features 
were serene but he was uneasy, 
alert. The big house was empty 
save for seventy-five to eighty 
people in this one room; all armor 
was up, every door, every real 
window was locked, hand-bolted, 
and dogged, and the night net of 
alarms switched on, and O’Neil 
had personally made sure of all 
this before releasing his guards 
to attend the wedding. But he 
trusted no gadgets and few people; 
he did not release himself from 
duty. 
T he bride approached the far 
end. Jake Salomon waited 
there, with Alec Train at his side. 
Facing down the aisle were the 
Reverend Hugo White and Judge 
McCampbell, matching in dignity. Shorty was wearing a black 
frock coat, white shirt, string tie, 
and carried his Book; the Judge 
was injudicial robes. 
(Boss, doesn’t Jake look 
beautiful? But what is that getup?) 
(It’s a cutaway, dearest.) (It’s a 
museum piece.) (I suppose so. 
Jake probably hasn’t worn it in 
thirty, forty years — or perhaps 
rented it from a theatrical 
costumer. I feel certain Alec had 
to rent his. Doesn’t Father Hugo 
look grand!) (Must be his preachin’ 
clothes. Boss. Joe ought to paint 
him in this, even if he never gets the 
pix he wants.) (Good idea, Eunice; 
we’ll plant it with Gigi — and one 
thing may lead to another. I have 
hopes that seeing The Three 
Graces will gentle him, too. As 
Hugo wants to pose ... if he can 
convince himself that it’s not sinful. Eunice, my knees are shaking. 
I’m not sure I can do it!) (Om 
Mani Padme Hum, baby sister. We 
had one hell of time getting him 
off the dime; don’t go chicken 
now.) (Om Mani Padme Hum, 
Eunice — hold my hand, darling; 
don’t let me faint.) 
Joan Eunice stopped in front of 
judge and preacher. Winifred took 
her bouquet from her, stepped 
back to one side. Alec Train moved 
Jake into place beside Joan 
Eunice, placed himself to balance 
Winifred. The music stopped. 
Hugo lifted his eyes and said, “Let 
us pray.” (Om Mani Padme Hum. 
You okay, twin?) (I’m all right 
now. Om Mani Padme Hum.) 
W HEN Hugo said, “Amen,” 
Joe Branca slid in from the 
side, shot his first picture. 
Thereafter he moved around like a 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
Chinese stage hand, disturbing no 
one and never moving at a crucial 
moment — but getting his shots. 
Hugo opened his Book, did not 
look at it. “We read today from 
the Book of Psalms. It says here: 
“ ‘The Lord is my shepherd; I 
shall not want. 
“ ‘He maketh me to lie down in 
green pastures; he leadeth me beside the still waters. 
“ ‘He restoreth my soul; He 
leadeth me in the paths of 
righteousness for His name’s sake. 
“ ‘Yea, though I walk through 
the valley of the shadow of death, I 
will fear no evil . 
H e closed his Book. “Brothers and Sisters, the Lord saw 
that Adam was lonely in the Garden of Eden and He said it is not 
good for man to live alone. So He 
created Eve to live with Adam. 
And He said to Adam, My son, 
you take care of this woman, you 
hear Me? You treat her right all 
the time, just like I was watching 
you every minute. Because I am 
watching you, every minute and 
every second. You cherish her and 
protect her like I tell you and you’ll 
be too busy to get into anything 
wrongful, and she’ll be a comfort 
to you all the days of your life.” 
He turned to Salomon. “Jacob 
Moshe, are you going to do that?” 
“I will!” 
The reverend looked at the bride. 
“And the Lord said to Eve, My 
daughter, you got to cook for this 
man and wash his clothes and bring 
up his babies and not go running 
around when you should be home, 
and love him even when he’s tired 
and bad-tempered and not fit to 
speak to, because men are like 
that and you must take the bad 
with the good — you hear Me, Eve? 
“Joan Eunice, are you going to 
do that?” 
“Yes, Father Hugo.” 
“Judge—” 
“Jacob Moshe, does there exist 
any impediment under our laws 
and customs to you marrying this 
woman?” 
“None.” 
“Joan Eunice, is there any 
reason in law or in your heart why 
you cannot marry this man?” 
“There is none. Your Honor.” 
McCampbell spoke more loudly. 
“If any witness knows of any 
cause which would forbid me to 
bind these two in marriage, I command him to speak.” (Eunice, if 
anyone even clears his throat. 
I’ll — I’ll) (You’ll keep quiet. Boss 
darling; that’s what you’ll do. 
Nobody here but our loving 
friends. Om Mani Padme Hum.) 
(Om Mani Padme Hum . ) 
“Jacob Moshe, will you love, 
honor and cherish her?” 
“I will.” 
“Joan Eunice, will you love, 
honor, and cherish him?” 
“I will love, honor, and obey 
him.” (Huh? Boss you demon, you 
haven’t the slightest intention of 
obeying!) 
Salomon said, “Wait a moment! 
Judge, she switched the words! I 
don’t expect that and I won’t let 
her promise — ” 
“Order. You keep quiet, Jake; 
I’m not addressing you. Joan 
Eunice, is that what you wish to 
promise?” 
“Yes, Your Honor.” (Eunice, 
stay out of this. I know what I’m 
doing.) 
“I must advise you that such a 
promise is not legally binding under the civil marriage contract of 
this state but I must warn you, too, 
that it is not a promise which 
should be lightly made in these circumstances.” 
“I know it. Your Honor.” (Boss, 
you’re out of your mind!) (Quite 
possibly. But it’s all right, 
sweetheart. Jake is going to give 
us exactly the orders we will be 
humbly pleased to obey. Haven’t I 
been right so far?) (Yes, but you 
keep scaring me. Suppose he tells 
us to keep our legs crossed? I’ve 
never been any good at that.) (He 
never will. Instead he’ll be magnanimously pleased to humor our 
little follies — since we’ve 
promised to obey him. Relax, 
sweetheart — this is precisely the 
way my darling Agnes handled 
me .. when I was not anything 
like as wise and tolerant as Jake is.) 
“Let me hear you state your intention again.” 
“I, Joan Eunice, do solemnly 
promise to love, honor, and obey 
Jacob Moshe — and I will. Your 
Honor, even if he backs out and 
won’t marry me. He doesn’t have 
to marry me. I’d be perfectly 
happy just to — ” 
“Quiet, Joan Eunice. That’s 
enough. Reverend, this is getting 
out of hand; I’m going to wrap it 
up with the bare legalities and you 
can plaster them with anything 
else they need in your closing 
prayer. All right?” 
“Yes, Judge. They don’t need 
much prayer; they’re ready.” 
“I hope you’re right. Jake, you 
heard this stubborn little, uh, 
lady. Are you willing to marry 
her anyhow?” 
“Yes.” 
“Jacob Moshe, do you take Joan 
Eunice to be your lawfully wedded 
wife?” 
“Ido!” 
“Joan Eunice, do you take Jacob 
Moshe to be your lawfully wedded 
husband?” 
“Ido.” 
“Uh, where’s the ring? Alec. 
Jake, take her left hand in your 
left. Now.” 
“With this ring I thee wed.” 
“Under authority vested in me I 
pronounce you man and wife. Kiss 
her, Jake. Take it. Reverend.” 
(And you told me not to louse it 
up!) (I got us there, didn’t I? He’s 
ours. I mean, we’re his. Same 
thing.) 
“Let us pray!” 
XXVI 
O N LUNA, Kennedy Tunnel B, 
paralleling Kennedy Tunnel A 
between Luna City and the Apollo 
Industrial Complex, was completed and both tunnels were then 
made one-way, thereby quadrupling the potential traffic. The 
Five- and ten-year projections 
caused the Commission to decide to go ahead at once with tunnels C and D. On the Hong Kong 
and New York Stock Exchanges 
Vacuum Industries, Ltd., Selenterprises, PanAm, and Diana 
Transport all took sudden jumps 
against a generally sagging 
market. Mercury Newsletter 
(subsid of MercServ) sent destructaped messages by special 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
couriers to their 7-star clients. 
Nine percent of these couriers 
failed to report back, which 
caused the managing director of 
MercServ to decide that a vacation at Las-Vegas-in-the-Sky 
would be good for his health even 
though there was no proof that Internal Defense agents had detained the couriers or solved the 
“destruct” combo. A source close 
to the President denied that there 
was anything more than seasonal 
unrest in any city in the country 
and denounced “irresponsible 
rumormongers.” CBS’s Today’s Day with Dave Daly was replaced by a motion picture with an 
explanation of technical difficulties. Today’s Day resumed the 
next day without Daly, who 
was — it was announced — on sick 
leave to recover from extreme 
fatigue. Miss Molly Maguire, the 
hottest sensie star of the private 
film industry, claimed the title of 
first woman in history to give birth 
to a child during a sky dive. The 
babe was safely landed exactly 
as planned by the midwife team 
diving with her, the event was 
filmed in stereosound and -color 
from several angles, and the only 
casualty was a sprained ankle for 
Miss Maguire — she was able to 
hold a press conference thirty minutes after she landed. 
Since plane flight had originated in, and sky dive had started 
over, Mexican soil, whereas the 
entire party except the plane had 
landed in Arizona, it was not clear 
what laws had been violated or 
whose, or what nationality the 
child was — as Miss MaGuire’s 
citizenship was Pakistani, with le
gal permanent residence in the 
States. The party surrendered 
voluntarily to the nearest U.S. immigration officer and Miss Maguire apologized most prettily on 
videocast for having reentered 
the country of her choice so informally through an inadvertent 
error in navigation by her pilot, 
plus a sudden gust of wind. They 
were released with a warning but 
the films were impounded — uselessly, as they seemed to show that 
the child was born, about fiftyfifty, in both countries, but factors of angle and parallax and 
identification of ground markings 
— in those film sequences in which 
the ground showed at all — made 
it impossible to be certain. Grove 
Press bought an option on the 
films, then entered suit to have 
them released, in the interest of 
justice. 
A notorious sex-change case 
married her attorney but the 
newsworthy couple managed to 
leave for their honeymoon before issuance of their license was 
noted — a famous scoopsnoop 
chased them to Canada, only to 
find that the couple he had traced 
down were a Dr. & Mrs. Garcia, 
members of the wedding but themselves of no news value. Mrs: 
Garcia smiled and let herself be 
photographed (she was quite 
photogenic) and was interviewed 
about the wedding; then the Garcias returned home. 
Senator James “Jumping Joe” 
Jones of Arkansas charged that 
the drive to repeal the XXXlst 
Amendment permitting prayer 
in public schools was a plot by the 
devil-inspired Pope of Rome and 
his servile followers. The 
rebuilding of the Oklahoma State 
House was halted by labor trouble 
drummed up (it was alleged) by 
the underground Equal Rights for 
Whites Action Committee. The 
contractor’s construction foreman 
said, “Any honk thinks he’s discriminated, he can take it to the 
hiring board and get a fair hearing. Trouble is these people they 
don’t want to work.” 
!!!!INSTANT MAN!!!! 
— Safe — Sanitary — Sensible — 
Why spend lonely sleepless nights 
j^when complete all-senses relief 
can be yours in the privacy of your 
own home? Programed for your 
happiness by the same great team 
of superscientists who created 
the recoverable orbital boo.ster. 
Available from all leading 
hospital supply & rental 
shops- - no prescription 
TRIPLEGREEN STAMPS 
Health-Now, Inc. — mfrs of 
INSTANT WOMAN 
Unhappy? You needn't be- and 
none of those silly mechanical 
toys, undignified and degrading. 
No drugs. Just phone Old Doc Joy, 
hypnotherapist licensed by the 
State of New York, (adv) 
«MR. AND MRS. MACKENIflZIE” (Liberian passports) 
had the penthouse floor to themselves — three baths, four bedrooms, kitchen, dining room, barlounge, drawing room, lanai, garden, swimming pool, waterfall, 
fountain, garden bar-pantry, 
foyer, private lift, magnificent 
view of the yacht harbor, beaches. 
estuary, town, and mountains 
beyond. 
But they were eccentric. Their 
rent included full hotel service 
but none of the hotel’s staff had 
been on that level since their arrival. They were not seen at the casinos, nor on the beaches, nor were 
they known to make use of other 
attractions of the resort. They 
sometimes had room-service 
meals, but the table cart went only 
as far as the lift; their servants 
took it up. 
It was rumored among the hotel 
staff that Mrs. MacKenzie liked 
to do her own cooking, but no one 
really knew — no one had seen her 
(save possibly from a copter) and 
few knew him by sight. Their servants had three suites on a lower 
floor . but were willing to discuss anything but their employ 
ers. 
She came from the garden into 
the lounge. He looked up from his 
book. “Yes, dear? Too much sun? 
Or did that copter come back?” 
“Neither. Copters don’t worry 
me; I just turn over on my tummy 
so that they can’t photograph my 
face. Jake darling, I want you to 
see something pretty.” 
“Drag it in here. I’m lazy.” 
“I can’t, dearest; it’s down on 
the water. A boat of some odd 
sort, with the gayest, most colorful sails. You were in the Navy; 
you know about such things.” 
“1 was in the Navy one hitch fifty years back, so I’m an expert already.” 
“Jacob, you always know everything. And it is pretty, and quite 
odd. Please, sir?” 
“Your slightest wish, Ma
145 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
dame.” He got up and offered her 
his arm. 
They stopped at the seaward 
rail. “Now which one? All those 
boats have colored sails. I haven’t 
seen a suit of white sails since we 
got here — you’d think there was a 
law against it.” 
"'That one. Oh, dear, they’re putting down its sails. And it was so 
pretty a minute ago.” 
“ ‘Dowsing her sails,’ Eunice. If 
I’m going to be your resident expert, let me expert. When you lower sails suddenly, you dowse 
them. Which this laddie is doing 
because he’s standing in to anchor about — yes! There goes the 
hook. And a vessel is always ‘she,’ 
never ‘it.’ Boats and ships are female because they are beautiful, 
lovable, expensive — and unpredictable.” 
“Jake, you’ve always been able 
to predict what I’m going to do 
even before I know myself.” 
(Twin, why tell a whopper like 
that? He knows better.) (He won’t 
argue it, hon.) “But what is it?” 
“Oh. It’s a trimaran, a yacht 
with a triple hull. Can’t say that 1 
agree that she’s pretty. A sloop 
with a triangular mains’ 1 is my 
notion of beauty.” 
“Does look sort of squarish 
now. But swooping in with all 
its — sorry — her sails up, she was 
lovely.” (Twin, ask Jake if he 
thinks there is any way we could 
go on it?) (On her, Eunice — not 
‘it.’ Are you a sailor, hon?) (Never been on a boat in my life. Boss. 
But I’m getting an idea, maybe.) 
(Maybe I have the same idea. Are 
you thinking about that talk with 
Jake when he pointed out a farm 
would mean even more staff and 
less safety than our house?) (I 
don’t care who thought of it first. 
Boss — ^just make sure that Jake 
thinks of it first.) (I shall, dear — 
do you think I have to be told that 
a ship is ‘she’? Or can’t recognize 
a trimaran? The real question is: 
Do you get seasick? I used to — 
and it’s miserable. But the fact 
that we haven’t had the tiniest bit 
of morning sickness makes me 
think you might be immune to 
motion sickness.) (So ‘let’s operate and find out,’ as Roberto 
says.) 
“Oh, trimarans have their 
points, Eunice. You get a lot of 
boat for your money. Roomy. 
And they are almost impossible 
to turn over — safer than most 
small vessels. I just wouldn’t award 
one a beauty prize.” 
“Jake, do you think you could 
get us invited aboard that one? She 
looks interesting.” 
“Oh, there’s some way to swing 
it. I might start by talking with the 
manager. But, Eunice, you can’t 
go aboard a private vessel with 
your features veiled; it would be 
rude. Your granddaughters did 
you no favor when they made you 
as recognizable as a video star.” 
“Jacob, a veil doesn’t enter into it because I never want to meet 
anyone as ‘Mrs. MacKenzie.’ I’m 
Mrs. Jacob Moshe Salomon and 
proud of it — and that’s the way I 
must always be introduced. 
Jake, I doubt if our marriage is 
news any longer; it can’t matter 
much if I’m spotted.” 
“I suppose not. The copters 
might swarm a mite closer for a 
while and some would have pix
snoops aboard with telescopic 
lenses. But I doubt if even your 
granddaughters are anxious to 
take a shot at you. If the snoops 
fret you, wear pants to sunbathe, 
and in the pool.” 
“The hell I will, it’s our pool, Jacob. Anyhow, briefies can’t conceal the fact that I’m pregnant and 
the sooner that’s in the news the 
less it will interest anyone later. 
Let them sneak a pic, then you 
have Doctor Bob confirm it — and 
it stops being news. No huhu, 
dear; I learned years ago that you 
can’t ‘get away from it all’ — you 
just have to cope. Is it possible, 
on a boat of that sort, to have a 
swimming pool?” 
“Not one that size. But I’ve seen 
trimarans much bigger than that 
one. Could be done, I suppose, 
since a trimaran can have so much 
deck space for its tonnage — I’d 
have to ask a naval architect. Why 
the interest. Lively Legs? Do you 
want me to buy you a yacht?” 
“I don’t know. But boats look 
like fun. Jake, I never had much 
fun in my life — my other life. I’m 
not sure how one goes about having fun — except that every day is 
a joy to me now. All that I’m sure 
of is that I want to do something 
utterly different this time. Not be 
a Hetty Green. And not the gay, 
mad whirl of ‘society’ — kark\ I’d 
rather turn whore. Would you like 
a yacht, Jake? Take me around the 
world and show me all those places 
you’ve seen and I never had time 
for?” 
“You didn’t take time.” 
AYBE it’s the same thing. I 
do know that if a man ac
quires too much money, presently 
it owns him instead of his owning 
it. Jake, I’ve been to Europe at 
least fifty times — yet I’ve never 
been inside the Louvre, never seen 
them change the Guard at Buckingham Palace. All I saw were hotels and board rooms — and those 
are the same all over the globe. 
Would you care to repair my education, dearest? Show me Rio? 
You say it’s the most beautiful 
city in the world. The Parthenon 
by moonlight? The Taj at dawn?” 
Jake said thoughtfully. “The trimaran is the favorite craft of the 
dropout.” 
“Excuse me? I missed something. ‘Dropout?’ ” 
“I don’t mean the barefooted 
bums in the Abandoned Areas, 
Eunice, nor the ones skulking 
around the hills. It takes money to 
drop out by water. But people do. 
Millions have. Nobody knows 
how many because it has been subject to an ‘exception’ for 
years — the government does not 
want attention called to it. But 
take those yachts below us: I’ll bet 
that at least one out of ten has registration papers for some ‘flag of 
convenience’ and the owner’s 
passport is as phony as that of 
‘Mr. and Mrs. MacKenzie.’ He 
has to be registered somewhere 
and carry some sort of passport, 
or the coast guard wherever he goes 
will give him a bad time, even impound his craft. But if he takes care 
of that minimum, he can dodge almost everything else — no income 
tax, no local taxes except when he 
buys something, nobody tries to 
force his kids into public schools, 
no real estate taxes, no poli
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
tics — no violence in the streets. 
That last is the best part, with the 
cycle of riots swinging up again.” 
“Then it is possible to get away 
from it all.” 
“Mmm, not quite. No matter 
how much fish he eats, he has to 
touch land occasionally. He 
can’t play Vanderdecken; only a 
ghost ship can stay at sea forever, 
real ones have to be put up on the 
ways at intervals.” Jake Salomon looked thoughtful. “But it’s 
closer to that antithetical 
combination of ‘peace’ and 
‘freedom’ than is possible on land. 
If it suits one. But, Eunice, I know 
what I would do — if I were young.” 
“What, Jake?” 
“Look up there.” 
“Where, dear? I don’t see any 
thing.” 
There r 
“The Moon?” 
“Right! Eunice, that’s the only 
place left with plenty of room and 
not too many peple. Our last frontier — but an endless one. Anyone 
under the cut-off age should at 
least try to out-migrate.” 
‘‘Are you serious, Jacob? 
Certainly space travel is scientifically interesting but I’ve never 
seen much use in it. Oh, some fallout. Videosatellites and so 
forth. New materials. But the 
Moon itself? Why, it doesn’t even 
pay its own way.” 
“Eunice, what use is that baby in 
your belly?” 
“I trust that you are joking, sir. 
I hope you are.” 
“Simmer down. Bulgy. Darling, a newborn baby is as useless 
a thing as one can imagine. It isn’t 
even pretty — except to its doting 
parents. It does not pay its own 
way and it’s unreasonably expensive. It takes twenty to thirty 
years for the investment to begin 
to pay off and in many — no, 
most — cases it never does pay off. 
Because it is much easier to support a child than it is to bring one 
up to amount to anything!” 
“Owr baby will amount to 
something!” 
“I feel sure that it will. But look 
around you; my generalization 
stands. But, Eunice, despite these 
shortcomings, a baby has a 
unique virtue. It is always the 
hope of our race. It’s only hope.” 
She smiled. “Jacob, you’re an 
exasperating man.” 
“I try to be, dear; it’s good for 
your metabolism. Now look 
back up at the sky. That’s a newborn baby, too. The best hope of 
our race. If that baby lives, the 
human race lives. If we let it 
die — and it is vulnerable for a few 
more years — the race dies, too. Oh, 
I don’t mean H-bombs. We’re 
faced with far greater dangers 
than H-bombs. We’ve reached an 
impasse; we can’t go on the way 
we’re headed — and we can’t go 
back — and we’re dying in our own 
poisons. That’s why that little Lunar colony has got to survive. Because we can’t. It isn’t the threat of 
war, or crime in the streets, or corruption in high places, or pesticides, or smog, or education that 
doesn’t teach; those things are Just 
symptoms of the underlying 
cancer. It’s too many people. Not 
too many souls, or honks, or 
thirds — ^just . too many. Seven 
billion people, sitting in each 
other’s laps, trying to take in each 
other’s washing, pick each other’s 
pockets. Too many. Nothing 
wrong with the individual in 
most cases — but collectively 
we’re the Kilkenny Cats, unable 
to do anything but starve and fight 
and eat each other. Too many. So 
anyone who can ought to go to the 
Moon as fast as he can manage 
it.” 
“Jacob, in all the years I’ve 
known you I’ve never heard you 
talk this way.” 
“Why talk about a dream that 
has passed one by? Eunice — Eunice- Johann, I mean — I was born 
twenty-five years later than you 
were. I grew up believing in space 
travel. Perhaps you did not?” 
“No, I didn’t, Jake. When it 
came along, it struck me as interesting — but slightly preposter
ous.” 
“Whereas I was born enough later that it seemed as natural to me 
as automobiles. The big rockets 
were no surprise to my generation; we cut our teeth on Buck Rogers. Nevertheless I was born 
too soon. When Armstrong and 
Aldrin landed on Luna I was pushing forty. When out-migration 
started, with a cut-off age of forty, 
I was too old; when they eased it to 
forty-five, again I was too 
old — and when they raised it to fifty, I was much too old. I’m not 
kicking, dear; on a frontier every 
man-jack must pull his weight, and 
there is little use for an elderly 
lawyer.” 
He smiled down at her and went 
on: “But, darling, if you wanted to 
out-migrate I wouldn’t try to dissuade you; I’d cheer you on.” 
“Jake!” (He can’t get away from 
us that easily!) (You’re darn tootin’ he can’t! I’ll fix him.) “Jake my 
own and only, you can’t get away 
from me that easily.” 
“Eunice, I am serious. I could 
die happy if I knew our baby was 
to be born on the Moon.” 
She sighed. “Jacob, I promised 
to obey you and I happily do so. 
But I can’t go to the Moon — as an 
out-migrant. Because I’m even 
farther past the cutoff age than 
you are — the Supreme Court says 
so.” 
“That could be fixed.” 
“And raise an issue over my 
identity again? Jacob darling, I 
don’t want to leave you. But 
— “she patted her belly and 
smiled — ” if he wants to go to the 
Moon, we’ll help, at the earliest 
age they’ll take him. All right?” 
H e smiled and gently patted 
her slight bulge. “More than all 
right. Because I don’t want his 
beautiful mother to go away for 
any reason. But a father should 
never stand in the way of his son.” 
“You don’t. You aren’t. You 
won’t. You never would. Jacob 
Junior goes to the Moon when he’s 
ready, but not this week. Let’s talk 
about trimarans and this week. 
Jake, you know I want to close up 
our house — I’d sell it but nobody 
would buy it other than as land; 
it’s a white elephant. But two 
things have bothered me. It has to 
be left garrisoned, or the Eree 
People will break in despite all armor, and squat — then some day 
some judge grants them title on adverse possession.” 
Jake said, “Certainly. Historically, that’s where all land titles 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
come from. Somebody standing 
on it, defending it and saying, 
This is mine!’ And lately the 
courts have been cutting down the 
period of adverse possession. Especially in city cores close to 
Abandoned areas — and your 
house is both.” 
“I know, dear — but I don’t want 
to surrender it to squatters. Darn 
it, that house cost me more than 
nine million, not counting taxes 
and upkeep. The other worry is 
what to do about our in-house 
staff. I’m sick of being a feudal 
lord — erase and correct; lady, 
now.” (Erase and correct — ‘tart’ 
now.) (Certainly, Eunice, but I 
haven’t been too tartish since we 
got married.) (Not much opportunity, twin — but you’re getting 
restless. Huh?) {Who is getting 
restless? Never mind, twin sister, 
the day will come. But we won’t 
rub darling Jake’s nose in it.) “I 
can’t just let them go; some have 
been with me twenty-odd years. 
But if we buy a yacht — and live on 
it — I think I have a solution to 
both problems.” 
“So?” 
“I think so. It’s an idea I got 
during our wedding, thinking 
about that farm.” 
“Well! Wench, you were supposed to be thinking about me." 
“I was, dear. But I seem to be 
able to think about several things 
at once, since my rejuvenation. 
Better blood supply, possibly.” 
(My help, you mean. Boss.) (Yes, 
dear. Same thing.) “Our banquet 
hall, dressed as a chapel, looked 
more like a church than it has ever 
looked like a place to eat. So here’s 
my notion. Give our house to 
Shorty. Give it to his church in a 
trust setup, with Alec, maybe, as 
a trustee, and also Judge Mac if 
he’ll do it. Arrange the trust for 
perpetual maintenance, with 
ample funds and a good salary for 
Hugo as pastor. Is this practical?” 
“No difficulty, Eunice, if you 
really want to unload the house — ” 
“I do. If you consent.” 
“It’s your house, dear, and I decided a long time ago that being a 
householder in a big city was more 
headache than pleasure. We 
could still keep my little house in 
Safe Harbor — no fear of 
squatters — if you want a pied-aterre. We won’t do it quite as you 
described it but you can give your 
house to Shorty if you wish to. I’ll 
get Alec to work out a plan. But I 
wonder if Shorty can cope with it? 
Squatters might still move in on 
him — or rioters break in and wreck 
the place.” 
“Oh. That fits in with the other 
half of my idea: What to do about 
our too-faithful retainers. Offer 
any with twenty years or close to it 
retirement at full pay. Encourage the in-house guards and maintenance men to work for the trust, 
same pay — because you’re right; if 
we hand an illit a place like that, 
with no one to keep him straight, 
he’ll soon have a shell, not a 
church. Father Hugo is the best 
bodyguard I’ve ever seen . but 
he’s a child of God and unsophisticated about management. He 
needs a practical, cynical man as 
his in-house steward. Cunningham. Or O’Neil. Or Mentone. 
Alec can work it out. Jake, I want 
to hand over to Shorty a complete 
plant, subsidized and main
tained, so that he can put his mind 
solely on preaching and praying 
and soul-saving. I think you know 
why.” (I think / know why, 
Boss — but any of the four would 
have killed that mugger.) (We’ve 
managed to thank the other 
three, beloved — and will go on 
thanking them. Father Hugo is a 
special case.) 
“Eunice, do you really think 
Hugo saves souls?” 
«| HAVEN’T the slightest idea, 
1 Jacob; I don’t know Who is in 
charge of this world. Even if what 
Hugo does has no more real 
meaning than our ‘prayer meetings,’ it’s still worth while. Darling, this is a screwed-up world. 
Back in the days of the Model-T 
Ford the United States was a fine 
country, brimming with hope. But 
today the best thing most young 
people can do is stay home, sit 
still, not get involved and chant 
Om Marti Padme Hum — and it is 
the best thing most of them are 
capable of doing, the world being 
what it is now; it’s far better than 
dropping out or turning on with 
drugs. When meditation and a 
meaningless prayer are better than 
most action open to them, then 
what Hugo has to offer is good in 
the same way. Even if his theology 
is a hundred percent wrong. But 
I don’t think Father Hugo is any 
more mistaken than the most 
learned theologian and he might 
be closer to the truth. Jacob, I 
don’t think anyone knows Who’s 
in charge ” 
“Just wondered, my dear. Sometimes pregnant women get taken 
with fancies.” 
“I’m pregnant down here, 
dearest; up here is still old Johann. 
Protects me somewhat, I think.” 
(Oh, you think so, huh? Boss, if you 
didn’t have me to keep you 
straight, you’d be as filled with vapors as a cat trying to have kittens 
in a wastebasket! Remember, I’ve 
been through this before.) (I know 
you have, darling, and that’s why 
I’m not afraid — otherwise I’d be 
scared silly.) (No worse than 
having a tooth drilled. Boss; we’re 
built for this. Roomy.) “Jake, did I 
ever tell you about the time I went 
into politics?” 
“Didn’t know you ever had and 
can’t imagine it, Eunice.” 
“Imagine it for ‘Johann,’ not 
for ‘Eunice.’ Forty years back I 
let them persuade me that it was 
my ‘duty.’ I was easy to persuade 
— but I realize now that my attraction to the Party was that I could 
pay for my campaign in a district 
they were going to lose anyhow. 
But I learned things, Jake. 
Learned that being a businessman has nothing to do with being a 
politician and even less to do with 
being a statesman. They clobbered 
me, Jake! I’ve never been tempted 
to save the world since. Maybe 
someone can save this addled 
planet but I don’t know how and 
now I know that I don’t know. 
That’s something even if it isn’t 
much. Jake, I could worry about 
Smith Enterprises when I was 
running it. I can worry now about 
sixty-odd people and make sure 
they’re each all right insofar as 
money can insure it. But no one 
can solve things for seven billion 
people; they won’t let you. You go 
nutty with frustration if you try. 
1 WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
Nor can you do much for three 
hundred million, not when the real 
problem — as you pointed out — is 
the very fact that there are three 
hundred million of them. I can’t 
see any solution short of 
compulsory sterilization — and the 
solution strikes me as worse than 
the disease. Licensing without 
sterilization hasn’t solved it.” 
Her husband shook his head. 
“And won’t, Eunice. Licensing is 
a joke; it has more loopholes than 
the tax laws. Compulsory methods 
inevitably involve politcal 
tests — no, thanks, I prefer the 
Four Horsemen. And the only effect that voluntary contraception 
has ever had has been to change the 
ratio, unfavorably, between the 
productive and the parasites; the 
population climbs anyhow. If we 
were as hard-boiled about weeding 
the culls as China is, it might not 
work that way. But we aren’t, we 
never have been — and I’m not sure 
I’d like it if we were.” 
“Then there isn’t any solution.” 
“Oh, there is — I mentioned it. 
The Four Horsemen. They never 
sleep, they’re never off duty. And 
there." He pointed at the Moon. 
“Eunice, I suspect that our race’s 
tragedy has been played endless 
times. It may be that an intelligent 
race has to expand right up to its 
disaster point to achieve what is 
needed to break out of its planet 
and reach for the stars. It may always — or almost always — be a 
photo finish, with the outcome 
uncertain to the last moment. Just 
as it is with us. It may take endless 
wars and unbearable population 
pressure to force-feed a technology to the point where it can cope 
with space. In the universe, space 
travel may be the normal birth 
pangs of an otherwise dying race. 
A test. Some races pass, some 
fail.” 
She shivered. “Gruesome.” 
“Yes. And no way to talk to a 
gal in what used to be called a 
‘delicate condition.’ Sorry, darling.” 
“A gruesome thought at any 
time, Jake. I’m not in a ‘delicate 
condition.’ I’m doing what this 
body is designed for. Building a 
baby. Feels good. I’m enjoying 
it.” 
“So it appears and that makes 
me happy. But, Eunice, before you 
shut down your house and move 
into a yacht, I must mention one 
thing. I think you must put it off 
until you’ve had this baby.” 
“Why, Jake? No morning sickness. I doubt if seasickness will be a 
problem.” 
“Because you are in a delicate 
condition, no matter how good it 
feels. I’d feel happier if you were 
never more than five minutes from 
medical attention. You’d be okay 
at home; Bob and Winnie are 
there. You’re okay here — a hotel 
resident physician and a good 
one — believe me, I checked on 
him — and a modern hospital over 
there, in sight. But at jea? Suppose 
you had a seven-month preemie? 
We’d lose the baby and probably 
you, too. No, Eunice.” 
“Oh.” (Eunice, any point in telling him that you carried your first 
one full term and no trouble?) (No, 
twin. How are you going to prove 
it? If you mention me now, you’re 
just a female with pregnancy delusions. Boss, this is one argument 
you’re going to lose. So concede it 
at once. Fall back and find another 
route.) “Jacob, I can’t argue. I 
lost my first wife with her first 
baby; I know it can happen. But 
what would you think of this? 
Could you persuade Roberto and 
Winnie to come with us? Then not 
go very far to sea. If we were 
anchored where that trimaran is, 
that hospital would be just as 
close . and Roberto would be 
aboard. This hotel physician must 
be all right as you have checked on 
him but I would rather have 
Roberto. He knows me inside and 
out. And never mind wise cracks; I 
mean as my physician. Or does the 
fact that you know that Roberto 
has slept with me make him 
unacceptable to you as my O.B. 
man?’’ (Whew! Twin, that was a 
foul blow.) (Oh, pooh, Eunice, I’m 
just confusing the issue.) 
J AKE SALOMON cocked one 
eyebrow and grinned down at 
her. “Little one, you can’t 
embarrass me that easily. If Bob is 
the baby-cotcher you want. I’ll do 
my best to persuade him ... as 
long as you don’t mind Bob’s wife 
being around.” 
“Pooh to you, sir. If you and 
Winnie want to stroll down 
memory’s lane. I’ll tuck you in and 
kiss you goodnight. She’s certain to 
console you while I’m benched — 
and you’ll need it.” 
“Thereby giving you carte 
blanche later. A woman almost 
always falls in love with the doctor 
who delivers her first baby.” 
“Pooh again. I’ve loved Roberto 
a long time and you know it. Are 
you jealous, Jacob?” 
“No. Just curious. I suppose 
that injuction you laid on me on 
our wedding day still applies? It 
occurs to me that, with respect to 
the day you mentioned. Bob had 
opportunity before, during, and 
after.” 
“Is that all it takes, dear? Just 
opportunity?” (Just about, twin!) 
She grinned at him and wrinkled 
her nose. “Sweetheart, all I will 
admit is the possibility that 
Roberto’s name might be in the 
hat. But it could have been Finchley. Or Hubert. Or dear Judge 
Mac. You and Alec were awfully 
busy that day — but 1 think you’ll 
find that Mac adjourned court at 
his usual hour . and I wasn’t 
home until much later.” 
“Is that a confession?” 
“Well, there might be a confession in there somewhere." 
“Quit pulling my leg, my love. 
There are only two sorts of wives. 
Those who cheat, and those who 
have their husbands’ friendly cooperation, in which case — ” 
“Isn’t there a third sort?” 
“Eh? Oh, you mean faithful 
wives. Oh, certainly. So I’ve heard. 
But in my twenty years of general 
practice, much of it divorce cases, 
I encountered so few of that 
sort — none I felt certain 
about — that I cannot venture an 
opinion. Wives technically faithful 
form so small a part of the sample 
that I can’t evaluate them. People 
being what they are, a rational man 
should be satisfied if his meals are 
on time and his dignity not affronted. What 1 was trying to say 
is, that if you ever want my friendly 
cooperation, don’t assault my 
credibility with a wet firecracker 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
such as Hubert. Judge Mac I could 
believe. Tom Finchley is a very 
masculine person, too, and one 
who bathes regularly — even 
though he sometimes abuses the 
sacred English tongue in a manner 
which causes me to flinch. Bob 
Garcia shows your good taste. But, 
please, darling, don’t expect me to 
believe that Hubert’s name could 
be in the hat.” (Twin, Jake knows 
us too well. Better not try to fool 
him too much.) (Ever hear of a ‘red 
herring,’ love?) 
“Very well, sir; I’ll take Hubert’s 
name out of the hat. That still 
leaves endless possibilities, does it 
not? And I will try always to 
respect your dignity. But, 
speaking of meals on time, I had 
better get busy or your dinner will 
be late.” 
“Why not just cold cuts and such 
when we feel like it and heat a tin 
of soup? I was thinking of a nap.” 
“Shall I join you, sir?” 
“I said ‘nap,’ sweetheart. Sleep. 
A nap with you is not restful. Old 
Senor Jacob needs a siesta.” 
“Yes, sir. May I finish quickly 
what I was saying? We can take 
care of anyone who wants to retire, or wants another job, or 
wishes to stay on with Hugo. But I 
am hoping that some of them 
might come with us as crew in our 
trimaran or whatever. Especially 
if they’ve been to sea before and 
know something about it.” 
“Finchley does. He was sent up 
for smuggling or some such.” 
“I was hoping that all of my mobiles except Hugo — and Rockford, 
if you want him — might decide to 
sail with us. They are all strong and 
able and not much family 
problem. Fred’s wife split some 
months back, Dabrowski has no 
children at home and Olga might 
be willing to be a chambermaid — stewardess, I should say — if 
she likes to sail; she’s insisted on 
doing most of the cleaning and 
such here even though she doesn’t 
have to. As for the Finchleys, Tom 
is just what we need — it wasn’t 
smuggling drugs; they were 
running arms into Central 
America as I recall, and he was 
first mate — and Hester Finchley is 
a good cook. Eve is no problem, 
she already knows how to read and 
write and do arithmetic — and if 
they tell her about this, she’ll be 
teasing her parents to take the job; 
all kids want to travel. Dear? If you 
are going in, would you see who’s 
on guard at the lift and ask him to 
dig out Finchley? He may know 
something about trimarans.” 
“I think he has the watch now. 
Shall I chuck you a robe?” 
“Am I getting too much sun? 
Doesn’t feel so; I’ve been using the 
lotion. Oh! You mean for Thomas 
the Tom Cat? But, dear, we’ve been 
swimming with him and his family 
every day. As well as with Fred and 
the Dabrowskis.” 
“I don’t give a hoot, dear, but I 
thought you were anxious to preserve appearances.” 
“Seems silly when I swim and 
sunbathe with all of them. As for 
appearances, didn’t I see you patting Hester’s bottom in the pool 
yesterday? Or was it Wednesday?” 
“It was Tuesday and it wasn’t 
Hester, it was her daughter Eve. 
Just practicing to be a sex maniac. 
Beautiful — nothing serious. So 
don’t be jealous.” 
“Beloved, the day I’m jealous of 
a little girl I want you to beat me. 
Not spank me. Beat some sense into me, woodshed style. But it was 
Hester, not her daughter. My gallant, wonderful Jacob would never 
bother a little girl.” 
“Perhaps not but that little girl 
bothers the hell out of me. Furthermore she does it on purpose.” 
“Poor Jake. Even thirteen-yearolds won’t leave him alone. I’m not 
surprised; I didn’t leave him alone, 
either.” 
“In this case, she’s thirteengoing-on-twenty-one. I’ll make you 
a deal, dearest. I’ll carefully 
avoid chaperoning you with her 
father if you will be very careful 
always to chaperone me with his 
daughter.” 
“Yes, sir. To hear is to obey, my 
lord — though I am chagrined that 
you think I might need 
chaperoning— or not chaperoning, 
as the case may be — with one of 
our servants. But how about Hester? Must I always be sure to be in 
sight when she’s around?” 
“Mind your own business. 
Wench. Uh — no need to be 
fanatical about it. I want them all 
to feel easy when they come up 
here to swim as I don’t want any of 
our household ever to swim in that 
sewage down there. You know the 
coliform count in that beautiful 
surf. That was the deal we ofered — stay off the beaches entirely 
and they could swim in our pool at 
any time. So we sacrifice a little 
privacy but don’t have one of them 
picking up amebiasis or such and 
spreading it through our whole 
family. It evens out — and they are 
all nice people . even our pre
cocious Eve who’s doing her best 
to see if she can upset me.” 
“I haven’t minded, Jacob; it is 
not good to be too much alone. But 
we were speaking of Hester’s 
bottom. Shapely, huh?” 
“Hon, you’re as bad as Eve. I’m 
going to go and say ten Money 
Hums and catch that siesta. I’ll 
send out Tom. Don’t let me sleep 
more than an hour. Kiss.” 
S HE turned her face up. As he 
left she dived in, swam a couple 
of lengths and climbed out, was 
waiting, staring down at the yacht 
harbor when Finchley arrived. 
“You sent for me. Ma’am?” 
She smiled. “Thomas Cattus, 
that’s not my name when we’re 
alone.” 
He glanced over his shoulder, 
said almost soundlessly, “Pussy 
Cat, the Boss is awake.” 
“So he is. But he’s gone to his 
room and closed the door. Siesta. 
He’ll be asleep in almost no time. 
But I don’t mean to scare you, 
Thomas Cattus dear. Come here 
to the rail, want to show you something. Have you done any sailing? 
Or has it all been power?” 
“Sailing? Oh, sure, I grew up on 
Chesapeake Bay. Cat boats and 
such.” 
“Ever sail a trimaran?” 
“Never skippered one. Crewed 
in one when I was sixteen.” 
“What do you think of them?” 
“Depends on what for. Okay if 
you want something more like a 
houseboat than a racer. But I 
wouldn’t have one without an 
auxiliary engine. In tight waters 
they can be as awkward as two 
people in a bathtub.” 
I WILLFEARNOEVIL 
“Ever try it in a bathtub, 
Thomas Cattus?” 
“Sure, who hasn’t? Okay for a 
giggle with a few drinks aboard. 
But a bed is better. Or a floor.” 
“How about a sunbathing 
mat?” 
“Pussy Cat, you enjoy scaring 
me. You gonna get us caught, 
yet.” 
“Rhetorical question, dear; I 
wasn’t twisting your arm. Tell me, 
do you think Hester and Jake have 
ever made it?” 
“Practically certain they never.” 
He grinned at her. “But I can tell 
you something.” 
“Then do. Pretty please. Pretty 
Tom Cat with the muscles.” 
“Not Hester’s fault they haven’t. 
I know. She told me bang, one 
night, while we were at it. Said the 
Boss could have it anytime he 
reached for it. Hester thinks the 
Boss is God’s right hand.” 
“Well, so do I. But it doesn’t 
keep me from appreciating my 
Thomas Cat. How would you feel 
about it? Jake and Hester.” 
“Me?” He looked astonished. 
“Look, Pussy Cat, you know if 
anybody does I don’t see no sense 
in putting a fence around a broad. 
Just makes her want to jump it. I’d 
ruther hold open the gate for her, 
she wants to.” 
“I said, ‘How would you feel 
about it, dear?’ ” 
“Oh.” Her driver-guard looked 
thoughtful. “Wouldn’t get my 
nose out of joint. The Boss is 
numero uno, da kine. Rozzer?” 
“Roz.” 
“He knocked up a broad, he’d 
pay. No huhu. But no huhu 
anyhow; we were only licensed for 
one and Hester had herself fixed, 
right after she had Eve. Good 
broad I married — didn’t split 
when I dropped one, took me back 
when I was paroled. Oh, she 
shacked, sure — but just with her 
boss, she worked. Didn’t peddle it. 
Or kept it to herself, didn’t tell me. 
Hester and the Boss? Sure, if they 
want to. Told her so, bang. Have 
fun,I told her.” 
“Mmm . Thomas Cattus, 
let’s give them a chance. Or six 
chances. Might be insurance for 
us, later.” 
He nodded thoughtfully. “Smart 
thinking. Pussy Cat. But how? 
And would he? The Boss?” 
“I feel sure he would if he knew 
it was safe. Private, I mean; Jake 
has courage under fire, just as you 
have, dear. Main problem is to get 
Eve out from underfoot. Mmm 
. you could take me shopping or 
such and I could ask Hester to get 
Mr. Salomon’s lunch . then as 
an afterthought I could invite Eve 
to come with me. Hmm?” 
“With either Fred or Ski up 
here? No good. Pussy Cat.” 
“All it needs is a time when you 
have the guard. Jake won’t send for 
your relief; at most he’ll lock open 
the lift door. He doesn’t worry 
about him, he worries about 
guarding me." 
“Mmm . roz. Could work if 
he wants it. You’re filling out. 
Pussy Cat. Tits prettier than ever.” 
“Joe says a woman gets prettier 
as she bigs out. But I don’t think 
many men think so.” 
“Hester looked awful cute, clear 
up to the last minute. And on you it 
looks good, too. Uh . you’re 
sure the Boss is asleep?” 
“Certain enough that I’m willing to risk it. But I don't mean to 
scare you, dear. Want to wait and 
see how our plans for Jake and 
Hester work out?” 
“Uh ... oh, hell, we might all be 
dead by then.” 
“Right here?” 
“Uh, copter might cruise by.” 
“Let’s go into the lanai.” 
XXXII 
H arvard University Corporation voted to withhold all funds 
until the Student Government selected a new university president. 
Both of the rival student 
governments and the faculty senate 
sought court relief from this 
“reckless and irresponsible 
action.” CONS BEST COPS SEZ 
FUZZ PREZ — the General 
Secretary of the Private Police, 
Guards and Security Drivers 
(AFL) at its annual banquet 
congratulated Milwaukee on 
joining the growing list of 
municipalities that had abolished 
the “clean record” rule in hiring 
peace officers. “The outstanding 
success of parolees and probationers as licensed private security officers is finally teaching the politicians to ‘hunt ducks where the 
ducks are.’ The Bible says ‘To 
catch a thief you set a thief,’ don’t 
it? Who knows more about hoods 
than a hood? Give a man incentives 
to keep his nose clean and put him 
on work he understands and you 
can count him in the crunch. My 
Mom kept telling me that when I 
was just a punk knockin’ over candy stores. Besides, like the Sec’etary of the Treasury told us earlier 
tonight, 'Look what it’s done for 
the economy!’ In this great republic — ” * 
“Today’s Day” newscast 
interviewed a midwife who claimed 
to have delivered Miss Molly 
Maguire of child ten days before 
her sensational two-nation sky 
dive. The sensie star promptly sued 
newscaster, station, and videonet. 
EQUAL RIGHTS 
FOR WOMEN!!! 
Don’t be teased or humiliated. See 
his look of surprise when you step 
right up to a urinal and use it 
with a smile. Get Dr. Mary Evers’ 
EQUAL-NOW Adapter (pat. appld. for) purse-size, foolproof, 
sanitary- comes in nine lovely, 
feminine, psychedelic patterns— requires no fitting, no prescription. 
All Drugstores/Supermarkets 
The Lunar Commission made 
permanent its trial policy of 
screening out-migration solely on 
physical and mental examination 
with no percentage points either 
plus or minus from past record. 
The Director said: “In a new 
world a man must start with a 
clean slate. No other policy is 
practical.” Under sharp questioning he admitted that contributions 
for unsubsidized vocations remained unchanged but insisted that 
this was a fiscal matter controlled 
by the condominium governments 
and in no way affected the basic 
principle. HOT WORDS IN CAPPUN DEBATE: “ ‘—does not 
deter!’ So he tells us. Is the Senator from the great State of Puerto 
Rico aware that our major problem is recidivism? Can the Senator 
cite one case in which a killer com
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
mined still another murder after 
he was executed?” 
WIITHEE! Joe, see how she runs 
W before the wind!” 
“Swell.” 
“Gets me clear down in my gizzard,” Joan Eunice said happily. 
“Let’s go aft. Winnie’s got the 
wheel and be sure to be impressed; 
she’s proud as can be that Tom has 
let her go on the watch list. She’s a 
natural sailor, salt water in her 
veins. Gigi, what’s the matter, 
dear? You aren’t smiling. Feeling 
queasy?” 
“Uh, a little, maybe.” 
“I must admit that the ‘Pussy 
Cat’ does have a rocking-horse motion when she’s running free. Love 
it myself but some don’t. Never 
mind, dear; Doctor Roberto has a 
sure-fire pill for tipsy tummy. I’ll 
fetch you one and in five minutes 
the motion won’t bother you and 
you’ll be hungry as a horse.” 
“I don’t take pills, Joan. I’m all 
right.” 
“You aren’t all right and when 
we go below you won’t want lunch 
and Hester told me she was fixing 
something special in your honor. 
Look, darling, Roberto feeds these 
pills to Winnie — one before breakfast every day and he had her on 
them for morning sickness before 
they came aboard. He’s a careful 
doctor,, hon; he wouldn’t give them 
to his own wife if they could hurt. 
Nobody ever gets a pill of any sort 
in the ‘Pussy Cat’ unless our ship’s 
surgeon dispenses it. Pretty please? 
Huh?” 
“Gigi.” 
“Yes, Joe.” 
“Take pill.” 
“Yes, Joe. Thanks, Joan, I do 
feel fluttery. I guess you think I’m 
silly but I’ve seen so many kids 
hooked on pills I’m scared of ’em.” 
“I don’t like pills but I take ’em 
when Doctor Roberto says to. 
He’s got me on supplements right 
now for this little monster Inside 
me. You stay up here in the breeze, 
dear, while I find Roberto.” 
AILING, sailing, over the 
O bounding main!” Mr. Salomon bellowed, as he swung up into 
the control console. “Hello, Ski.” 
“Good morning. Captain. On 
port tack with basic course one 
five — ” 
“I see what it is. Beat it down below and get your breakfast.” 
Salomon slid into the saddle and 
glanced at the compass as he took 
the wheel. “We didn’t leave you 
anything but you can scrounge 
ship’s biscuit out of the lifeboat.” 
“Hester won’t let me starve, 
sir.” 
“Nor Olga. Now beat it.” Jake 
eyed his sails, decided he could 
point a touch higher, reached out 
with his right hand to the running 
rigging controls, kept tapping a 
switch to shorten his main sheet, 
his eye on her mainsail, while he 
handled the wheel by touch till he 
had her settled down on a tighter 
tack. Then he adjusted his jibs and 
relaxed. 
“Good morning. Captain.” 
“Tom, save that for witnesses. 
It’s all very well for Mrs. Salomon 
to want me dubbed with an 
honorary title but we all know 
who’s the sailing master by our 
ship’s papers. You’re skipper and 
have the responsibility; I’m just the 
owner and unlicensed first mate. 
Eunice ought not to do it — but we 
have to cater to the little darlings. 
Speaking of little darlings, how are 
your two this fine morning? Didn’t 
see Eve at breakfast.” 
“She ate before you got up, sir. 
Seen her and told her she’s goin’ to 
have to wear pants from now on, 
except in the pool or near it.” 
“Don’t see why she should, the 
other gals don’t unless it happens 
to suit them. I just don’t want her 
swarming into my lap, naked as an 
eel and twice as lively. Gives me delusions of youth.” 
“Ell clamp down on her, sir.” 
“Tom, I don't want the child 
clamped down on. I want everybody to enjoy this cruise — one big 
happy family. Ask Hester to tell 
her quietly that old Uncle Jake 
loves her but doesn’t like to be 
pawed. A lie, that last, but an 
official lie. Speaking of the pool, 
how’s the filter?” 
“Eilter’s okay, was just a clog in 
makeup feed line. Kelp. No huhu.” 
“Has the surgeon tested the 
water?” 
“Safe.” 
“That’s good. Tom, when I was 
a kid, striking for quartermaster 
third, we used to swim off the boat 
booms and thought nothing of it. 
But today even the Pacific Ocean 
can’t soak up all the crud they 
dump into it. You can put 
swimming call on the bull horn and 
take the Skull-and-Crossbones sign 
off the pool.” 
“Aye aye, sir.” 
“Half a second while 1 make 
eight bells.” Jake reached out with 
his left hand, picked the last touch 
plate of a row of eight; the quadruple double Bong\ marking the 
beginning of the forenoon watch 
rang through the vessel. He then 
picked still another touchplate and 
sounded swimming call himself. 
“Tom, if a man didn’t have to eat 
or sleep he could sail this wagon 
around the world by himself. Three 
men could do it easily. Even two.” 
“Maybe.” 
“You sound doubtful, Tom.” 
“Even one man could, sir — if 
nothin’ never went wrong. Something always does.” 
“I stand corrected. And with two 
pregnant women aboard — three if 
you don’t keep a close eye on 
Eve—” 
“Oh, Dr. Garcia got her on the 
junior pill. I don’t take no chances, 
sir.” 
“So? Tom, my respect for 
you — high — has just increased. 
She’s safe from her Uncle 
Jacob . but I make no promises 
about any other male in this 
bucket. There is something in salt 
air that hikes up the metabolism. 
And there is much truth in the old 
saw about ‘when they’re big 
enough, they’re old enough and 
nothing can be done about it.’ 
Better to roll with the punch.” 
“She is and she has and we 
did — I had this here talk with the 
Doc. Hester and me don’t expect 
no more from Eve different than 
we did ourselves. Anybody knows 
when a broad starts getting broad 
she’s goin’ to land on her back.” 
“Yes, everybody knows it — yet 
most parents don’t believe it when 
it comes to their own kids. I know, 
I had a family law practice for 
years. Tom, you’re such an all
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
around sensible man I’m surprised 
that you ever got into trouble.” 
H IS sailing master shrugged. 
“Comes o’ believing what I was 
told, sir. ’M chief officer of this 
rust bucket and Captain says keep 
my lip tight and see nothin’ and we make ten times as much on one 
voyage. All fixed. Only he got 
smart and hung onto the bribe 
money hisself. Thought he could 
run it in the dark. You’d ‘a’ 
thought he’d never heard of radar. 
Wham! Coast Guard.” Finchley 
shrugged again. “No complaints, 
sir, I was a fool. But two years and 
four months and I get this much 
better job driving for Mr. Smithas-was. Smellin’ like a rose. Not so 
trusting now, is all. Don’t trust too 
much, you don’t get your ass 
burned.” 
“Yet you don’t seem cynical. 
Tom, I think the major problem in 
growing up is to become 
sophisticated without becoming 
cynical.” 
“That’s over my head. Counselor. I just think people are okay, 
mostly — even that silly skipper — if 
you don’t strain ’em more than 
they’re built for, like that piece of 
standing rigging there. Rated three 
tons. Pro’ly take five and no 
trouble. Don’t put six tons on it.” 
“We’ve said the same thing, I 
think, but your illustration is 
vivid. Beat it, Tom. If there’s no 
work to be done, grab sack time. 
Or pool time.” 
“Yes, sir. I want to inspect the 
starboard hull; it’s making extra 
water. Pump can handle it but I 
want to know why.” He touched 
his cap and swung down off the 
platform. 
Jake cocked his own cap against 
the sun, relaxed and started to 
sing. 
A sailor's wife a sailor's star 
shall be! 
Yo ho, we go, across the sea! 
A sailor's wife a sailor's star 
shall be, 
A sailor's wife his star . shall 
be! 
His wife climbed up behind him 
and kissed the back of his neck. “Is 
that for me, dear? Or for ‘Nancy 
Lee’?” 
“Always for you, my darling. 
Besides, I can’t remember the part 
with ‘Nancy Lee’ in it.” 
“I wonder if you ever remember 
a girl’s name. You call all of us 
‘darling.’ ” 
“Merely because it’s true. But 
you are the only one I call my 
darling. And I do remember your 
name — it’s Salomon.” 
“Jacob, you must have been a 
prime menace when you were a 
bluejacket. With that Hebrew 
blarney you could talk your way 
into anything. Then out of it, with 
no trouble.” 
“No, Ma’am, I was a sweet, 
innocent lad. I simply followed the 
ancient code of the sea: ‘When the 
hook’s up, all bills are paid.’ ” 
“Leaving little Jewish bastards 
behind in every port . and 
thereby improving the breed. 
How about Gigi? Going to improve the breed there?” She dug 
her thumb into a spot over his hip 
where his slight pot bulged out 
from sitting. “Some dish, eh, 
keed?” 
“Madam,” he said haughtily, “I 
GALAXY 
do not know what you are talking 
about.” 
“ ‘Tell that to the Marines, the 
old sailors won’t believe you.’ 
Jacob my love, I feel certain that 
you know the second Mrs. Branca 
almost as well as you knew the 
first. But I have no wish to prove 
it; I simply offer my congratulations. Gigi is a darling, I love her 
to pieces. I was not throwing asparagus.” (Tell him she squeals, 
twin.) (I will not!) 
“Woman, you get your exercise 
jumping at conclusions.” 
(Then tell him it happened where 
Troy Avenue crosses Gay Street, 
near the Square — a neighborhood 
you know well, twin.) (Eunice, I 
want Jacob to feel easy about such 
things — I am not trying to 
harpoon him.) (You aren’t 
equipped to, Joan; Jake is the 
original Captain Ahab.) (Eunice, 
you have a dirty mind.) {Whose 
mind? I don’t have one. Don’t need 
one.) 
Mrs. Salomon dropped the 
subject, opened her sextant case, 
took it out. “Will you give me a 
time tick, darling?” 
“Are you going to shoot the 
defenseless sun?” 
“I’m going to do better than a 
sun sight, dearest. The sun, the 
upper limb of the Moon and — if 
I’m lucky and can spot it 
again — Venus, for a three-star fix. 
Want to bet on how small a 
triangle I get?” 
“Even money on fifty miles for 
the short side.” 
“Beast. Brute. Cad. And me an 
expectant mother. I was more than 
ten times that close yesterday 
evening; I’m getting the hang of it. 
I could cheat — I could get a point 
fix by querying Point Loma, then 
fudge it on the chart.” 
“Eunice, why this passion to 
emulate Bowditch? One would 
think that radio and satellites and 
the like had never been invented.” 
“It’s fun, darling. I’m going to 
hit that nav exam for a flat four-oh 
and get my limited license. After 
I’ve unloaded this pup in the 
hopper and we no longer have to 
stick to coastal waters. I’m going 
to do a ‘Day’s Work’ every day all 
the way to Hawaii. Betcha I make 
landfall at Hilo under three miles. 
Oh, it’s not necessary, dear — but 
what if it turned out to be? Suppose 
war broke out and everything went 
silent? Might help to have a 
celestial navigator aboard. Tom 
admits that he’s hardly taken a 
sight since he got his mate’s 
ticket.” 
“If he ever took one. Yes, it 
could be useful, my darling 
. because if war broke out in 
earnest and we would not go on to 
Hilo. We would make a sharp left 
turn and go south and get lost. The 
Marquesas. Or farther south, the 
farther the better. That way our kid 
might live through it. Easter Island 
if you think you can hit it.” 
“Jacob, by then I’ll split it right 
down the middle. Or any island 
you pick. Sweetheart, I- wasn’t 
playing games when I asked for the 
whole old-fashioned works — all the 
charts, all the pilots, three keywind chronometers and a hack, 
this lovely sextant and a twin like it 
in case I drop this one . and 
please note that I always put the 
lanyard around my neck. All the 
H.O.s and the Almanac. I’m no use 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
as a deckhand now — so I decided 
to become a real navigator. Just in 
case, just in case.” 
“Mmm. My darling, I hope we 
never have to run for it . but 
have you noticed that I keep this 
vessel fully stocked at all times 
even though we anchor almost 
every night and can shop for supplies any time we wish?” 
“I’ve noticed, sir.” 
“Nor is it an accident that I gave 
Doctor Bob an unlimited budget 
and saw to it that he is equipped for 
any conceivable obstetrical problem.” 
“I did not notice that, quite.” 
wyou weren’t meant to, nor 
Iwas Winnie— no need to give 
you gals something to worry about. 
But since you have been doing the 
same sort of planning ahead, I 
decided to tell you. Bob used the 
time the ‘Pussy Cat’ was being refitted in taking a refresher in O.B. 
And he spent twenty times more 
money on our sick bay than one 
would expect for a sea-going 
yacht.” 
“I’m pleased to hear it, sir. With 
such foresight, money can do 
almost anything. Except turn back 
the clock.” 
“It even did that in your case. 
Beloved.” 
“No, Jacob. It gave me added 
years . and this wonderful 
body . and you. But it did not 
turn back the clock. I’m still 
almost a century old. I can never 
feel young the way I once 
did — because I’m not. Not the way 
Winnie is young. Or Gigi. Jacob, I 
have learned that I don’t want to be 
young.” 
“Eh? Are you unhappy, dear?” 
“Not at all! I have the best of 
two worlds. A youthful, vital body 
that makes every breath a sensuous 
joy . and a century of rich 
experience, with the wisdom — if 
that is the right word — that age 
brings. The calmness. The long 
perspective. Winnie and Gigi still 
suffer the storms of youth . 
which I don’t have and don’t want. 
I’ve forgotten the last time I had a 
tranquilizer but I think it was the 
day they unstrapped me. Jacob, 
I’m a better wife for you than either of those two lovely girls could 
be; I’m older than you are. I’ve 
been where you are now and understand it. I’m not boasting, dear; 
it’s simply true. Nor would I be 
happy to spend my time trying desperately not to upset his delicate, 
youthful, unstable balance. We’re 
good for each other, Jacob.” 
“I know you are good for me.” 
“I know I am. But sometimes 
you have trouble remembering that 
I am not truly ‘Eunice,’ but 
‘Johann.’ ” (Hey! What is this. 
Boss? We’re both.) (Yes, beloved, 
always — but Jake needs to be 
reminded of Johann — because all 
he ever sees is Eunice.) “For 
example, Jacob, a while ago you 
thought I was twitting you about 
Gigi.” 
“ ‘Thought,’ hell — you were." 
“No, dear. Close your eyes and 
forget that I have Eunice’s voice. 
Think back at least ten years when 
I was still in passable health. If 
your older friend Johann had 
twigged that you had kicked the 
feet out from under some young 
and pretty woman would he have 
twitted you?” 
“Huh? Hell, yes. Johann would 
have slipped me the needle and 
broken it off.” 
“Would I have, Jacob?” Did I 
ever?” 
“You never caught me.” 
“So? I might have congratulated 
you, Jacob, just as I did 
today — had I felt that I could do so 
without offending you. But I 
would not have twitted you. Do 
you recall a young woman whose 
first name was — or is — Marian? 
Last name had the initial 
‘H’ — your pet name for her, ‘Maid 
Marian.’ ” 
“How in the/ie//?” 
“Steady, darling — you let your 
helm fall off. That was sixteen 
years ago, just before I asked you 
to spend all your time on my affairs. So I ordered a fresh snoopsheet on you before I put the deal 
up to you. May I say that the fact 
that you had dealt so carefully 
with her reputation was a strong 
factor in my deciding that I could 
trust you with anything, too? 
Including my power-of-attorney, 
which you have held ever since and 
never abused? May I add, too, that 
I wanted to congratulate you on 
both your good taste and your success as a Lothario? For, of course, 
I then had to have her snooped, 
too, and her husband as well, 
before I could entrust my grisly 
secrets to you. But — also of 
course — I could not say a word.” 
“I didn’t think any part of that 
ever showed.” 
“Please, Jacob. Do you recall 
that you once told Eunice that you 
could hire a man to photograph 
her in her own bath — and she 
would never know it? As we’ve 
noted, money can do almost anything that is physically possible. 
Part of that snoop report was a 
photograph of you and Marian in 
what you lawyers call a ‘compromising position.’ ” 
“Good God! What did you do 
with it?” 
“Burned it. Hated to; it was a 
good picture and Marian looked 
awfully pretty— and you looked all 
right yourself, you loveable old 
goat. Then I sent for the head of 
the snoop firm and told him I 
wanted the negative and all prints 
now and no nonsense — and if it 
ever turned out that even one print 
had escaped me, I would break 
him. Get his license, bankrupt 
him, put him in jail. Were you or 
Marian ever embarrassed by such 
a picture? Blackmail?” 
“No. Not me — and I’m morally 
certain she wasn’t, either.” 
“I guess he believed me. Jacob, 
do you still think I was twitting you 
about Gigi? Or was I congratulating you?” 
“Uh . maybe neither. Maybe 
trying to wring a confession out of 
me. It’s no go, wench.” 
“Please, Jacob. Stipulating that 
I was mistaken but sincere — which 
was it? Now that you know how I 
behaved about Marian.” 
“Eunice — Johann! You should 
have been a lawyer. Subject to that 
stipulation, I concede that it must 
have been a sincere congratulation. But one I can’t accept — I 
haven’t earned it. Now, damn it, 
tell me how you came by this delusion.” 
WVES, dear. But not this min1 ute; there comes Gigi her
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
self.” Joan put her sextant back 
into its box. “Sights will have to 
wait anyhow; this reach has taken 
us in so close I’ve lost my horizon 
for the Sun. Hi, Gigi, you pretty, 
pretty thing! Give us a kiss. Just 
me, Jake is on watch.” 
“I’m not all that busy. Eunice, 
hold the wheel.” He accepted a kiss 
while still seated, then took the 
helm back from his wife. 
Joan said, “Been swimming, 
dear?” 
“Uh, yes. Joan Eunice, could I 
see you a minute? Mr. Salomon, 
would you excuse us?” 
“Not by that moniker I won’t; 
you’ll have to call me Jake.” 
“Stuff it, dear,” his wife” said 
cheerfully. “She wants a hen 
conference. Come along, dear. 
Captain, try to keep us afloat.” 
They found a spot in the lee of 
the lifeboat. “Got troubles, dear?” 
(Eunice, are we about to have a 
beef over Jake? Surely not!) (Can’t 
be, twin. That affair started over 
two weeks ago . and both Gigi 
and Joe were relaxed about it from 
scratch. Which means just what we 
thought: It actually is a return 
engagement — and Jake lied to 
protect a lady’s reputation. 
Predictable!) 
“Well, sort of,” admitted Mrs. 
Branca. “Uh, might as well say it 
bang. Next time you anchor and 
send a boat in . Joe and 1 want 
off.” 
“Oh, dear! What’s wrong, Gigi? 
I did so hope you would stay at 
least the month we talked 
about — then as much longer as you 
wished.” 
“Well ... we did expect to. But 
I got this seasickness problem and 
Joe — well, he has done some 
painting but ... the light’s not 
right; it’s too bright and ...” She 
trailed off. (Twin, those are ex- \ 
cuses.) (Jake?) (Can’t be, I tell you. 
You’ve got to make her come 
clean.) 
“Gigi.” 
“Yes, Joan?” 
“Look at me. You haven’t 
missed a meal since Roberto put 
you on the seasick pill. If Joe 
prefers floodlights to sunlight, we’ll 
clear out the dining saloon and it 
can be his studio. Put your arms 
around me and tell me what’s 
really wrong.” 
“Uh — Joan, the ocean’s just too 
darn bigV' Gigi blinked tears and 
said, “I guess you think I’m a 
baby.” 
“No. It’s big. Biggest ocean in 
the world. Some people don’t like 
oceans. I do. That doesn’t mean 
you have to.” 
“Well, I thought I would like it. 
I mean, you hear about it. What a 
wonderful thing it is to make an 
ocean trip. But it scares me. Uh, it 
scares Joe, too; he just doesn’t say 
so. Joan Eunice, you’ve been awful 
good to us — but this isn’t our 
scene. Joe and I, we aren’t fish — 
we’re alley cats. Always lived in 
cities. It’s too quiet here. Especially at night. At night the quiet is so 
loud it wakes me up.” 
Joan kissed her. “All right, 
darling. I knew you weren’t having 
quite the happy time I wanted you 
to have. Didn’t know why. I’ll have 
to visit you at your place — where 
it’s nice for all of us. I don’t like the 
city, it scares me. But I like it, 
loads, in your studio — as long as I 
don’t have to go outside. But is that 
all that’s wrong? Has anyone upset 
you? Or Joe?” 
“Oh, no! Everybody’s been 
swell.” 
“You called Jake ‘Mr. Salomon.’” 
“That was because I was 
upset — knowing I had to tell you.” 
“Then you both feel easy with 
Jake? I know he’s impressive, he 
even impresses me. Nothing 
uptight there?” 
“Oh, not a bit! Uh, knowing we 
were walking out on Jake upset us 
as much as knowing we were walking out on you.” 
“Then may Jake and I both 
come visit you? Stay a few days?” 
(Will she duck this, Eunice?) (Why 
ask me. Boss? You just asked her.) 
Mrs. Branca dropped her eyes, 
then looked up and said bluntly, 
“You mean a Quartet? All the 
way?” 
“All the way.” 
“Well, we would, I guess you 
know that. But how about Jake?” 
“Well? How about Jake, Gigi? 
You tell me.” 
“Uh, Jake is relaxed with us. But 
he’s a little uptight when you’re 
around, seems like. Joan Eunice, 
you caught on. Didn’t you? Or you 
wouldn’t have braced me for a 
Quartet.” 
“I caught on, dear. It’s all right. 
No huhu.” 
“I told Jake I thought you had. 
He said. Oh, no, impossible, you 
slept like a log.” 
“I do, except that I’ve reached 
the point in pregnancy where I 
sometimes get up to pee. But that 
wasn’t it — Jake could be most anywhere if he’s not in bed and I never 
check on him. What I spotted 
wasn’t proof. Just that a man has a 
way of looking at a woman he’s 
sure of. And vice versa. Nothing 
anybody could object to. Just ‘not 
uptight’ describes it as well as any. 
I’m not even mildly jealous of 
Jake, it simply pleased me. 
Knowing how sweet you can be for 
a man — remember, I used to be a 
man — ” 
“I know. But I don’t really 
believe it.” 
“I have to believe it and can’t 
ever forget it. Knowing you, I felt 
smugly pleased for my husband. 
Tell me, have you made a Three 
Circle with Jake? Money Hum?” 
“Oh, yes, always!” 
“Next time — at your studio — it 
will be a Four Circle. Then our 
Quartet will harmonize perfectly 
and no one will ever be uptight 
again.” 
“Yes. Yesl” 
“In the meantime you’re not 
going to have to put up with this 
great big scary ocean even one 
more night. We won’t anchor. I’ll 
have Tom call for a copter— say 
for right after lunch. It’ll put you 
down at La Jolla International and 
you’ll jet straight home — copter 
pilot will see to things for you and 
Tom will have your reservations — 
and you’ll be home and flashing 
a pack in your own studio before 
you can say, ‘Time Zone.’ Feel 
better?” 
“Uh, I feel like a heel but — yes, I 
do. Oh, Golly, Joan, I’m so 
homesick'.” 
“You’ll be home today. I’m 
going to find Tom and have him 
get things rolling. Then I’ll go tell 
Jake — and tell him why, he’ll 
understand — and relieve him at 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
the wheel, and tell him he can find 
you in your stateroom. If you have 
the nerve of a mouse, little alley cat 
from the big city, you’ll bolt the 
door and tell him good-by 
properly. Uh — Troy? Or twosome?” 
“Oh. Troy. Of course.” 
“Then find Joe and tell him. Ten 
minutes, maybe fifteen. But 
Gigi — that painting of Eve. I must 
buy it.” 
“No, we’ll give it to you.” 
“We settled that long ago. Joe 
can give me anything else, but not 
paintings. I must pay for it 
because I want it to be a present 
from me to my husband. Now kiss 
me and run, dear.” 
T he Pussy Cat with her sails 
doused rocked gently on a light 
sea. Fifty feet above her tallest 
stick a copter hovered while again 
lowering a passenger-freight 
basket. Tom Finchley stood far aft 
and coached the copter pilot with 
hand signals. Mr. and Mrs. 
Branca had already disappeared 
into the copter cabin, having gone 
up on the first trip, but their baggage was on the weather deck, 
waiting to be loaded. 
There was quite a pile. Joan had 
urged them to fetch along “everything you could possibly need for a 
month or longer — for painting 
especially, as there will be lots of 
bodies around — and any of them 
will model ... or I’ll have them 
lashed to a grating and flogged, 
then make them walk the plank. 
Joe darling, you can do big 
romantic pix if you wish — pirate 
scenes with lush victims and leering 
scoundrels. Fun?” 
She had sent the invitation by 
MercServ with tickets and an airfreight order and instructions to 
MercServ to supply a reader for 
the message. Joe had taken her 
literally; he seemed to have 
cleared out his studio — flood 
lamps, spots, easels, a heavy roll of 
canvas, stretchers, cameras, photo 
equipment and supplies, assorted 
impedimenta — and one bag each 
for clothes and personal articles. 
Seeing what Joe had fetched, Joan 
was glad that she had ordered a 
Brink’s to get them to the jetport 
and was careful today to have one 
meet them at the far end. 
The basket took up a load of 
baggage, came back for the last. 
Fred and Della’s sixteen-year-old 
Hank, an eager but untrained deck 
hand, were loading, taking turns 
keeping the basket from spinning 
while the other placed items in it. 
Soon they had it all in but one 
large case, when a gust of wind disturbed the uneasy balance between 
copter and surface craft. The 
basket swung wildly; Fred let go 
and danced aside while Hank went 
flat to the deck to keep from being 
hit by it. 
Fred recovered and again braced 
the basket, now ten feet farther forward. Joan Eunice grabbed the 
handle of the last case, then used 
both hands. “Whew! I think Joe 
packed the anchor in this one.” 
Jake yelled, “Eunicel Don’t lift 
that! You want to miscarry?” He 
grabbed it from her, started for the 
basket. 
Hank was on his feet again. 
“Here, Captain, I’ll get that!” 
“Out of my way, son.” Jake 
trudged to the basket, found it too 
high, got the case into his arms, 
then up onto one shoulder, placed 
it carefully inside — and collapsed. 
Joan rushed to him. 
Aft, Tom Finchley noted when 
the last item went in, looked up at 
the copter’s pilot and signaled 
“Hoist away!” and added the hand 
signal for “That’s all — on your 
way!” 
Then he looked down — and 
started to run. 
Joan sat down on the deck, took 
Jake’s head and shoulders to her. 
“Jake, Jake, darling!” (Eunice! 
Help me!) 
Fred said, “I’ll get the doc!” and 
rushed for a companionway. The 
boy stood helplessly by. Salomon 
gave a long bubbling sigh and all 
his sphincters relaxed. (Eunice! 
Where is he?) (Boss, I can’t find 
him!) (You’ve got to find him! He 
can’t be far.) (What in hell?) (Here 
he is, here he is! Jakel) (Eunice, 
what happened? Somebody 
slammed me in the side of the head 
with a brick.) (Does it hurt, 
darling?) (Of course it doesn’t hurt. 
Boss, not now. It can't. Welcome 
aboard. Melancholy Jacques you 
lovin’ old bastard! Oh, boy, am I 
glad to see you!) (Yes, welcome 
home, darling. My darling. Our 
darling.) (Eunice?) (No, I'm 
Eunice, Jock. Old cocky Jock. 
That’s Joan. Or Johann. Or Boss. 
No, Joan is ‘Boss’ only to me; 
you’d better call her ‘Joan.’ Look, 
shipmates, let’s get this Troy 
straight before we get tangled up in 
our feet. Joan, you call our husband ‘Jake’ same as always — while 
I’ll call him ‘Jock’ as I used to. 
Jock, you call Boss either ‘Joan’ or 
‘Johann’ as suits you and she’s 
either ‘Joan’ or ‘Boss’ to me. And 
I’m always ‘Eunice’ to either of 
you. Got it straight?) 
(I’m confused.) (No huhu, Jock 
beloved, never any huhu again. 
You’ll get used to it, I did. Joan has 
to drive while we’ll sit back and 
neck and give advice. Tell him, 
Joan.) (Yes, Jake. You have us 
both now. Forever.) (Om Mani 
Padme Hum.) (Om Mani Padme 
Hum. Join us, Jake. A Thanksgiving.) (Om Mani Padme Hum!) 
“Om Mani Padme Hum.” 
“Joan. Let me have him, dear.” 
Dr. Garcia was bending over her. 
She shook her head. “I’ll hold 
him, Roberto.” (Boss! Knock off 
the female kark and let dear Doctor work.) (Yes, Eunice. Hang on 
tight to Jake.) (Never fear, dear; I 
shall. Jock, can you see now? Out 
of Joan’s eyes. We’re going to 
move.) (Of course I can see. Who’s 
that ugly old wreck? Me?) (Of 
course not; that’s just something 
we don’t need any longer. Look 
away, Joan; you’re upsetting 
Jock.) 
“Fred, take her below. Hank, 
help him. Tom, I need Winnie. 
Get her.” 
D r. GARCIA found Joan in 
the saloon. She was lying down, 
a wet cloth over her forehead, with 
Olga Dabrowski seated by her. 
Tom Finchley followed the doctor 
in, his face solemn. The doctor 
said nothing, took Joan’s wrist, 
glaned at his watch. 
Then he said, “It’s bad news, 
Joan.” 
“I know, Roberto. He was gone 
before I came down here. (He’s not 
gone. Boss. Don’t put it that way. 
I WILL FE£AR NO EVIL 
Jock is dead, as dead as I am. But 
not gone. Right, Jock?) (I think 
you’re splitting hairs, Lively 
Legs — ) (‘Lively Legs!’ You 
haven’t called me that in a long 
time.) (How about last night?) 
(You called Joan that; you didn’t 
call me that, not last night.) (Will 
you two keep quiet? Or at least 
whisper? I’ve got to cope.) 
(Sorry, Boss. Jock darling, 
whisper to me very quietly. Is Joan 
better at it than I am?) (Eunice, I 
can still hear you — and you have 
your tenses mixed.) (Boss darling, 
there are no tenses in the Eternal 
Now. I asked Jock a question — 
and he’s too chicken to answer.) 
(I certainly am!) (Oh, well. With 
my equipment and my coaching, 
Joan is probably adequate by now. 
Plus a good start — you won’t believe this, Jock, but Boss has the 
dirtiest mind. That lady-lady act is 
just an act.) (Twin, quit trying to 
get my goat. I’m busy, Roberto is 
worried about us.) (Sorry, twin. 
I’ll be good.) 
“Eunice, I want to make one 
thing clear. It would not have made 
any difference if it had happened 
ashore with all possible lifesupport at hand. Even with Dr. 
Hedrick at hand. Oh, we could 
have kept him alive — as a vegetable. Nothing else.” 
“Jake never wanted that, Roberto; I’ve heard him say so, emphatically. He never approved of 
the way I was kept alive.” 
“The two cases are a hundred 
and eighty degrees apart, Joan. 
Your body was worn out but your 
brain was in good shape. In Jake’s 
case — well, I gave him that physical before we put to sea; his body 
was in fine shape, for his age. But I 
know what the autopsy will show: 
a massive rupture of a large blood 
vessel in his brain; he died at once. 
A cerebral ‘accident’ we call it, 
because it’s unpredictable. If it’s 
any consolation, he didn’t suffer.” 
(‘Didn’t suffer,’ eh? Try it. 
Bob — it felt like a kick in the head 
by a mule. But you’re right, it was 
just one blow. Not even a headache, afterward.) (About Ihe same 
for me, Jock darling, when I got it. 
Boss had a much rougher time, for 
years.) (What if I had? It’s over 
now. Darlings, please keep 
quiet — we’ll talk when they let us 
alone.) 
“Doctor, there will be no autopsy.” 
“Joan, ther,e should be an autopsy for your peace of mind.” 
“It won’t bring Jake back and he 
wouldn’t like it. As for my peace of 
mind, I have just one question. 
Was it . too much honey 
moon?” 
“Oh. No, just too many years. 
Joan, it wasn’t even from lifting 
that heavy load. Let me explain 
this sort of ‘accident’. It’s like a 
weak spot in an old-fashioned 
pneumatic tire, worn almost 
through and ready to blow 
out — then anything can trigger it. 
Jake could simply have stood up 
and keeled over — today, tomorrow, last week. Oh, it can happen 
during intercourse, you often hear 
men say they want to die ‘while 
tearing off one last load.’ But it’s 
a horrible experience for the woman involved — and probably isn’t a 
last orgasm anyhow, more likely 
he’s chopped down just before it. 
“Far better the way Jake got it. 
still virile — I assume — ” (You 
know darn well Jock was ‘still 
virile.’ Ask your wife. Ask Gigi. 
Hell, ask anybody.) (Eunice, was 
my behavior that blatant?) (Not 
blatant at all, Jock you lovin’ old 
goat. But news gets around.) “ — or 
I should say ‘I know’ as I was his 
physician. Jake was happy and 
strong and virile — and then he was 
through, like snipping a film. 
Don’t worry about ‘too much 
honeymoon.’ Getting married may 
have saved Jake years of hopeless 
senility. Or it may have chopped 
two weeks off his life as a small 
price for much happiness. But 
more likely it extended his life; a 
happy man functions better. 
Forget it, dear. When my time 
comes I hope I get it the way Jake 
got it — quickly, and happy to the 
end.” 
‘‘Then there is no point in an autopsy, Roberto. Will you sign a 
death certificate?” 
“Well . when death takes 
place not in a hospital and not 
under medical care, it is customary to notify the authorities 
and — ” 
“Roberto!” 
“Yes, Joan?” 
WVOU’RE not going to do that 
1 to Jake. Notify whom! 
Somebody in Washington? We’re 
in Federal waters, and the coroner 
of San Diego county has no proper 
interest in this death. But he’d be 
likely to try to milk it for publicity, once he finds out who Jake 
is, who I am — and I shan't let that 
be done with Jake’s death. Jake 
was under medical care — yoursl 
You’re our ship’s surgeon. It might 
be that you saw him die. Think 
about it.” (Joan, don’t ask Bob to 
lie. It doesn’t matter if some 
coroner has his M.E. chop me up.) 
(I shan’t permit it! Besides, Jake^ 
I’m pregnant. Do you want me to 
hav* to go through thatl Crowds 
and questions and pulling and 
hauling and sleepless nights?) 
(Mmm . tell him to make it an 
airtight lie, dear.) (Boss is a stubborn bitch, Jock — but she’s usually 
right.) 
“Hmm — ” Dr. Garcia took off 
his stethoscope, put it aside. “Now 
that you mention it, there was still 
some heart action after I reached 
him. Lacking means to determine 
the instant of brain failure I am 
forced to take cessation of heart 
action as the moment of death.” 
(That boy would make a good 
witness, girls — come to think about 
it, he did make a good witness at 
the identity hearings.) 
“In that case. Doctor, it seems to 
me that the circumstances are not 
open to question — and you may be 
sure that I will spend any amount 
of money to keep anyone from 
turning Jake’s death into a circus 
at any later time. I would like you 
to certify death and the circumstances and mail a copy to 
whatever Federal authority should 
be notified — when next we touch 
ashore. No copy elsewhere, we 
have no permanent residence 
other than this vessel. Oh, mail a 
copy to Alec Train; he has Jake’s 
will, he’ll need one for probate. 
And be sure to supply Captain 
Finchley with a duplicate original 
for the log.” 
“All right, Joan, since that’s the 
way you want it. And I agree: Here 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
we have a natural death and there 
is no point in letting bureaucrats 
poke around in it. But — right now I 
want to give you something to 
make you sleep. Nothing much, 
just a heavy dose of tranquilizer.” 
“Roberto, what was my pulse?” 
“That’s none of a patient’s 
business, Joan.” 
“It was seventy-two, dead on 
normal — I counted my heart beats 
during that thirty seconds from 
your first glance at your watch 
until you let go my wrist. I need no 
tranquilizers.” 
“Joan, your heart action should 
be higher than normal — under the 
circumstances.” 
“Then possibly I need a stimulant, not a tranquilizer. Roberto, 
you sometimes forget — even 
though you have been through the 
whole thing with me — ^that I am 
not a normal patient. Not a young 
bride subject to hysteria. Underneath I am a very old man, almost 
three times your age, dear . and 
I’ve seen everything and no shock 
can truly be a shock to me. Death 
is an old friend; I know him well. I 
lived with him, ate with him, slept 
with him; to meet him again does 
not frighten me — death is as 
necessary as birth, as happy in its 
own way.” 
She smiled. “My pulse is normal 
because I’m happy— happy that 
my beloved Jake met death so 
easily and happily. Oh, I’ll go to 
my cabin and lie down; I usually 
nap during the heat of the afternoon. But how about Eve?” 
“Eh?” 
“Have you done anything about 
her] She’s young, she’s probably 
never seen death before. She almost certainly needs a 
tranquilizer — not I.” 
“Uh . Joan, I’ve been busy. 
But — Olga. Will you find Winnie 
and tell her I said that Eve was to 
have a minimum dose of Tranquille?” 
“Yes, Doctor.” 
Mrs. Dabrowski left. 
“Now, young lady. I’ll take you 
to the cabin.” 
“Just a moment, Doctor. 
Captain, will you get way on with 
both sails and auxiliary and make 
course for the nearest point of the 
seventy-five-mile limit? I want us 
to be in international waters before 
sundown.” 
“Aye aye. Ma’am. That would 
be about west by south, maybe 
basic course two-six-oh. I’ll plot 
it.” 
“Good. Then pass the word, 
quietly, that burial services will be 
at sundown.” 
“Joan!” 
we have a natural death and there 
is no point in letting bureaucrats 
poke around in it. But — right now I 
want to give you something to 
make you sleep. Nothing much, 
just a heavy dose of tranquilizer.” 
“Roberto, what was my pulse?” 
“That’s none of a patient’s 
business, Joan.” 
“It was seventy-two, dead on 
normal — I counted my heart beats 
during that thirty seconds from 
your first glance at your watch 
until you let go my wrist. I need no 
tranquilizers.” 
“Joan, your heart action should 
be higher than normal — under the 
circumstances.” 
“Then possibly I need a stimulant, not a tranquilizer. Roberto, 
you sometimes forget — even 
though you have been through the 
whole thing with me— that I am 
not a normal patient. Not a young 
bride subject to hysteria. Underneath I am a very old man, almost 
three times your age, dear . and 
I’ve seen everything and no shock 
can truly be a shock to me. Death 
is an old friend; I know him well. I 
lived with him, ate with him, slept 
with him; to meet him again does 
not frighten me — death is as 
necessary as birth, as happy in its 
own way.” 
She smiled. “My pulse is normal 
because I’m happy — happy that 
my beloved Jake met death so 
easily and happily. Oh, I’ll go to 
my cabin and lie down; I usually 
nap during the heat of the afternoon. But how about Eve?” 
“Eh?” 
“Have you done anything about 
fieri She’s young, she’s probably 
never seen death before. She almost certainly needs a 
tranquilizer — not I.” 
“Uh . Joan, I’ve been busy. 
But — Olga. Will you find Winnie 
and tell her I said that Eve was to 
have a minimum dose of Tranquille?” 
“Yes, Doctor.” 
Mrs. Dabrowski left. 
“Now, young lady. I’ll take you 
to the cabin.” 
“Just a moment. Doctor. 
Captain, will you get way on with 
both sails and auxiliary and make 
course for the nearest point of the 
seventy-five-mile limit? I want us 
to be in international waters before 
sundown.” 
“Aye aye. Ma’am. That would 
be about west by south, maybe 
basic course two-six-oh. I’ll plot 
it.” 
“Good. Then pass the word, 
quietly, that burial services will be 
at sundown.” 
“Joan!” 
“Roberto, do you think I would 
turn Jake over to an undertaker! 
Taxidermists! He wanted to die 
like his ancestors; I shall bury him 
like his ancestors — his dear body 
untouched and returned home 
before the sun sets.” 
W O every thing there is a sea1 son, and a time for every 
purpose under the heaven: A time 
to be born, and a time to die — ’ ” 
Joan paused in her reading. The 
sun was an orange-red circle 
almost touching the horizon. On a 
grating at the rail, steadied by Fred 
and the Doctor, Jake’s body 
waited, sewed into canvas, with 
ballast weights at the feet. (A 
primitive rite, Johann.) (Jake, if 
you don’t like it. I’ll stop.) (Jock, 
you should be respectful; this is a 
funeral.) (It’s my funeral, isn’t it? 
Do I have to pull a long face for my 
own funeral? Johann, 1 do like it. I 
respect symbols, primitive symbols 
especially. Thank you for doing 
this — and thank you most of all for 
not letting my carcass fall into the 
hands of licensed ghouls.) (Just 
wanted to be sure, Jake. I’d better 
go on; I’ve marked several more 
passages.) 
(Go on, Johann. Just don’t try to 
pray me into Heaven.) (I shan’t, 
Jake beloved. We three will face 
whatever comes, together.) 
(Right, Boss. Jock knows it.) 
“ ‘All go unto one place; all are 
of the dust, and all turn to dust 
again. Who knoweth the spirit of 
man?’ 
“ ‘Two are better than one. For 
if they fall, the one will lift up his 
fellow: but woe to him that is alone 
when he falleth; for he hath not 
another to help him up. Again, if 
two lie together, then they have 
heat: but how can one be warm 
alone?’ ” (Boss, that reminds me. 
Do we have to sleep alone tonight?) 
(Damn it, Eunice, don’t you ever 
think of anything else?) (Come off 
it. Boss. What else is worth 
thinking about? Stocks, bonds and 
other securities? I’ve been telling 
Jock about your discovery — that 
sex is more intense for a woman 
than for a man. He doesn’t believe 
it. But he’s eager to find out.) 
(Jake, are you that eager? I 
intended to show respect for your 
memory.) (I appreciate the 
thought, Johann. But you needn’t 
carry it to extremes. I can’t see 
why you should mourn me when 
I’m still here. Uh, tell me — is it 
really better?) (Let him judge for 
himself. Boss — whether it’s better 
to spread Eunice ... or to be 
Eunice. A more scientific 
comparison than you have been 
able to make.) (Quit talking like a 
kinsey, Eunice. All right, partners; 
I’ll think over the chances. But I’ll 
be damned if I’ll make a disgraceful spectacle out of us tonight. 
Not this night. It’s got to be 
discreet — or no game.) “ ‘And if 
one shall prevail against him, two 
shall withstand him; and a threefold cord is not quickly broken.’ ” 
(Boss, I like that. This makes up 
for the funeral I never had. Not 
even a memorial service.) (But you 
did have a memorial service. Lively Legs.) (I did? Who was there?) 
(Just me, dear. I hired a little 
chapel and an organist. I read a 
couple of poems you used to like. 
Some flowers. Nothing much.) 
(Jock, I’m dreadfully touched. 
Boss! He really does love me. 
Doesn’t he?) (He does, darling — we 
both do.) (I wish I’d been there, 
Jock.) (I didn’t know where you 
were, dearest. Maybe just as well, 
you’re not very well behaved at 
funerals.) (Oh, pooh all over you, 
you dirty old ghost — nobody can 
hear me.) (Careful whom you call a 
ghost. Lively Legs; it might slop 
over on you. Let Joan get through 
with this and splash it.) 
‘“Whatsoever thy hand findeth 
to do, do it with all thy might — ’ 
‘ — for thy days are few and they 
are numbered — ’ ‘ — man goeth to 
his long home.’ ‘The silver cord is 
loosed, the golden bowl is broken.’ 
From the deep we came, let the 
body of our brother Jacob now be 
returned to the deep.” 
Joan closed the Book; Fred and 
Dr. Garcia lifted the end of the 
grating; the body fell into the 
water, disappeared. 
She turned away, handed the 
Book to Mrs. Dabrowski. ‘‘Here, 
Olga. Thank you.” 
“Joan, that was beautiful. I 
don’t see how you did it.” 
“Wipe your eyes, Olga; farewells 
must never be sad — and Jake was 
ready to go. I knew my husband 
well, Olga; I knew what he wanted, 
it was not hard.” 
She pressed Olga’s hand and 
turned away. “Winnie! Stop that. 
Stop it at once. Jake does not want 
you to cry.” (What makes you 
think so, Johann? I feel flattered 
by having a lovely little creature 
like Winifred weep over me.) (Oh, 
pipe down, Jake. You were the star 
of the show, now stop taking bows. 
Talk to Eunice.) Joan took the 
smaller woman in her arms. 
“You mustn’t, Winnie Really you 
mustn’t. Think of your baby.” 
W INNIE bawled against her 
shoulder. “Joan, don’t you 
miss him at all?” 
“But, darling, how can I miss 
Jake when he has never left me? 
The Jewel is still in the Lotus, and 
always will be. Eternal Now.” 
“I guess so — but I just can’t 
stand it!” 
(Dear Doctor, maybe? He’ll be 
giving Winnie a sleeping pill, 
surest thing.) (Not Roberto, 
Eunice. Under his aggressive 
atheism he’s got a touch of what he 
was brought up on — he’d be 
shocked. Some other night.) 
“Roberto, you had better take care 
of Winnie.” 
“I will — but are yoM all right?” 
“You know I am. I have a 
prescription for you, however.” 
“All right. It won’t hurt you to 
take a real knocker-outer tonight. 
Say phenobarb.” 
“Let’s not say ‘phenobarb.’ My 
prescription is for Winnie. Get her 
to eat something. Then sit with her 
and recite the Money Hum for at 
least a half hour. Then take her to 
bed and hold her in your arms and 
let her sleep. And you sleep, sir; 
you’ve had a rough day, too.” 
“All right. Do you want to join 
us in saying them? We could come 
to the cabin — then you could go 
straight to bed. I’ve learned that 
it’s better than barbiturates.” 
“Doctor, if you wish, you may 
come to my cabin at nine o’clock 
tomorrow morning — and kick me 
out of bed if I’m not up. But I will 
be. Don’t go there any sooner than 
that. Tonight I shall recite that 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
hypnotic prayer. With Jake. He’ll 
be able to hear me . whether you 
think so or not.” 
“Joan, I have no wish to attack 
anyone’s faith.” 
“You haven’t, dear. I appreciate your solicitude. When I need 
it, I will draw on it — freely. But 
now you take care of Winnie.” 
(Boss, how about Fred? No one to 
dodge. Jock, you’ll be right in the 
middle. Lucky Adolf. But Fred 
won’t know it.) (Eunice, you’re out 
of your pointy little head. We almost scared Fred to death once before, just by being us. Before we 
got him gentled. Look at him, he’s 
worse off than Winnie. With nobody to console him. But we can’t 
console him, not this night.) 
“Captain.” 
“Yes, Ma’am?” 
“Let’s bust up this wake. People 
should not stand around moping. 
Meal hours have become disorganized; can Hester throw together some cold supper quickly? 
Perhaps with volunteer help? I’d 
volunteer but I have something 
to do.” (Oho! The Tom Cat. Jock, 
this is going to be fun.) (Lively 
Legs, is there a man in this vessel 
you gals haven’t spread for?) (Oh, 
sure, Jock honey. Hank. He’s got 
his eye on Eve and thinks we’re an 
old hag. And now that her Uncle 
Jock has left her. Eve might trip 
him.) (Now that I’m dead, I regret 
having resisted that delicious 
little jailbait. Wouldn’t have cost 
me more than a million to buy my 
way out of trouble — and I had a 
rich wife.) (If you two lechers will 
shut up a moment. I’ll set you 
straight about something. Not 
Thomas Cattus. Certainly not be
fore the midwatch and could be 
later with this wind against us. 
Captain Tom Finchley is going to 
be busy skippering.) “Captain, I 
want you to get way on and set 
basic course for San Clemente 
Island anchorage.” 
“Yes, Ma’am.” He trailed after 
her and added softly: “I better 
start calling you Captain now. 
Set an example.” 
She stopped. They were sufficiently alone that she could speak 
privately by lowering her voice. 
“Tom Cat.” 
“Yes?” 
“Don’t call me Captain — you 
are Captain until I’ve passed my 
tests. Then we’ll see. And don’t call 
me ‘Ma’am.’ I’m either ‘Mrs. 
Salomon’ or ‘Joan,’ depending on 
the company, just as before. But 
in private I’m still your Pussy Cat. 
I hope I am.” 
“Well . okay.” 
“Let’s hear you say it.” 
“Pussy Cat. Brave little Pussy 
Cat. Puss, you surprise me more, 
longer I know you.” 
“That’s better. Tom Cat, Jake 
knew all along about your tomcatting with me.” (Oh, what a lie! 
Eunice, she never told me — and I 
suspected only once and decided 
I was mistaken.) (I know, Jock. 
Boss is a deceitful one and not at 
all truthful and besides she tells 
fibs even to me.) 
"He did?” 
“Yes, Thomas Cattus. But Jake 
Salomon was a true gentleman and 
saw only what he was expected to 
see. He never teased me about my 
little follies. Simply indulged me. 
But he didn’t tell on himself, 
either. Do you know if he ever 
made it with Hester?” (Now see 
here, Johann — ) (Pipe down, Jock; 
I’ve wondered, too.) 
“Uh . hell. Pussy, all men are 
alike, all after the same thing.” 
“And all women are alike, we’ve 
all got it. ’Well?” 
“Hester spread for him first 
chance we gave ’em. But she didn’t 
tell me. Ashamed. Had to catch 
’em at it, then twist her arm.” 
“Surely you didn’t hurt her?” 
“No, no. Puss, I don’t rough a 
broad, never. Didn’t catch ’em, not 
to hurt, neither. Backed out 
fast — then asked, later. Told her I 
knew for certain, so how about 
coming clean, was all. She did. 
She hadn’t told me — because of 
you.” 
“Oh. 1 trust you then told her 
about me?” 
Her sailing master looked horrified. “Pussy, you think I’m out o’ 
my frimpin’ head? Look, I like 
what you got just fine. But I ain’t 
foolish. I don’t rat on broads. If I 
did you’d be last on the list. 
Believe.” 
“Tell Hester if you wish, dear; it 
can’t matter now. Then, at some 
later time, she would not be 
surprised if she found me doing 
what widows so often do.” (‘They 
don’t tell, they don’t yell, they 
rarely swell — and they’re grateful 
as hell.’) (Jock, you’re a dirty old 
ghost.) “Well, let’s set our course. 
What ETA, Tom Cat? If it’s later 
than midnight. I’ll relieve you for 
the midwatch.” 
“You will like hell. Ma’am — 
Pussy Cat. You sack in a full 
night, you need it. I’ll put Fred on 
the wheel now and Hank on lookout — and I’ll drag a corking mat 
back near the helm and catch some 
sack drill till we get close in. Pussy 
Cat, you’ve got to promise me 
you’ll stay in your cabin. Not go 
wandering around — I’ll think 
you’re meaning to jump overboard.” 
“Is that an order. Captain?” 
“Uh — yes, damn it, that’s an order!” 
“Aye aye, sir. It won’t be 
necessary to check on me; I’ll be in 
my cabin, door locked, and I will 
be asleep. 1 promise not to jump 
overboard earlier than tomorrow 
night.” 
“Pussy Cat, you wouldn’t jump? 
Would you?” 
WflTITH Jake’s baby inside me? 
W Captain, I do have a concept 
of duty. Until I have this baby, my 
life is not my own. I not only must 
not suicide — I would not in any 
case — but I must also keep calm 
and happy and healthy and not 
risk so much as a dirty drinking 
glass. So don’t worry about me. 
Good night, Tom.” She headed 
for the cabin. 
(Nothing doing at that shop tonight, partners — we’re faced with 
nobility. I think Anton is our 
best bet.) (The Passionate Pole! 
Jock darling. I’m not sure your 
heart can stand it.) (Fortunately, 
my dears, my old pump no longer 
has to stand anything — and the 
one you turned over to Joan, 
Eunice, is a Swiss watch among 
tickers. Doesn’t race even when 
she is racing. But you know that.) 
(Quit chattering, you two. Either 
of you have any idea how to get 
Olga out of the way?’ 
(Push her overboard?) (Eunice!) 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
(Can’t I joke. Boss? I like Olga, 
she’s a nice gal.) (Too nice, that’s 
the problem. Not a tart like you, 
or me — or Hester.) (Hrrrmph!) 
(Jake, you’re not in court, dear. 
The subject is tail. Mine. Ours, I 
mean.) (Johann, I simply wanted 
to say that, if you took our problem directly to Mrs. Dabrowski, 
you might find her sympathatic. 
I always found her so.) 
(Jake! Are you implying that 
you’ve had Olga? I don’t believe 
it.) (I don’t either, Jock. If you had 
said ‘Eve’ I would have boggled — but would have believed 
you. But Olga? Hell, she wears a 
panty even in the pool.) (Which 
comes off very easily — in private.) 
(Eunice, I think he means it. 
Well, I’ll be damned! You and I 
are pikers. ‘Me ’at’s off to the 
Duke.’ All right, Jake — tell us how 
to go about it.) (About what? 
Getting her out of the way? Just 
ask her, she’s very sympathetic — and felt my death more than 
you wenches have.) (Jock, that’s 
not fair. We felt it . but we’re 
overjoyed that you decided to stay 
anyhow.) 
(Thank you, my dears. Conversely, if you would like to invite 
her in — ) (Do you mean a Troy?) (I 
understand that such is the current argot, Eunice; in my youth we 
called it something else. But 
wouldn’t it be more of a Pentagon? Five?) 
(The word is ‘Star’ today, Jock. 
But let me give you the first rule of 
happy ghosting. You must never, 
never, never admit that you are 
here, nor tease Joan to admit it. 
Because she might get groused 
and do so. Whereupon Joan would 
wind up in a shrink factory — with 
us along — and there go our happy 
games. Look, you’ve been married 
to Joan quite a while now and 
jumping her even longer— did you 
ever suspect that I was present, 
too?) (Not once.) (You see? Don’t 
admit it and they leave us alone.) 
(Eunice, Jake would never let on. 
But now about Olga — Jake, did 
you ever teach her Om Mani?) 
(No.) (Boss, I begin to see. We’ve 
taught it to Anton, Jock. Is Olga 
limber enough to sit in Lotus?) 
(Lively Legs, Mrs. Dabrowski is 
limber enough for anything.) 
(That does it, Joan. Olga will join 
in, even if shp thinks it’s heathen — tonight she will. For you. 
And there is no easier way to get a 
party peeled down and rolling 
than by forming a Circle. You’ve 
done it again and again.) (As I recall, dears, Joan even used it on 
me. When it was hardly necessary. Okay, let’s find the Dabrowskis.) 
XXVIII 
A ppointments openfederal GS-19 Assistant 
Welfare Field Operative (LearnerVisitor) Literacy requirement 
C. Brown Belt or higher gives 10% 
preference. Veteran’s preference, 
parolee’s preference, relevant experience preference all semi-cumulative. See local Civil Service or 
Welfare office for pre-examinations and salary formulas. Latter 
based on standard scale plus field 
cost-of-living factor and hazardous area rating, cumulative. 
In a compromise vote today the 
Society for Rational Astrology 
accepted a “grandfather clause” 
in the licensing bill before the 
Nebraska Legislature. The 
Committee on Agriculture & 
Mechanical Arts then voted the 
amended bill “Do Pass” by 7 to 
2 — tantamount to passage in the 
state’s unicameral legislature. 
The Protective Association of 
Intuitive Astrologers called it 
“the greatest setback for science 
since Galileo.” The Lunar Commission announced that the colonies are now 102% self-sufficient in foodstuffs but added that 
the ten-year plan would continue 
in order to increase out-migration potential. MAY-DECEMBER ROMANCE LOSES . 
at sea in their honey-moon yacht. 
The young widow remained in seclusion . 
THROW AWAY YOUR BUST 
PADS!!! 
You Fool Nobody But 
Urself, Elf — 
No surgery, no risky drugs or hormones, no harmful injections. 
Learn secrets perfected 25,000 
years ago by wise & holy Hindu 
Masters 
Phone MercServCode 
“ADEPT” -Confo 
(Get a Fellow, Della! 
Rozzer?) 
“ — door for processing, Pleasure meeting you, Mrs. Garcia; 
good luck. Doctor. Next applicant! Step lively, sit down over 
there — your husband not with 
you? Or is it ‘Miss?’ ” 
“I am a widow, Mr. Barnes.” 
“So? We don’t get many widows, nor does the Commission 
encourage them. Out-migration 
is not an escape for emotional 
problems. Such as bereavement. 
Nor do we accept applicants so 
advanced in pregnancy unless 
there are overriding advantages 
to the Commission, not the applicant. Take the couple who 
went through just before you. 
She’s pregnant — but he is a medical doctor, one of the top categories for subsidized out-migration. So I passed her. Might have 
passed her on her own; she’s a 
nurse. But unless you have such a 
special qualification — ” 
“I know, sir. Dr. Garcia is my 
personal physician.” 
“Eh? Even if I accept you, that is 
no guarantee that he would still 
be your physician on the Moon. 
Unlikely, in fact. Unless, by coincidence — ” 
“Mr. Barnes, you have my outmigration proposal in front of 
you. It has been prepared with 
great care by my attorney. It 
might save time to glance through 
it.” 
“All in good time. You would be 
surprised at how many people 
come in here without having the 
slightest idea of what they are up 
against. They seem to assume that 
the Commission is anxious to 
have them. Nothing could be farther from the truth. Nineteen out 
of twenty who sit down in that 
chair I do not permit to go on 
through the processing door. I 
make it a practice to get rid of the 
more obvious time-wasters quickly. Uh, ‘Salomon, Eunice.’ Mrs. 
Salomon, I want to know first — 
Mrs. Salomonl” 
“Mrs. Jacob Moshe Salomon, 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
maiden name, Joan Eunice 
Smith.” 
“Your face did look somewhat 
familiar but your features, uh — ” 
“ — are chubby now. Yes. I’ve 
gained twenty-six pounds — which 
Dr. Garcia finds satisfactory for 
my height, build, and date of impregnation.” 
“That brings up other problems. 
A woman is often mistaken as to 
the date — and first babies are notoriously unpredictable in their arrivals. Our Lunar transports 
aren’t planned for new infants, nor 
for childbirth. I want you to realize the hazards.” 
“I know them. Need we go into 
this?” 
“I must be the judge of that.” 
“Mr. Barnes, my doctor is satisfied that I know the exact date of 
impregnation and — Is all of this 
confo?” 
“Mmm. I’ll put it this way. 
None of it is privileged. I am a 
lawyer but not your lawyer. I 
hear more intimate details from 
applicants than you can imagine 
but I haven’t time to waste on 
gossip.” 
“I am glad to hear that, Mr. 
Barnes ... as I would be much displeased if what I am about to tell 
you were to become a matter of 
gossip.” 
“Hmmph. I think I felt a chill 
breeze. Are you trying to impress 
me with your importance? Don’t 
bother; applicants are all the 
same size once they come in here. 
Your money doesn’t mean a 
thing.” 
“Was my manner unfriendly? 
I’m sorry.” 
“Well — ^ Let’s stick to the busi
ness at hand. A lawyer in the Lunar Commission’s Civil Service — a job with no squeeze, believe me — doesn’t often find himself dealing with rich people. But 
it makes no difference; if you 
don’t want to be frank with the 
Commission — well, that’s your 
problem. But I won’t approve an 
applicant’s proposal until 7 am 
satisfied about it. All about it. 
Now you implied that you had 
something pertinent to tell me 
which you class as ‘confo.’ I don’t 
have to accept your restriction. 
Now ... do you talk? Or shall we 
terminate this interview?” 
“You leave me no option, sir. 
This is not a first baby I am carrying, so no ‘first baby’ hazard exists. If the Goddard lifts on schedule, I have every reason to expect 
to have my baby on the Moon. Dr. 
Garcia is not worried about the 
timing and neither am I.” 
“So? This brings up other 
problems. This earlier child — does 
he, or she, affect your estate?” 
“No. That is why this must be 
treated as confo. 7 did not have 
that earlier baby.” 
“Eh? You lost me. Better clarify that.” 
WpLEASE, Mr. Barnes. I am 
A a sex-change and a brain 
transplant. Surely you know 
it — good heavens, the whole world 
knows it. The first baby this body 
gave birth to was before that time. 
It is the reputation of my donor I 
wish to protect, not mine. The 
child was illegitimate. Common as that is these days — no 
longer a legal concept in most 
states and the very word almost 
obsolete — so great is my gratitude to the sweet and gracious 
lady who formerly lived in this 
body, I would be most unhappy 
were I to be the cause of any tarnish on her memory.” 
(Boss, you know I don’t give a 
kark.) (Let her handle it, Eunice; 
this petty bureaucrat can gum up 
the works if Joan does not divert 
him just so. Are we kibitizing 
Joan or are we going to the 
Moon?) (Hell, yes, we’re going to 
the Moon! My ‘Yes’ vote, plus 
your ‘Yes’ vote, plus half of Joan’s 
vote — a natural fence-straddler 
she is, legs always open — which 
works out to a five-to-one majority for out-migrating. A landslide!) (So let her alone while she 
handles him.) (If she didn’t have 
that big belly she could handle him 
a lot better. And faster.) 
(Hrrmph. Eunice, you claim you 
were there ... so why don’t you 
tell poor old melancholy Jacques 
the straight on that? It was me, 
wasn’t it? It was I?) (Jock old 
ghost, I love you dearly — but if 
you think I’ll split on my twin, you 
don’t know me.) (Oh, well. A baby 
is a baby is a baby. I just hope it 
doesn’t have two heads.) (Two 
heads would be stretching a good 
thing too far. Jock, I’ll settle for 
two balls.) (Thinking about incest. 
Lively Legs?) (And why shouldn’t 
I think about it? We’ve tried everything else.) 
(Jake, Eunice — will you two 
please go back to sleep? Squire 
Pecksniff here is searching for fly 
specks on Alec’s masterpiece. 
Trying to think up more objections — which I’ll have to answer.) 
‘‘Mrs. Salomon, I find myself 
quite disturbed by one aspect concerning this alleged earlier 
child — the great likelihood that 
some future action may be 
brought challenging your disposition of your estate when this 
child, or some person claiming to 
be this child, turns up. The fifty 
percent of estate required — as a 
minimum — from any out-migrant not of a subsidized-vocation category is a source of capital to the colonies; the Commission is not willing to part with a 
dime of it once the Commission 
carries out its half of the bargain. 
Yet such a ‘missing heir’ could lay 
claim to all of your estate.” 
‘‘Most unlikely, Mr. Barnes, 
but if you will look at Appendix 
G, you will see how my lawyer 
handled it. A small trust to buy up 
any such claim, with a fifty-year 
conversion of any remainder to 
a named charity.” 
“Uh, let me find it. Mmm, Mrs. 
Salomon, do you call ten million 
dollars ‘small?’ ” 
“Yes.” 
“Mmm. Perhaps I had better 
look closely at the other financial provisions. Have you been 
advised that, even though the 
Commission claims only half of 
your fortune, the other half cannot be used to buy you anything 
on the Moon? In other words, poor 
or rich, on the Moon out-migrants 
start off equal.” 
“I know that, Mr. Barnes. Believe me, my attorney Mr. Train is 
most careful. He searched the law 
and made certain that I knew the 
consequences of my acts — because 
he did not approve of them. To 
put it briefly Alec Train said that 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
anyone who goes to the Moon to 
live must be out of his head. So 
he tried to talk me out of what he 
regards as my folly. You’ll find 
four other possible heirs in Appendix F — my granddaughters. It 
is to their advantage to accept 
what is offered there ... as they 
are told bluntly how much worse 
off they will be if they wait for me 
to die. A poor bet for them in any 
case; I am now physiologically 
younger than they are; I’ll probably outlive all of them.” 
“That could be true. Especially 
on the Moon, one could add. I wish 
I could out-migrate myself. But I 
can’t afford to pay for it the way 
you can and lawyers are not in demand there. Well, your Mr. Train 
seems to have thought of most aspects. Let’s look at your balance 
sheet.” 
“One moment, sir. I have asked 
for one small measure of special 
treatment.” 
“Eh? All out-migrants are 
treated alike. Must be.” 
“A very small thing, Mr. Barnes. 
My baby will be born not long after I arrive on Luna. I’ve asked to 
have Dr. Garcia continue to 
attend me through that time.” 
“I can’t promise that. Madam. 
Sorry. Policy.” 
She started slowly to get up. 
“Then I’m not going through with 
it.” 
“Uh — good God! Is this really 
your net worth?” 
She shrugged. “What is the 
worth of one pregnant woman, 
sir? I suppose it depends on your 
values.” 
“I didn’t mean that. This balance sheet — If it’s correct, you’re 
not just wealthy — I knew 
that — you’re a billionaireV' 
“Possibly. I haven’t added it. 
That summary was prepared 
through Chase Manhattan with the 
assistance of accountancy firms 
listed there. I suppose it’s correct . unless some computer got 
the hiccups. But give it back to 
me . since the Commission 
can’t promise me Dr. Garcia to 
deliver my baby.” 
“Please, Madam. 1 have certain 
latitude in these matters. I simply 
don’t exercise it — ordinarily. 
Policy.” 
“Whose policy, Mr. Barnes? The 
Commission’s? Or yours?” 
“Eh? Why, mine. I said ^o.” 
“ Then quit wasting my time, you 
damned idiotl” 
(‘That’s telling him. Fat Lady!’) 
(Eunice, this is one fat lady who 
isn’t going to take any more 
nonsense. My back aches.) 
T he blast almost caused Mr. 
Barnes to fall out of his swivel 
chair. He recovered his. balance, 
said; ''Please, Madam Salomon!” 
“Young man, let’s have no more 
nonsense! I’m far gone in pregnancy, as you can see. You’ve lectured me about the dangers of 
childbirth — and you aren’t a doctor. You’ve pried into personal 
matters with the gall of a Kinsey. 
You’ve tried to tell me I can’t have 
my own doctor when he is going 
in the same ship — and now it turns 
out that it was not a Commission 
regulation but merely petty 
tyranny on your part. Bullying. 
All through this nonsense — although I’ve appeared with a complete and carefully prepared pro
posal — you’ve kept me sitting on a 
hard uncomfortable chair. My 
back aches. On how many poor 
helpless applicants have you fattened your ego? But I am neither 
poor nor helpless. You spoke of a 
chill breeze. It’s an icy blast now. / 
bloody well mean to have your 
jobr 
“Please, Madam! I said you 
could have your own doctor. And 
I am required to review each applicant’s proposal.” 
“Then get your lazy arse out of 
that comfortable chair and give it 
to me\ You come sit in this ducking stool.” 
“Very well. Ma’am.” They exchanged chairs. Shortly he said, “I 
see that you are putting almost all 
of the other fifty percent of your 
fortune into starship research and 
development.” 
“It’s none of your business.” 
“I didn’t say it was. It just struck 
me as . unusual.” 
“Why? My child may want to go 
in a starship. I want that research 
to move. Mr. Barnes, you’ve had 
time to look at that proposal; if 
you hadn’t talked so much you 
could have it memorized by now. 
Do whatever it is you do. Mark 
your X, or stamp your chop. Or 
hand it back and let me out of here. 
Now! Not five minutes from 
now — but now. My back still hurts. 
You’re a pain in the back, Mr. 
Barnes, you and your petty 
‘policy’ and your worthless talk.” 
He signed it. “Through that 
door. Madam Salomon.” 
“Thank you.” She started toward it. 
“You’re barely welcome— you 
ancient bitch!” 
Joan Eunice stopped, turned 
back, and smiled her best goldensunrise smile. “Why, thank you, 
dear! That’s the best thing you’ve 
said to me. Because it is utterly 
honest. Of course I’m not welcome, the way I’ve stormed at 
you — and answered your bullying 
with worse bullying. And I am 
indeed both a bitch and ancient.” 
“I shouldn’t have said that.” 
“Oh, but you should have. I richly deserved it. But I would never 
have tried to get your job — truly. 
I’m not that petty. That was just 
backache bad temper talking. I 
admire your spunk in telling me 
off. What is your first name?” 
“Uh, Matthew.” 
“A good name, Matthew. A 
strong name.” Joan Eunice came 
back, stood close to him. “Matthew, I’m going to the Moon. I’ll 
never be back this way again. Will 
you forgive this ancient bitch and 
let us part friends? Will you kiss me 
goodbye? I’ve no one to see me 
off, Matthew — will you kiss me 
goodbye as I leave for the Moon?” 
“Uh— ” 
“Please, Matthew. Uh, mind the 
big belly; turn me a little sideways — that’s better.” She wetted 
her lips, lifted her face, and closed 
her eyes. 
Presently she sighed and nestled 
closer. “Matthew? Will you let me 
love you? Oh, I don’t mean seduce 
you, it’s too late for that. I’m about 
benched. Just tell me that I may 
think of you with love as I go to the 
Moon. It’s a long way off and I’m 
a little scared — and I lived too 
long without love and want to love 
everyone who will let me . any 
who will love me back even a little. 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
Will you, dear? Or is this bitch too 
ancient?” 
“Uh, Madam Salomon — ” 
“Eunice, Matthew.” 
“Eunice. Eunice, you’re a sparky 
little bitch, you really are. But I 
kept you sitting there — even before I realized who you are — because I like looking at you. Hell, 
honey, my wife says I can love any 
woman I want to — ten percent of 
what I love her.” 
“Ten percent is a good return 
on any investment, Matthew. All 
right, please love me that ten percent — and I’ll love you ten percent 
of what I loved — still love — my 
darling husband. Is there enough 
love in that ten percent for a second kiss? It’s a long way to the 
Moon — they must keep me warm 
all the way.” She closed her eyes 
and waited. 
(Hey, twin, lover boy is doing 
better this time.) (Don’t bother 
me now, Em busy!) 
Presently Mr. Barnes murmured, “Lovely.” 
“All swollen and fat now, that’s 
why I wear styles that cover them. 
But you should have seen Eunice — the first Eunice, my benefactrix — at her lovely best ... in 
styles to show it.” 
“I still say they’re lovely. I guess 
we had better stop this, I’ve got a 
roomful of people waiting out 
there. And you have almost four 
hours of processing before you go 
on to quarantine. If you want to 
go to Andes Port with your own 
doctor, you had better go now.” 
“Yes, Matthew, I love you — ten 
percent — and I’ll still be loving 
you on the Moon. At compound 
interest. Through that door?” 
“Through there and follow the 
signs. Goodbye, Eunice. Take care 
of yourself.” 
(Boss, that’s either a new high, 
or a new low. Was he kissing usl 
Or a billion dollars?) (It seemed 
to me — though I’m still learning 
compared with you two 
trollops — that the young man 
started out kissing a billion dollars . and wound up kissing Joan. 
Us. Quite well, too. Dears, I find 
that my animal nature has been 
considerably stirred — I’m looking 
forward to us being back in circulation again.) (Hell, yes, Jock 
darling, we all are. It occurs to 
me, Joan, that there must be lots of 
homesick out-migrants who will 
appreciate a simple country girl 
who learned clear back in junior 
high to kiss with her eyes closed 
and her lips open.) (Eunice, that’s 
what I’m counting on. Seven 
billion people makes Earth a 
terribly lonely place . but there 
are only a few thousand on Luna 
and, if we try, we can get to know 
all of them and love most of them. 
What do you think, Jake?) 
(Johann, we can try. We will. 
Wups, here’s our first stop. ‘Physical.’ Goose bumps and indignities. But what the hell? 
— somebody kissed us goodbye.) 
XXIX 
A s RE-REPORTED in the 
Christian Science MONITOR, 
Izvestia condemned the announcement (Daily Selenite, year 35, day 
69) of the Lunar Commission’s 
call for proposal studies for terraforming Ganymede as “one more 
provocative example of the in
satiable territorial aggressions of 
the mad-dog alliance of the two 
major imperialist, counterrevolutionary, genocidal powers, 
the United States of America and 
the so-called People’s Democratic 
Republic of China” and demanded that the UN Security 
Council take action before it was 
too late. In Sequoia National Park 
three families (or possibly one 
extended-family were discovered 
living two hundred feet up in a giant redwood. The group (seven 
adults, five children — two less 
than a year old) claimed to have 
been up the tree more than three 
years; extensive arrangements 
for their unique style of living lent 
substance to the claim. They were 
booked on a variety of charges but 
the U.S. district attorney declined to prosecute: “I ain’t about 
to waste my time and taxpayers’ 
money on a bunch of monkeys. 
Let’s chase ’em back up the tree!” 
The Iowa State Annual Picnic 
in Long Beach, California, suffered 243 cases of acute food poisoning (botulism-D), 17 muggings, 
3 rapes, and was rained out. 
“ — from the great State of New 
York knows that slum clearance is 
no answer. Must we hear the death 
rattle before we admit that any 
organism, be it man, or city, or civilization, in time grows old and 
dies?” In a letter in Nature (UK) 
it was claimed that scientists in 
Novosibirsk had solved both the 
problem of twinning replication 
and of extra-uterine foetal 
development in vitro and must 
now be reckoned as back in the 
Great-Powers race with a potentially unlimited supply of 
workers, soldiers, and peasants. An 
editorial in the same issue urged 
the Nobel letter-writer to give up 
writing science-fiction or at least 
change his brand of hashish. Debate on proposed legislation for 
control of neo-psychedelics continued: “Has the gentleman on the 
other side of the aisle ever given 
thought to the potentially disastrous effect on our economy of actually enforcing the narcotics 
laws we already have? Or is he 
talking for the video audience?” 
Experienced observers predicted 
no vote this session.” 
N LUNA CITY Mrs. Salomon, 
as with everywoman, neared the 
end of her nine lunar months. Her 
lovely navel had long since extruded, her belly was an arching 
dome of life pushing up the sheet. 
She waited in the Community 
Hospital eight levels down. The 
nurse seated near her was pregnant also but not nearly so far 
along. 
“Winnie?” 
“Yes, dear?” 
“If it’s a boy it must be Jacob 
Eunice ... a girl must be Eunice 
Jacob. Promise me.” 
“I did promise, dear; I wrote it 
down just as you asked me to. And 
I promised to take care of your 
baby — and that is all done, too, already recorded — I take care of 
yours, you take care of mine. Only 
we won’t need to, dear; both of us 
are going to be all right — we’ll 
raise them together.” 
“Promise me, it’s important.” 
(Johann, don’t name that baby 
Jake. Call him Johann — Johann 
Eunice.) (Jake, I will not load 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
down a boy with Johann — it 
forced me to learn to fight too 
young.) (Jock, don’t argue with 
Boss. She’s always right, you 
know that.) (Then call him John!) 
(His name is Jacob, Jake — I won’t 
have it any other way.) (Joan, 
you’re the most stubborn old 
bastard in the entire Solar System — and turning you into a 
woman didn’t change you. All right 
already!) (I love you, my husband.) (We both love you. 
Boss — and Jake is as proud about 
the names as I am.) 
“I do promise you, Joan. Cross 
my heart.” 
“My sweet Winsome. We’ve 
come a long way together, you and 
I and Roberto.” 
“Yes, we have, dear.” 
“I’m ill. Am I not?” 
“Joan, you’re not ill. A woman 
never feels good just before she 
has a baby — I know. I’ve seen hundreds of them. I told you that tube 
was just for glucose.” 
“What tube? Winnie, come close 
and listen. This is important. My 
baby’s name must be ... ” 
“ — rejection syndrome. Doctor. 
Atypical but unmistakable.” 
“Dr. Garcia, why do you say 
‘atypical’?” 
“Mmm. Sometimes, when she’s 
irrational, she speaks in three 
different voices and — well, two of 
them are dead. Split personality.” 
“So? I’m not a psychiatrist. Dr. 
Garcia; ‘split personality’ means 
little to me. But I don’t see that it 
necessarily affects pregnancy. I’ve 
delivered some fine, healthy babies from women who were quite 
irrational.” 
“Nor am I a psychiatrist, sir. Let 
it stand that she is irrational 
much of the time . and that I see 
this as part of the total clinical picture, which — in my opin
ion — gives a prognosis of transplant rejection.” 
“Dr. Garcia, you know more 
about transplants than I do; I’ve 
never managed a transplant case 
in my life. But this patient seems in 
fair shape to me. Right here in this 
hospital 1 have seen women who 
appeared to be in much worse 
shape . who had their babies and 
were up and working in three 
days. With our low gravity they recover quickly. Did you think this 
patient was hurt on the trip up 
from Earth?” 
“Oh, no! Those flotation acceleration cells are wonderful. 
Mrs. Salomon rode in one, so did 
my wife. I monitored them; Joan 
took it even better than Winnie 
did. I envied them, as I found the 
ride in a standard chair pretty 
rough. No, I see no connection; 
rejection symptoms did not show 
until this week.” Garcia frowned. 
“She doesn’t know that her mind 
isn’t clear — she’s lucid off and on. 
But motor control is decaying. 
That strong young body sustains 
her metabolism — but truthfully. 
Doctor, I can’t guess how long.” 
He frowned again. “It could let go 
any moment — damn it, I wish I 
had proper support equipment!” 
The older doctor shook his head. 
“This is a frontier, son. I’m not 
running down your specialty — but this is not the place for it. 
Here we set bones and take out appendixes and try to keep contagious diseases from racing 
through the colony. But when it 
comes time to die, we die — you, 
me, anybody — and get out of the 
way of the living. Now suppose we 
had all of Johns Hopkins here with 
Jefferson Medical thrown 
in — could you stop it? Reverse it? 
Possibility of spontaneous remission if you had your fancy support 
equipment?” 
“No. The best we could do 
would be to extend the time.” 
“So the literature says, but I 
wanted to hear you say it. Well, 
Doctor? Your patient.” 
“We take the baby.” 
“Let’s get busy.” 
J OAN EUNICE came awake as 
they were wheeling her down the 
corridor. “Roberto?” 
“Right here, dear.” 
“Where are they taking me? Am 
I going in for surgery again?” 
“Yes, Joan.” 
“Why, dear?” 
“Because you haven’t gone into 
labor when you should have. So 
now we do it the easy way — Caesarean section.” He added: 
“There’s nothing to worry about. 
It’s as routine as taking out an appendix.” 
“Roberto, you know I never 
worry. You’re doing it?” 
“No, the chief of surgery. He’s 
far more skilled than I am. Dr. 
Frankel. You met him, he examined you this morning.” 
“Did he? It’s slipped my mind. 
Roberto, I must tell Winnie something very important. It’s about 
the name of my baby.” 
“She knows, dear, she wrote it 
down. ‘Jacob Eunice, or Eunice 
Jacob.” 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
“Oh, good! Then everything’s all 
right. But tell them to make it 
quick, Roberto; I never liked waiting around at a beachhead.” 
“It’ll be quick, you’ll never notice it. Spinal and wagonload of 
barbiturate, Joan.” 
“That’s funny, you called me 
Joan. My name’s Johann, Doctor. Agnes is going to be all 
right — she is, isn’t she?” 
“Yes, Johann. Agnes — is going 
to be all right.” 
“I told her she would be all right. 
Doctor, I feel dreamy. If I fall 
asleep, will you wake me when 
Agnes goes in to have her baby?” 
“Yes, Johann.” 
“Thank . you . Mrs. Wicklund. I didn’t . know . could be 
so . wonderful.” 
“Roberto? Where are you? I 
can’t see you.” 
“Right here, dear.” 
“Touch me. Touch my face, I 
can’t feel anything lower down. 
Roberto, what I bought was a wonderful year — and I have no regrets. 
Have they started?” 
“Not quite. Do you want to go 
to sleep, dear?” 
“Must I? I’d rather not. I feel 
sleepy — dreamy and good . but 
I’d rather not go to sleep just yet. 
It’s on the knees of the gods now, 
isn’t it? Time to bite the bullet and 
chin up and all that. But I don’t 
need that, I’m happy. Come close, 
dear, I must tell you why. 
Closer . can’t talk . very loud.” 
“Clamp! Damn it. Nurse, stay 
out of my way!” 
“Everything always hurts, Roberto — everything. Always. But 
some things are worth all the hurts. 
‘Tie me kangeroo down, mite, tie 
me kangeroo down!’ That . tell you that. Om Mani Padme 
wasn’t . what I meant to say; Hum. Now I lay me down to 
that’s Jake, he’s singing again. Al- sleep — ” 
ways sings when he’s happy. Lean “Surgeon, she’s failing.” ' 
very close ... so I can tell you ... A baby cried, a world began, 
before — I sleep. Thank you, Ro- “Heart action dropping!” 
berto, for letting me welcome you (Jake? Eunice?) (Here, Boss! 
into my body. It is good to touch Grab on! There! We’ve got you.) 
— to f---, be f---ed. It’s — not (Is it a boy or a girl?) (Who cares, 
good — to be — too much alone. Johann — it’s a baby! ‘One for all 
You have blessed me . with and all for one!’) 
your body, dear. Now I’ll sleep a An old world vanished and then 
while if I may . but first I had to there was none. ★ 
The Magazine of Alternatives 
SONG OF KAIA 
TJ. Bass 
MONARCH 
Piers Anthony 
(The latest Dr. Dillingham Story) 
A HELPING HAND 
Juanita Coulson 
READING ROOM 
Lester del Rey 
All in the current I F —on your newsstand now! 
A G/IMXV' SCIENCE FEATURE 
THE 
LIMmNG 
VELOCITY 
OF 
ORTHODOXY 
"When we get Out There 
we’re going to toss 
the light barrier 
in the same junkheap 
as the sound barrier . 
KEITH LAUMER 
¥ AM perhaps the only individual 
^ever to receive a B.S. in Architecture from the University of Illinois without learning to use a slide 
rule. Spurning such aids as tending 
to atrophy the natural faculties, I 
polished my mental arithmetic to a 
point rivaling the skill of an idiot 
savant. This annoyed the idiot savant, who resigned his post as Head 
of the Department and became a 
science writer. 
In those days we still did homework instead of rioting. Some of 
the problems assigned in the engineering curriculum were rather 
time-consuming; the record for 
one problem for one class for one 
day, as I recall, was some eleven 
hours. As a result we students fell 
into the habit of working in twoman teams. During those long 
happy evenings in close proximity 
with slide-rule operators I noted 
a curious phenomenon: faced with 
the challenge of dividing 100 by 
ten, they would frown, adjust the 
magic device, make mysterious 
passes and announce: “Nine nine 
nine nine nine. Uh — where does the 
decimal go?” 
I earned my reputation as a 
lightning calculator by my uncanny ability, when encountering a 
tricky bit of arithmetic such as dividing 3.978 by 1.987, to instantly 
announce: 
“That will be very close to 2.0” 
I never revealed my secret formula: 
2 + 2=4 (equation 1) 
The tendency of the technical 
mind to hold the nose so close to 
the grindstone that it loses sight of 
the point carries over, alas, into its 
public pronouncements. Not one 
to denigrate Science, I. But let’s 
not get carried away with ideas, 
like, oh, the alleged limiting velocity of light. 
According to the Relativity 
boys, nothing can ever travel faster 
than about 186,000 mi/sec. — the 
velocity of propagation of electromagnetic radiation — such as light 
and radio waves — in a vacuum. 
Man will never explore the stars, 
they say, because it would take 
too long. We can never communicate with the neighboring galaxy 
because a return message would 
take a few million years — minimum. 
Aside from the fact that this 
limitation, if true, would take all 
the fun out of things and also aside 
from the fact that people who announce what we will never do always seem to be asking for a dunce 
cap, the whole idea is nonsense. 
Limiting velocity indeed. Phooey. 
We’ll go as fast as we want to, so 
there. 
I realize that at this point the 
academicians are laying aside their 
technical journals with a pitying 
smile and preparing to point out 
that at light-speed: 
(a) the mass of the spaceship will reach infinity and 
(b) its length will become zero, and 
(c) time aboard will come to 
a standstill. 
Ergo, the thing is clearly impossible. 
I reply that what’s impossible is 
not super-light velocity, but spaceships of infinite mass, zero length 
and no time. The absurdity of 
these concepts should be a tip-off 
to the theoreticians that, although 
their arithmetic gives them nine, 
nine, nine, nine, they still don’t 
know where to put the decimal. 
So let’s take a clearer look at 
things. 
T he Universe is, as far as we’ve 
actually observed it, a reasonable, consistent, operating mechanism. It seems to abhor absolutes 
as much as Nature was once 
thought to abhor a vacuum. It also 
abhors uniqueness. Once we were 
told that the world was flat and 
that Europe was at its center. Then 
that Terra was the center of the 
Solar System. Then that the sun 
was at the center of the Galaxy. 
Then that our Galaxy was at the 
center of the Universe — and that it 
was the biggest and best Galaxy going, etc., etc., etc. This is all bunk, 
of course. 
Now they tell us that nothing 
can travel away from Earth faster 
than light. I italicize where I do because these flat statements of the 
crippling limitation imply a Terracentric Universe. 
Consider: we observe a distant 
radio source in a given direction, 
receding from us at three-quarters 
of the speed of light. Turning our 
antennae in the opposite direction, 
we observe another radio source, 
equally distant, also receding at a 
major fraction of this magic velocity. 
Falling back on: 
.75 + .75 = 1.5 (equation 2) 
it appears that our limitation is already exceeded. 
“Sorry,” the smiling physicist 
says, with an expression resembling 
that of the canary which has just 
had a bite of the cat. “The velocities don’t add.” 
Okay. We’ll remember that one, 
Buster. 
Let’s look at it this way: Cap
tain Horntoot of the Starship 
Clubfoot takes his command out 
past Luna and opens her up. Traveling at a modest one G, he soon 
reaches a respectable velocity; say 
.75 lightspeed. 
Now, we all know that this can’t 
go on or all sorts of impossible 
things will try to happen. Capt 
Horntoot knows this, too. No dullard he, he summons his First 
Mate to the quarterdeck. 
“All right, Mr. Shrub,” he 
barks. “What’s our present velocity?” 
Shrub tells him. 
“With reference to what?” 
Horntoot demands. 
“Why, ah, Omaha, Nebraska, 
my home town, sir,” Shrub replies. 
“Out there — ” the captain points 
through the front windshield, “is a 
distant radio source, which is receding from Omaha, Nebraska at 
a velocity of three-quarters of a 
light.” 
“I see it, sir!” 
“No, you don’t, you idiot, that’s 
a speck of crud on your glasses! 
You can’t see this distant radio object because it’s not visible from 
here. But take my word for it: it’s 
out there. Now, how fast are we 
traveling — in relation to the distant radio object, I mean.” 
“Well, actually ! guess we’re 
standing still, sir,” Shrub says. 
“Standing still?” Horntoot 
roars. “I told you to get the lead 
out and boost us up to three-quarters of lightspeed!” 
THE LIMITING VELOCITY OF ORTHODOXY 
“Yes, but sir — that’s impossible!” 
“Indeed, Mr. Shrub? And why, 
may I ask?” 
“B-because we’re already going 
¥4 of a light — and if we accelerated 
another ¥4 light, that would be a 
light and a half — and it says right 
in my handbook that you can’t — ” 
“Perish the thought, Mr. 
Shrub,” Horntoot says coolly. 
“The velocities don’t add.” (Nyahnyah, n’ nyah-nyah!) 
If you can’t beat ’em, join ’em. 
S URE, I know they’ll come 
bounding out of the woodwork 
to tell me all the things wrong with 
this formulation; but I’ll bet my 
place in the Public Freezer against 
a lifetime subscription to the Engineering News-Record that some 
day some dumb tramp captain will 
get from here to there quicker than 
a ray of light that started when he 
did — even if he doesn’t exceed 
lightspeed on the way. And he’ll let 
the slide-rule boys formulate the 
math later. 
(And I suppose that when Capt 
Horntoot turns on his headlights 
at .999 lights, the beams just pile 
up out front like toilet paper spinning off a roll?) 
Let’s face it. Violent Reader; all 
this talk about the velocity of light 
is in the same category as the 
aqueous humor and phlogiston. 
LIGHT IS A CONDITION, 
NOT AN EVENT (Laumer^s 
Theorem). 
Light has no velocity. When the 
sun radiates, it sets up conditions 
around it. Those conditions extend 
in all directions. Are we to believe 
that light rays go speeding away 
from the sun in opposite directions, all at the same speed with 
reference to the sun (or is it to 
Omaha?) and to all the other light 
rays — including those going in the 
opposite direction? 
Again, phooey. 
We’re playing with velocities, 
eh? A velocity implies a time and a 
distance — but they tell us that at 
high velocities both time and distance are variables. So — what kind 
of time are we clocking by? Ship 
time or shore time? And which 
shore? Whose yardstick are we using? If time on a distant object, receding from us at the limiting velocity, is standing still — then so is 
the object, right? And the business 
of measuring speed implies a 
frame of reference. A fly inside a 
moving Dempster Dumpster, etc. 
So — what is our frame of reference for all this talk about absolute limits? Earth? A remote galaxy, at the limits of detectability? 
A moving ship somewhere between 
them? 
Double phooey. 
When we get Out There, in our 
nuclear powered Go-ship, and we 
step on the gas — we’re going to 
Go. We’re going to toss the light 
barrier in the same junkheap as 
the sound barrier. 
Stick around and see. ★ 
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 
( Continued from page 95 } 
chants — by Pohl and Kornbluth, 
Roses — as a landmark novel. (It 
still wouldn’t make sense to cite 
Space Lords). 
You see? You see what the sincere people are doing to us, gentle reader? I quote: 
“Perhaps science fiction is best 
defined, however, by an enumeration of its themes. These can be 
grouped into the following categories: technological gim
mickry, space travel, time travel, 
future scenarios, and finally, the 
exploration of inner space and 
ultimate meaning." (Italics the 
authors’). 
Can they? I haven’t tried counting, but I doubt if there is a significant number of sf stories which 
use technological gimmickry as 
a theme. They may use technological gimmickry as a device of 
storytelling. More likely, they 
may use technological gameplaying as a form of recreation 
for minds trained to grasp subtle 
distinctions between the probable and the technically possible. But as a theme, gimmickry 
seems a bit limited, and I doubt if 
the Roses really meant exactly 
what they said. 
One would have to quote farther 
to deduce what they mean by such 
purely personal labels as future 
scenarios and ultimate meaning. 
(I can recognize space travel and 
time travel as occasionally possessing thematic qualities, all 
right. As for the exploration of 
inner space, I presume that’s 
stated in its conventional meaning as a proposed antithesis to 
outer space, which used to be a 
place with an existence of its own 
when I was in school but has become corrupted into whatever 
that shouting is beyond the viewpoint observer’s ears. But that’s 
not often a theme, as distinguished from a motive. 
In fact, though love has labored 
and scholarship’s entire panoply 
of ready obscure references and 
suspect annotations has been 
brought into action here, neither is 
this poor book a theme, much less 
a thesis. 
T he single man best qualified to 
analyze the classics would be 
Poul Anderson. Thank a good 
Lord, he spends his time doing so 
only for the purpose of construct
Thankf TO tho continuing support of loyal roodors— and in responca 
M popokipd—iMnd — the publishers are happy to announce thatt 
GALAXY one* again goes monthfyl 
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 
ing additional fiction. But if 
those walls could speak, I for one 
would go running to listen, for, 
clearly, that man is without peer 
as a student of what can be done. 
It was a Poul Anderson month a 
while ago, with Doubleday bringing out Tau Zero and Tales of the 
Flying Mountains and Ballantine reprinting Guardians of 
Time, Brain Wave, and After 
Doomsday. These are variously 
successful books, spanning his 
range from earliest effort and 
human concern {Brain Wave) 
through such recent notions as 
Tau Zero, with its Williamsonian 
effects as a spaceship drives its 
speed helplessly up and upward 
until time (expressed in contracting, dying space) and space (as a 
blossoming function of rolling 
time) become no more than captive media for the drama of the 
mighty machine masters. 
Tau Zero has its biggest problems, in fact, when Anderson 
tests what I assume to have been 
his basic assumption — that you 
can tell a superscience story and a 
humanistic one at the same time. 
I think you’re doomed to re-tell 
Aniara, and A niara isn’t worth telling because it works only as a 
function of some psychic mechanism. Probably the one that 
says the good Lord didn’t intend 
for folks to go unpunished. That 
would be why the moment of triumph is the moment of letdown 
in this attempt. 
Guardians of Time is a novelette collection about Poul’s version of the Time Patrol. Problem 
here is its resemblance to a collection of adventure pulp “historical” 
romances, when in fact it’s one of 
the few collections of time patrol 
stories that isn’t obviously and 
immediately inconsistent with 
its own premises. That’s a tough 
standard to live up to. But since all 
four stories have a common 
theme — decency circumvented — 
and a common motive nostalgia 
inverted, the book as a piece of 
recreation makes for altogether 
too even reading. 
And After Doomsday cheats a 
little. In fact, it cheats a lot. But 
that’s okay. It’s the price of his successes. Although there’s no mistaking the man’s touch on a story, 
there’s not a man around with Anderson’s range. I’m forming the 
theory that this is because he can 
actually write a story just to see 
if one of his analytical notions 
will hold water. There’s nothing 
remarkable about a professional wirter’s being able to isolate 
different kinds of story, and then 
to isolate story ingredients and 
synthesize something new out of 
them — not necessarily viable, 
but at least capable of exhibiting 
a few reflexes. And often enough, 
genuine life. But to be able to 
write each and every one of 
them ... of so many different 
kinds. Now that, students, is your 
classicist. ★ 
A mouse has 
already been saved 
from leukemia. 
Help us save a man. 
For years, youVe been giving people with leukemia your sympathy. 
But sympathy can't cure leukemia. Money can. Give us enough of that, and maybe 
well be able to do for a man what has already been done for a mouse. 
American Cancer Society! 
2001: A 
SPACE 
ODYSSEY by 
Arthur C. Clarke 
Hunting an alien 
"presence" in the 
universe, 5 men and a 
computer -gone -psychotic stumble upon the incredible secret of mankind's 
birth — only to trigger the 
cosmic "booby-trap" that could 
spell its death. A controversial best-seller by the 
most acclaimed science fiction writer of our era. 
PHOTOGRAPH COURTESY OF MGM FROM THE FILM 2001: 
A SPACE OOYSSEV, A STANLEY KUBRICK PRODUCTION. 
Memtiers accepted in U.S.A. and Canada only. Canadian members 
will be serviced from Toronto. Ofter slightly different in Canada. 
Pub. ed.$4.95 
2001: A Space 
Odyssey 
b«tt-s«lling nov»i ond 
oword-winning cinema spactoculor 
Science Fiction has Rrown up. 
Have you kept up? 
A new literary genre has come of 
age— your age. Mature. Sophisticated. 
Provocative. And respected. You ate invited to explore it now under an amazing trial 
ofter. Take any 3 volumes on this page (worth up to 
$23.40 in original publishers’ editions) for only $1 with 
membership. ■ New club selections will be described to 
you in advance each month. Choose from new works of 
fiction— and fact— by such acclaimed authors as Ray Brad 
bury, Rod Serling, Isaac Asimov, Arthur Clarke, Robert 
Heinlein and others. All volumes are full-length, hardbound— and uncut. Though they sell for as much as $4.95, 
$5.95 and more in their original publishers’ editions, club 
members pay only $1.49 plus shipping. (You may choose 
an optional extra-value selection at a slightly higher 
price.) Y'our sole o’uligation is to accept as few as four 
books during the coming year. Cancel anytime thereafter. 
Science Fiction Book Club, Garden City, N.Y. 11530. 
Faience fiction book ^-lub 
I Dept. n-GXX, Garden City, N.Y. 11530 
n 
i Please accept my application for membership and rush the • 
13 books whose numbers I have printed below. Bill mel 
•$1.00 plus a modest shipping and handling charge for all! 
I three. Each month send me the Club’s free bulletin, Things | 
'to Come, which describes coming selections. If I do not i 
( wish to receive the monthly selection or prefer an alter- 1 
nate, I simply give instructions on the form provided. For * 
leach book I accept, 1 pay $1.49, plus shipping and han- j 
Idling. Occasional extra-value selections are priced slightly I 
I higher. I need take only 4 books in the coming year and i 
I may resign any time thereafter. * 
INO-RISK GUARANTEE: If not delighted with my intro- | 
Iductory package, I may return it in 10 days and member- . 
[Ship will be canceled. I will owe nothing. | 
I 1 1 I I I I 
Print 
Name 
620. Childhood’s 
End, by Arthur C. 
Clarke. Mankind’s 
last I'cncratioh on 
earth. “Wildly fantastic!” — Allantic. 
Pub. ed. $4.50 
806. Beyond (he 
Beyond, by Pout 
Anderson. 6 novellas by Huyo Award 
winner. About scientists. pirates, 
“loners." 
642. S(andon Zanzibar. by John Brunner, Life in U.S. 100 
years from now. 
Hugo Award Winner. 600 pages. 
Pub. ed. $6.95 
802. Downward to 
the Earth, by 
Robert Silvcrberg. 
Alien planet with 
alluring secret of 
rebirth. 
619.1 Sing The Body 
Electric! by Ray 
Bradbury. 18 maior 
pieces — Bradbury’s 
first collection in 
five years. Pub ccl. 
$6.95 
801. One Step from 
Earth, by Harry 
Harrison. 9 talcs in 
matter ‘’transmission.’' Mars “manshot”; new earth 
race. Pub. ed. $5.95 
|Address | 
I City State Zip j 
I 22-S79 I 
I If under 18 , parent must sign here. I 
I Note: Book Club editions are sometimes reduced In size, but they are all full-length, 
] hard-covtr books you will be proud to add to your permanent library. j 
622. The Foundation Trilogy, by 
Isaac Asimov. The 
ends of (he galaxy 
revert to ba rba rism. 
Pub. ed. $10.50 
637. The Left Hand 
of Darkness, by 
Ursula K. LeGuin. 
Finding love — in a 
“Unisex" world! 
Nebula Award winner. Pub. ed. $4.95 
621. Three for Tomorrow. Novellas 
by Silverberg, Zelazny. Blish. Foreword by Arthur C. 
Clarke. Pub. ed. 
$5.95 
638. Nightfall and 
Other Stories, by 
Isaac Asimov. 20 
probing tales by 
this best-selling science fiction author. 
Pub. ed. $5.95 
615. Stranger in a 
Strange Land, by 
Robert A. Heinlein. He knew ihc 
Martian love .secret ^ 
—and it spelled his 
doom. Pub. ed.$o.:»5 ^ 
618. Danger<>us vT — ' 
sions. Anthology oi r 
33 original storks ~ 
never before in t 
print by Sturgeon, ^ 
Anderson, others. 
Pub. ed, $6.95 ^