SEPTEMBER 1958 GALAXY 
MAGAZINE 
SEPTEMBER 1958 
35< 
K 
LASTBORN 
By 
ISAAC 
ASIMOV 
THING OF 
BEAUTY 
By 
DAMON 
KNIGHT 
UNSEEN 
CENSOR 
By 
ROSEL GEORGE 
BROWN 
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION 
By 
WILLY 
LEY 
AND OTHER STORIES 
Anyone For Doomsday? 
Not You! 
Not Us I 
But it COULD happen, for anything is possible. And anything that is possible — and can make a good story — goes 
into the pages of GALAXY Science Fiction. 
Doomsday is only one possible future out of many: 
The conquest of other planets . 
Invasions of Earth . 
Other dimensions . 
Immortality . 
Strange and exciting future civilizations that 
have their roots right in the present . 
You’ll find all these and a lot more in GALAXY, the 
magazine of ideas brought vividly to life! 
for J2 convincing issues, send $3.50 
or $6.00 for 24 issues, 
TO 
GALAXY Publishing Corp. 
421 Hudson Street • New York 14, N. Y. 
y y. —the science-fiction anthology 
, A^t/ '’*®" waiting for. order now 
^ fQ g^l your copy of the first edition 
specially inscribed for you alone! 
THE THIRD 
Edited by H. L. Gold 
A superb permanent addition to any 
science fiction library, here are choice 
stories that have appeared in Galaxy 
during the past several years — including some of the liveliest brain 
children of Asimov, del Rey, Simak, 
Pohl, Leiber, and many other top 
writers. Cost is only $3.75. Place your 
order now to insure early delivery. 
GALAXY PUBLISHING CORP. 
421 Hudson Street, New York 14, N.Y. 
Please send me copies of 
THE THIRD GALAXY READER as 
soon as copies come off the press. 1 
enclose □ check □ cash □ money order 
in the amount of $ 
NAME .... 
ADDRESS 
MESSAGE .... 
Note: coupon is for your conven
ience only;^ if you prefer to keep your 
magazine intact, please send in your 
order on a sheet of paper. 
BREECHES NEEDED 
W HEN people, experts included, say something can’t 
be done, they generally mean it 
can’t be done with existing methods or orthodox approaches. They 
may go on to insist that it will 
never be done but the statement 
is not valid as an opinion, and 
even less so as a prediction. 
Thinkers can be divided into 
two highly unequal groups: innovators and improvers. The inequality is more than numerical: 
innovators are usually scorned and 
seldom make money; improvers 
• 
have honors forced on them, along 
with great power and unthinkable 
wealth. And a still sadder inequality: innovators fully recognize the 
importance of improvers, but improvers often add their expert jeering to public scorn, like Charles E. 
Wilson’s definition of basic research as ‘Svhen you don’t know 
what you’re looking for,” a jaunty 
dismissal of the fact that every 
auto essential was once a profitless 
theory. 
No question that improvers are 
necessary. To stay with the auto 
industry another moment, I think 
foreign and domestic manufacturers are both culpable, one for 
making machining substitute for 
engineering, the other for substituting engineering for machining. 
But either is better than leaving 
carmaking to the innovators. 
Improvers need no defense. 
When they do, they can buy all 
the advertising and psychiatry required to defend them. But their 
attitude toward visionary innovators is the best defense — if they 
believed that improvement is the 
easier part of invention, which it 
is, LfOrd knows the harm that might 
be done to their confidence and 
our comfort and convenience, not 
to mention our economy. 
Better this way, and no irony 
intended. The rewards of improvement, being tangible and marketable, must be bankable; if they are 
not, this is the proof of failure. 
But the success of innovation is 
the innovation itself; it may eventually have cash value, but putting 
it into production and making it 
work better at lower cost should 
be left to the improvers. 
Improvers are the best guardians of budget all the distance 
from prototype to the ultimate in 
perfection — and then they risk 
being spendthrifts so prodigal that, 
in comparison, the most drunken 
of sailors is like unto the soberest 
of judges. 
For perfection, or something 
minutely short of it, can be attained, and often is, and the effort 
to improve perfection is both ungodly costly and doomed. 
The airplane is a handy exam( Continued on page 4) 
ANNOUNCING 
A Complete Restyling Of 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVELS 
Streamlined pocket-size format — handsomest in design, 
handiest for reading and carrying. 
Outstanding titles by outstanding authors. 
A gigantic increase of 50% more pages. 
Clear, compact type — more wordage yet greater reading ease. 
All this at no increase in price — a hard-headed bet 
that upgrading pays off in these days of less and less 
for more and more. 
□ Count me ini Here's my $2.00 for six titles, during the 
year, each different, each full-length — half a dozen 
»Kk choice novels at less than the original cost of any one. 
NAME 
ADDRESS 
CITY STATE 
Publisher's Note-. If you don't want to mutilate this issue 
send your order on any sheet of paper. 
(Continued from page 2) 
pie. It was improved so remorselessly that in only a few decades 
it was held back by the very thing 
that made it fly — the propeller. 
There’s a logical solution. Any 
good innovator would think of it 
instantly. A breech is needed, a 
breakthrough — scrap the propeller, use something else instead. 
Luckily, the something else was 
there waiting. 
Or was it just happenstance? 
Doesn’t it give one to think when, 
every time a something else instead is called for, it appears to be 
right there? Quite tidily, too: the 
research about completed, working 
model or production methods or 
dosages on hand, the single final 
necessity being the order to commence manufacturing. 
Well, that command is an agonizingly difficult one to give. 
Breakthroughs are never comfortable and neat. They destroy 
theories, outmode skills, junk 
machinery, stockpiles, inventories 
and know-hows. But none of that 
is as expensive as trying to save 
the investment. 
Anyone who doesn’t understand 
that the order can’t — and should 
not — be given until the last 
possible moment is a visionary. 
Except innovators, who have no 
business thinking at all in such 
terms. 
Same for any improver who 
gives the command too soon — 
what’s he doing in the ranks of the 
innovators? 
TF you’ve read this far in the 
hope that it might start getting 
interesting, let me confess that I 
was watching something else — the 
way the atttitude shifted from the 
title on; because this is exactly 
how science fiction gets itself 
written, the process alone is interesting to me. 
Well, now we can sweep off the 
shavings and see what’s left. 
The title — calling for breakthroughs is unnecessary. They 
needn’t be called— they’ll come. 
The bias in favor of innovators — reasonable enough; we are 
innovators ourselves. As tests by 
independent laboratories prove, 
these are times that try men’s 
souls: line after line has reached 
the end, either of perfectability or 
market saturation, and the only 
way out is right through the wall. 
But the timing — too soon is as 
disastrous as too late; the Pierce 
Arrow people produced a teardrop 
car in 1935, were out of business 
the same year. Rewards may be 
huge for improvers, but so are the 
punishments, and these are even 
more automatic when the timing is 
wrong; stereoscopic film companies 
went bankrupt a generation ago. 
It’s no wonder I’ve known so 
many happy innovators, so few 
ulcerless improvers. 
— H. L. GOLD 
ALL ORIGINAL 'X^Xf SEPTEMBER, 1958 
STORIES vol. 16, no. 5 
0 
MAGAZINE 
» 
Also Published in Great Britain, France, Italy, Germany, Finland and Sweden 
NOVELLA 
LASTBORN 
CONTENTS 
by Isaac Asimov 6 
NOVELETS 
FROM AN UNSEEN CENSOR by Rose/ George Brown 78 
THING OF BEAUTY by Damon Knight 1 1 6 
SHORT STORIES 
ON THE DOUBLE 
THE STROKE OF THE SUN 
PERSONNEL PROBLEM . .. 
FEATURES 
EDITOR'S PAGE 
GALAXY'S FIVE STAR SHELF 
FORECAST 
by Lloyd Biggie, Jr. 45 
by Arthur C. Clarke 71 
byH.L.Gold 105 
by Willy Ley 59 
by H. L. Gold 2 
by Floyd C. Gale 101 
144 
SCIENCE DEPARTMENT 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
The Last of the Moas 
Cover by DEMBER showing Preparing Antarctica for Solar Conference. 
ROBERT M. GUINN, Publisher » H. L. GOLD, Editor 
WILLY LEY, Science Editor W. I. VAN DER POEL, Art Director 
JOAN J. De MARIO, Asst, to the Publisher SONDRA GRESEN, Asst, to Editor 
GALAXY Science Fiction is published monthly by Galaxy Publishing Corporation. Main offices: 
421 Hudson Street, New York 14, N. Y. 35c per .copy. Subscription: (12 copies) $3.50 per 
year in the United States, Canada, Mexico, South and Central America and U. S. Possessions. 
Elsewhere $4.50. Entered as second-class matter at the Post Office, New York, N. Y. Copyright, 
New York 1958, by Galaxy Publishing Corporation, Robert M. Guinn, president. All rights, including translations reserved. All material submitted must be accompanied by self-addressed stamped 
envelopes. The publisher assumes no responsibility for unsolicited material. All stories printed in 
this magazine are fiction, and any similarity between characters and actual persons is coincidental. 
Printed In the U.S.A. by The Guinn Co., Inc., N. Y. Title Reg. U.S. Pat. Off.
SFGRAM_START_ASIMOV
By ISAAC ASIMOV 
Illustrated by WOOD 
Edith Fellowes smoothed
her working smock as she 
always did before opening the elaborately locked door 
and stepping across the invisible 
dividing line between the is and 
the is not. She carried her notebook and her pen, although she 
no longer took notes except when 
she felt the absolute need for some 
report. 
This time she also carried a suitcase. (“Games for the boy,’* she 
had said, smiling, to the guard — 
who had long since stopped even 
thinking of questioning her and 
who waved her on.) 
And, as always, the ugly little 
boy knew that she had entered 
and came running to her, crying, 
“Miss Fellowes— Miss Fellowes—*’ 
in his soft, slurring way. 
“Timmie,” she said, and passed 
her hand over the shaggy brown 
hair on his misshapen little head. 
“What’s wrong?” 
He said, “Will Jerry be back to 
play again? I’m sorry about what 
happened.” 
“Never mind that now, Timmie. 
A scientific experiment or not, the patient 
was her responsibility • • • and all the more 
so for having died so many centuries ago! 
Is that why you’ve been crying?” 
He looked away. “Not just about 
that, Miss Fellowes. I dreamed 
again.” 
“The same dream?” Miss Fellowes’ lips set. Of course, the Jerry 
affair would bring back the dream. 
He nodded. His too-large teeth 
showed as he tried to smile and 
the lips of his forward-thrusting 
mouth stretched wide. ‘When will 
I be big enough to go out there. 
Miss Fellowes?” 
“Soon,” she said softly, feeling 
her heart break. “Soon.” 
Miss Fellowes let him take her 
hand and enjoyed the warm touch 
of the thick dry skin of his palm. 
He led her through the three 
rooms that made up the whole of 
Stasis Section One — comfortable 
enough, yes, but an eternal prison 
for the ugly little boy for nearly 
half of the seven (was it seven?) 
years of his life. 
He led her to the one window, 
looking out onto a scrubby woodland section of the world of is 
(now hidden by night) where a 
fence and painted instructions allowed no men to wander without 
permission. 
He pressed his nose against the 
window. “Out there. Miss Fellowes?” 
“Better places, nicer places,” 
she said sadly as she looked at his 
poor little imprisoned face outlined in profile against the window. 
The forehead retreated flatly and 
his hair lay down in tufts upon it 
The back of his skull bulged and 
seemed to make the head overheavy, so that it sagged and bent 
forward, forcing the whole body 
into a stoop. Already, bony ridges 
were beginning to bulge the skin 
above his eyes. His wide mouth 
thrust forward more prominently 
than did his wide and flattened 
nose and he had no chin to speak 
of, only a jaw-bone that curved 
smoothly down and back. He was 
small for his years and his stumpy 
legs were bowed. 
He was a very ugly little boy 
and Edith Fellowes loved him 
dearly. 
Her own face was behind his 
line of vision, so she allowed her 
chin the luxury of a tremor. 
They would not kill him. She 
would do anything to prevent it. 
Anything. She opened the suitcase 
and began taking out the clothes 
it contained. 
T^r ISS Fellowes had crossed the 
threshold of Stasis, Inc., for 
the first time just a little over 
three years before. She hadn’t the 
slightest idea of what Stasis meant 
or what the place did. No one 
did then, except those who worked 
there. In fact, it was only the day 
after she arrived that the news 
broke upon the world. 
At the time, it was just that 
they had advertised for a woman 
with knowledge of physiology, ex
perience with clinical chemistry 
and a love for children. Ekiith Fellowes had been a nurse in a maternity ward and believed she 
fulfilled those qualifications. 
Gerald Hoskins, whose nameplate on the desk included a Ph.D. 
after the name, scratched his cheek 
with his thumb arid looked at her 
steadily. 
Miss Fellowes automatically 
stiffened and felt her face (with 
its slightly asymmetric nose and 
its a-trifle-too-heavy eyebrows) 
twitch. 
He’s no dreamboat himself, she 
thought resentfully. He’s getting 
thick in the middle and thin on 
top and he’s got a sullen mouth. 
But the salary mentioned had been 
considerably higher than she had 
expected, so she waited. 
Hoskins said, “Now do you really love children?” 
“I wouldn’t say I did if I didn’t.” 
“Or do you just love pretty children?” 
Miss Fellowes said, “Children 
are children. Dr. Hoskins, and the 
ones that aren’t pretty are just the 
ones who may happen to need help 
most.” 
“Then suppose we take you 
on—” 
“You mean you’re offering me 
the job now?” 
He smiled briefly, and for a 
moment, his broad face had an absent-minded charm about it. He 
said, “I make quick decisions. So 
far, the offer is tentative, however. 
I may make as quick a decision to 
let you go. Are you ready to take 
the chance?” 
Miss Fellowes clutched at her 
purse and calculated just as swiftly as she could, then ignored calculations and followed impulse. 
“All right.” 
“Fine. We’re going to form the 
Stasis tonight and I think you had 
better be there to take over at 
once. That will be at 8 p.m. and 
I’d appreciate it if you could be 
here at 7:30.” 
“But what—” 
“Fine. Fine. That will be all 
now.” On signal, a smiling secretary came in to usher her out. 
Miss Fellowes stared back at 
Dr. Hoskins^ closed door for a moment. What was Stasis? What had 
this large barn of a building— with 
its badged employees, its makeshift corridors, and its unmistakable air of engineering — to do 
with children? 
She wondered if she should go 
back that evening or stay away 
and teach that arrogant man a lesson. But she knew she would be 
back if only out of sheer frustration. She would have to find out 
about the children. 
S HE came back at 7:30 and did 
not have to announce herself. 
One after another, men and women seemed to know her and to 
know her function. She found her
LASTBOR N 
self all but placed on skids as she 
was moved inward. 
Dr. Hoskins was there, but he 
only looked at her distantly and 
murmured, “Miss Fellowes.” 
He did not even suggest that she 
take a seat, but she drew one 
calmly up to the railing and sat 
down. 
, They were on a balcony, looking down into a large pit, filled 
with instruments that resembled a 
cross between the control panel of 
a spaceship and the working face 
of a computer. On one side were 
partitions that seemed to make up 
an unceilinged apartment, a giant 
dollhouse into the rooms of which 
she could look from above. 
She could see an electronic 
cooker and a freeze-space unit in 
one room and a washroom arrangement off another. And surely 
the object she made out in another 
room could only be part of a bed, 
a small bed. 
Hoskins was speaking to another man and, with Miss Fellowes, they made up the total occupancy of the balcony. Hoskins 
did not offer to introduce the other 
man, and Miss Fellowes eyed him 
surreptitiously. He was thin and 
quite fine-looking in a middle-aged 
way. He had a small mustache and 
keen eyes that seemed to busy 
themselves with everything. 
He was saying, “I won’t pretend 
for one moment that I understand 
all this, Dr. Hoskins; I mean ex
cept as a layman, a reasonably intelligent layman, may be expected 
to understand it. Still, if there’s 
one part I understand less than 
another, it’s this matter of selectivity. You can only reach out so 
far; that seems sensible — things 
get dimmer the further you go; it 
takes more energy. But then you 
can only reach out so near. That’s 
the puzzling part.” 
“I can make it seem less paradoxical, Deveney, if you will allow me to use an analogy.” 
Miss Fellowes placed the new 
man the moment she heard his 
name, and despite herself was impressed. This was obviously Candide Deveney, the science writer 
of the Telenews, who was notori. ously at the scene of every m^jor 
scientific breakthrough. She even 
recognized his face as one she saw 
on , the newsplate when the landing on Mars had been announced. 
So Dr. Hoskins must have something important here. 
“By all means, use an analogy,” 
said Deveney ruefully, “if you 
think it will help.” 
“Well, then, you can’t read a 
book with ordinary-size print if 
it is held six feet from your eyes, 
but you can read it if you hold it 
one foot from your eyes. So far, 
the closer the better. If you bring 
the book to within one inch of 
your eyes, however, you’ve lost it 
again. There is such a thing as being too close, you see.” 
‘‘Hmm,” said Deveney. 
“Or take another example. Your 
right shoulder is about thirty 
inches from the tip of your right 
forefinger and you can place your 
right forefinger on your right shoulder. Your right elbow is only half 
the distance from the tip of your 
right forefinger; it should by all 
ordinary logic be easier to reach, 
and yet you cannot place your 
right finger on your right elbow. 
Again, there is such a thing as being too close.” 
Deveney said, “May I use these 
analogies in my story?” 
“Well, of course. Only too glad. 
I’ve been waiting long enough for 
someone like you to have a story. 
1*11 give you anything else you 
want. It is time, finally, that we 
want the world looking over our 
shoulder. They’ll see something.” 
Miss Fellowes found herself admiring his calm certainty despite 
herself. There was strength there. 
Deveney said, “How far out will 
you reach?” 
“Forty thousand years.” 
Miss Fellowes drew in her 
breath sharply. 
Years? 
^ INHERE was tension in the air. 
The men at the controls scarcely moved. One man at a microphone spoke into it in a soft monotone, in short phrases that made no 
sense to Miss Fellowes. 
Deveney, leaning over the bal
cony railing with an intent stare, 
said, “Will we see anything. Dr. 
Hoskins?” 
“What? No. Nothing till the job 
is done. We detect indirectly, 
something on the principle of radar, except that we use mesons 
rather than radiation. Mesons 
reach backward under the proper 
conditions. Some are reflected and 
we must analyze the reflections.” 
“That sounds difficult.” 
Hoskins smiled again, briefly as 
always. “It is the end-p>roduct of 
fifty years of research; forty years 
of it before I entered the field. 
Yes, it’s difficult.” 
The man at the microphone 
raised one hand. 
Hoskins said, “We’ve had the 
fix on one particular moment in 
time for weeks; breaking it, remaking it after calculating our own 
movements in time; making certain that we could handle timeflow with sufficient precision. This 
must work now.” 
But his forehead glistened. 
Ekiith Fellowes found herself 
out of her seat and at the balcony 
railing, but there was nothing to 
see. 
The man at the microphone 
said quietly, “Now.” 
There was a space of silence 
sufficient for one breath and then 
the sound of a terrified little-child 
scream from the dollhouse rooms. 
Terror! Piercing terror! 
Miss Fellowes’ head twisted in 
LASTBOR N 
the direction of the cry. A child 
was involved. She had forgotten. 
And Hoskins’ fist pounded on 
the railing and he said in a tight 
voice, trembling with triumph, 
"Did it!” 
l^T ISS Fellowes was urged down 
the short spiral flight of 
stairs by the hard press of Hoskins* palm between her shoulder 
blades. He did not speak to her. 
The men who had been at the 
controls were standing about now, 
smiling, smoking, watching the 
three as they entered on the main 
floor. A very soft buzz sounded 
from the direction of the dollhouse. 
Hoskins said to Deveney, "It*s 
perfectly safe to enter Stasis. IVe 
done it a thousand times. There’s 
a queer sensation, but it’s momentary and entirely harmless.” 
He stepped through an open 
door in mute demonstration and 
Deveney, smiling stiffly and drawing an audibly deep breath, followed him. 
Hoskins said, "Miss Fellowes! 
Please!” He crooked his forefinger impatiently. 
Miss Fellowes nodded and 
stepped stiffly through. It was as 
though a ripple went through her, 
an internal tickle. 
But, once inside, all seemed normal. There was the smell of the 
fresh wood of the dollhouse and 
of — of soil, somehow. 
There was silence now, no voice 
at least, but there was the dry 
shuffling of feet, a scrabbling as of 
a hand over wood — then a low 
moan. 
"Where is it?” asked Miss Fellowes, in distress. Didn’t these fool 
men careF 
It was in the bedroom; at least 
in the room with the bed in it. 
It was standing naked, with its 
small, dirt-smeared chest heaving 
raggedly. A bushel of dirt and 
coarse grass spread over the floor 
at its bare brown feet The smell 
of soil came from it and a touch 
of something fetid. 
Hoskins followed her horrified 
glance and said with annoyance, 
"You can’t pluck a child cleanly 
out of time. Miss Fellowes. We had 
to take some of the surroundings 
with it for safety. Or would you 
have preferred to have it arrive 
here minus a leg or with only half 
a head?” 
"P/ease.'” said Miss Fellowes, in 
an agony of revulsion. "Are we 
just to stand here? The poor child 
is frightened. And it’s filthy T 
She was quite correct. It was 
smeared with encrusted dirt and 
grease and had a scratch on its 
thigh that looked red and sore. 
As. Hoskins approached, the boy, 
who seemed to be about three or 
four years of age, hunched low and 
backed away rapidly. He lifted his 
upper lip and snarled in a hissing 
fashion like a cat. With a rapid 
gesture, Hoskins seized both the 
child’s arms and lifted him, writhing and screaming, from the floor. 
Miss Fellowes said, “Hold him 
now. He needs a warm bath first. ’ 
Have you the equipment? If so, 
have it brought here, and I’ll need 
to have help in handling him just 
at first. Then, too, for heaven’s 
sake, have all this trash and filth 
removed.” 
She was giving the orders now 
and she felt perfectly good about 
that. And because now she was an 
efficient nurse, rather than a confused spectator, she looked at the 
child with a clinical eye — and 
hesitated for one shocked moment. 
She saw past the dirt and shrieking, past the thrashing of limbs 
and useless twisting. She saw the 
boy himself. 
It was the ugliest little boy she 
had ever seen. He was horribly 
ugly from misshapen head to 
bandy legs. 
She got him cleaned with three 
men helping her and with others 
milling about in their efforts to 
clean the room. She worked in silence and with a sense of outrage, 
annoyed by the continued strugglings and outcries of the boy and 
by the undignified drenchings of 
soapy water to which she was subjected. 
Dr. Hoskins had hinted that the 
child would not be pretty, but 
that was far from stating that it 
would be repulsively deformed. 
And there was a stench that soap 
and water was alleviating only 
little by little. 
She had the strong desire to 
thrust the boy, soaped as he was, 
into Hoskins’ arms and walk out; 
but there was the pride of profession. She had accepted an assignment, after all. And there would 
be the look in Hoskins’ eyes. A 
cold look that would read: Only 
pretty children, Miss Fellowes? 
He was standing apart from 
them, watching coolly from a distance with a half-smile on his face 
when he caught her eyes, as 
though amused at her outrage. 
She decided she would wait a 
while before quitting. To do so 
now would only demean her. 
W HEN the boy was a bearable 
pink and smelled only of 
soap, she felt better anyway. His 
cries changed to whimpers of exhaustion as he watched warily, 
eyes moving in quick frightened 
suspicion from one to another of 
those in the room. His cleanness 
accentuated his thin nakedness as 
he shivered with cold after his 
bath: 
Miss Fellowes said sharply, 
“Bring me a nightgown for him!” 
A nightgown appeared at once. 
It was as though everything were 
ready and yet nothing at hand unless she gave orders; as though 
they were deliberately leaving this 
in her charge without help, to test 
her. 
LASTBORN 
The newsman, Deveney, approached and said, “111 hold him, 
miss. You won’t get it on by yourself.” 
‘‘Thank you,” said Miss Fellowes. And it was a battle indeed, 
but the nightgown went on, and 
when the boy made as though to 
rip it off, she slapped his hand. 
The boy reddened, but did not 
cry. He stared at her and the 
splayed fingers of one hand moved 
slowly across the flannel of the 
nightgown, feeling the strangeness 
of it. 
Miss Fellowes thought desperately: Well, what next? 
Everyone seemed in suspended 
animation waiting for her, even 
the ugly little boy. 
Miss Fellowes said, “Have you 
provided food? Milk?” 
A mobile unit was wheeled in, 
with its refrigeration compartment 
containing three quarts of milk, 
with a warming unit and a supply 
of fortifications in the form of 
vitamin drops, copper-cobalt-iron 
syrup and others she had no time 
to be concerned with. There was 
a variety of canned self-farming 
junior foods. 
She used milk, simply milk, to 
begin with. The radar unit heated 
the milk to a set temperature in 
a matter of ten seconds and clicked 
off, and she put some in a saucer. 
She had a certainty that the boy 
wouldn’t know how to handle a 
cup. 
Miss Fellowes nodded and said 
to the boy, “Drink. Drink.” She 
made a gesture as though to raise 
the milk to her mouth. The boy’s 
eyes followed, but he made no 
move. 
Suddenly, the nurse seized the 
boy’s upper arm in one hand and 
dipped the other in the milk. She 
dashed the milk across his lips, so 
that it dripped down cheeks and 
receding chin. 
For a moment, the child uttered 
a high-pitched cry; then his tongue 
moved over his wetted lips. Miss 
Fellowes stepped back. 
The boy approached the saucer, 
bent toward it, then looked up and 
behind sharply as though expecting a crouching enemy; bent again 
and licked at the milk eagerly, like 
a cat. He did not lift the saucer. 
Miss Fellowes allowed a bit of 
the revulsion she felt show on her 
face. She couldn’t help it 
Deveney caught that, perhaps. 
He said, “Does the nurse know. 
Dr. Hoskins?” 
“Know what?” demanded Miss 
Fellowes. 
Deveney hesitated, but Hoskins 
(again that look of detached 
amusement on his face) said, 
“Well, tell her.” 
Deveney addressed Miss Fellowes. “You may not suspect it 
miss, but you happen to be the 
first civilized woman in history 
ever to be taking care of a Neanderthal youngster.” 
S HE turned on Hoskins with a 
kind of controlled ferocity. 
“You might have told me, Doctor.” 
“Why? What difference does it 
make?” 
“You said a child.” 
“Isn’t that a child? Have you 
ever had a puppy or a kitten, 
Miss Fellowes? Are those closer to 
the human? If that were a baby 
chimpanzee, would you be repelled? You’re a nurse. Miss Fellowes. Your record states you 
worked in a maternity ward for 
three years. Have you ever refused to take care of a deformed 
infant?” 
Miss Fellowes felt her case slipping away. She said, with much 
less decision, “You might have 
told me.” 
“And you would have refused 
the position? Well, do you refuse 
it now?” He gazed at her coolly, 
while Deveney watched from the 
other side of the room, and the 
Neanderthal child, having finished 
the milk and licked the plate, 
looked up at her with a wet face 
and wide, longing eyes. 
The boy pointed to the milk 
and suddenly burst out in a short 
series of sounds repeated over and 
over; sounds made up of gutturals 
and elaborate tongue-clickings. 
Miss Fellowes said, in surprise, 
“Why, he talks.” 
“Of course,” said Hoskins. 
“Homo neanderthalensis is not a 
truly separate species, but rather 
a sub-species of Homo sapiens. 
Why shouldn’t he talk? He’s probably asking for more milk.” 
Automatically, Miss Fellowes 
reached for the bottle of milk, but 
Hoskins seized her wrist. “Now, 
Miss Fellowes, before we go any 
further, are you staying on the 
job?” 
Miss Fellowes shook free in annoyance. “Won’t you feed him if 
I don’t? I’ll stay with him — for 
a while.” 
She poured the milk. 
Hoskins said, “We are going to 
leave you with the boy. Miss Fellowes. This is the only door to 
Stasis Section One and it is elaborately locked and guarded. I’ll 
want you to learn the details of 
the lock which will, of course, be 
keyed to your fingerprints as they 
are already keyed to mine. The 
space overhead—” he looked upward to the open ceilings of the 
dollhouse— “is also guarded and we 
will be warned if anything untoward takes place in here.” 
Miss Fellowes said indignantly, 
“You mean I’ll be under view.” 
She thought suddenly of her own 
survey of the room interiors from 
the balcony. 
“No, no,” said Hoskins seriously, “your privacy will be respected 
completely. The view will consist 
of electronic symbolism, which 
only a computer will deal with. 
Now you will stay with him tonight, Miss Fellowes, and every 
LASTBOR N 
night until further notice. You will 
be relieved during the day according to some schedule you will find 
convenient. We will allow you to 
arrange that.” 
Miss Fellowes looked about the 
dollhouse with a puzzled expression. “But why all this, Dr. Hoskins? Is the boy dangerous?” 
“It’s a matter of energy, Miss 
Fellowes. He must never be allowed to leave these rooms. Never. 
Not for an instant. Not for any 
reason. Is that clear?” 
Miss Fellowes raised her chin. 
“I understand the orders. Dr. Hoskins, and the nursing profession is 
accustomed to placing its duties 
ahead of self-preservation.” 
“Good. You can always signal 
if you need anyone.” And the two 
men left. 
IMF ISS Fellowes turned to the 
boy. He was watching her 
and there was still milk in the 
saucer. Laboriously, she tried to 
show him how to lift the saucer 
and place it to his lips. He resisted, 
but let her touch him without crying out. 
Always, his frightened eyes were 
on her, watching, watching for the 
one false move. She found herself 
soothing him, trying to move her 
hand very slowly toward his hair, 
letting him see it every inch of the 
way, see there was no harm in it. 
And she succeeded in stroking 
his hair for an instant. 
She said, “Fm going to have to 
show you how to use the bathroom. Do you think you can 
learn?” 
She spoke quietly, kindly, knowing he would not understand the 
words but hoping he would respond 
• * 
to the calmness of the tone. 
The boy launched into a clicking phrase again. 
She said, “May I take your 
hand?” 
She held out hers and the boy 
looked at it. She left it outstretched and waited. The boy^s 
own hand crept forward toward 
hers. 
“That’s right,” she said. 
It approached within an inch of 
hers and then the boy’s courage 
failed him. He snatched it back. 
“Well,” said Miss Fellowes 
calmly, “we’ll try again l^ter. 
Would you like to sit down here?” 
She patted the mattress of the bed. 
The hours passed slowly and 
progress was minute. She did not 
succeed with either bathroom or 
with the bed. In fact, after the 
child had given unmistakable signs 
of sleepiness, he lay down on the 
bare floor and then, with a quick 
movement, rolled beneath the bed. 
She bent to look at him and his 
eyes gleam^ out at her as he 
tongue-clicked at her. 
“All right,” she said, “if you feel 
safer there, you sleep there.” 
She closed the door to the bedroom and retired to the cot that 
had been placed for her use in the 
largest room. At her instance, a 
makeshift canopy had been 
stretched over it. She thought: 
Those stupid men will have to 
place a mirror in this room and 
a larger chest of drawers and a 
separate washroom if they expect 
me to spend nights here. 
TT was difficult to sleep. She 
-■* found herself straining to hear 
possible sounds in the next room. 
He couldn’t get out, could he? The 
walls were sheer and impossibly 
high, but suppose the child could 
climb and leap like a monkey? 
Well, Hoskins said there were 
observational devices watching 
through the ceiling. 
She thought: Can he be dangerous? Physically dangerous? 
Surely, Hoskins couldn’t have 
meant that. Surely, he would not 
have left her here alone, if— 
She tried to laugh at herself. 
He was only a three- or four-yearold child. Still, she had not succeeded in cutting his nails. If he 
should attack her with nails and 
teeth while she slept— 
Her breath came quickly. Oh, 
ridiculous, and yet— 
She listened with painful attentiveness, and this time she heard 
the sound. 
The boy was crying. 
Not shrieking in fear or anger; 
not yelling or screaming. He was 
crying softly, and the sound was 
the heartbroken sobbing of a lonely, lonely child. 
For the first time. Miss Fellowes thought with a pang: Poor 
thing! 
Of course, it was a child; what 
did the shape of its head matter? 
It was a child that had been orphaned before. Not only its mother 
and father were gone, but all its 
species. Snatched callously out of 
time, it was now the only creature 
of its kind in the world. The last. 
The only. 
She felt pity for it strengthen 
and with it shame at her own callousness. Tucking her own nightgown carefully about her calves 
(incongruously, she thought: Tomorrow I’ll have to bring in a 
bathrobe), she got out of bed and 
went into the boy’s room. 
“Little boy,” she called in a 
whisper. “Little boy.” 
She was about to reach under 
the bed, but she thought of a possible bite and did not. Instead, she 
turned on the night light and 
moved the bed. 
He was huddled in the corner, 
knees up against his chin, looking 
up at her with blurred and apprehensive eyes. 
In the dim light, she was less 
aware of his repulsiveness. 
“Poor boy,” she said, “poor boy.” 
She felt him stiffen as she stroked 
his hair, then relax. “Poor boy. 
May I hold you?” 
She sat down on the floor next 
LASTBOR N 
to him and slowly and rhythmically stroked his hair, his cheek, his 
arm. Softly, she began to sing a 
slow and gentle song. 
He lifted his head at that, staring at her mouth in the dimness, 
as though wondering at the sound. 
She maneuvered him closer 
while he listened to her. Slowly, 
she pressed gently against the side 
of his head, until it rested on her 
shoulder. She put her arm under 
his thighs and with a smooth and 
imhurried motion lifted him into 
her lap. 
She continued singing, the same 
simple verse over and over, while 
she rocked back and forth, back 
and forth. 
He stopped crying and after a 
while the smooth burr of his 
breathing showed he was asleep. 
With infinite care, she pushed 
his bed back against the wall and 
laid him down on it. She covered 
him and stared down. His face 
looked so peaceful and little-boy 
as he slept. It didn’t matter so 
much that it was so ugly. Really. 
She began to tiptoe out, then 
thought: What if he wakes up? 
She came back, battled irresolutely with herself, then sighed and 
slowly got into bed with the child. 
It was too small for her. She 
was cramped and made uneasy by 
the open ceiling, but the child’s 
hand crept into hers and, somehow, she fell asleep in that position. 
Che awoke with a start and a 
^ wild impulse to scream. The 
latter she just managed to suppress into a gurgle. The boy was 
looking at her, wide-eyed. It took 
her a long moment to remember 
getting into bed with him and now, 
slowly, without unfixing her eyes 
from his, she stretched out one leg 
carefully and let it touch the floor, 
then the other one. 
She cast a quick, imcomfortable 
glance toward the open ceiling, 
then tensed her muscles for quick, 
disengagement. 
But at that moment, the boy’s 
stubby fingers reached out and 
touched her lips. He said something. 
She shrank at the touch. He was 
terribly ugly in the light of day. 
The boy spoke again. He 
opened his own mouth and gestured with his hand as though 
something were coming out. 
Miss Fellowes guessed at the 
meaning and said tremulously, “Do 
you want me to sing?” 
The boy said nothing but stared 
at her mouth. 
In a voice slightly off-key with 
tension. Miss Fellowes began the 
little song she had sung the night 
before. The ugly little boy smiled. 
He swayed clumsily in rough time 
to the music and made a little 
gurgly sound that might have been 
the beginnings of a laugh. 
Miss Fellowes sighed inwardly. 
Music hath charms to soothe the 
savage breast. It might help— 
She said, "You wait. Let me 
get myself fixed up. It will just 
take a minute. Then 111 make 
breakfast for you.” 
She worked rapidly, conscious 
of the lack of ceiling at all times. 
The boy remained in bed, watching her when she was in view. She 
smiled at him at those times and 
waved. At the end, he waved back, 
and she was charmed by that. 
Finally, she said, "Would you 
like oatmeal with milk?” It took 
a moment to prepare, and then 
she beckoned to him. 
Whether he imderstood the gesture or followed the aroma. Miss 
Fellowes did not know, but he got 
out of bed. 
She tried to show him how to 
use a spoon, but he shrank away 
from it in fright. (Time enough, 
she thought.) She compromised on 
insisting that he lift the bowl in 
his hands. He did it clumsily 
enough and it was incredibly messy, but most of the food did get 
into him. 
She tried the drinking milk in 
a glass this time, and the little 
boy whined when he found the 
opening too small for him to get 
his face into. She held his hand, 
forcing it around the glass, making 
him tip it, forcing his mouth to 
the rim. 
Again a mess but again most 
went into him, and she was used to 
messes. 
The washroom, to her surprise 
and relief, was a less frustrating 
matter. He understood what it was 
she expected him to do. 
She found herself patting his 
head, saying, "Good boy. Smart 
boy.” 
And to Miss Fellowes’ exceeding pleasure, the boy smiled at 
that. She thought: When he smiles, 
he’s quite bearable. Really. 
L ater in the day, the gentle' men of the Telepress arrived. 
She held the boy in her arms 
and he climg to her wildly while, 
across the open door, they set 
cameras to work. The commotion 
frightened the boy and he began 
to cry, but it was ten minutes before Miss Fellowes was allowed 
to retreat and put him in the next 
room. 
She emerged again, flushed with 
indignation, walked out of the 
apartment (for the first time in 
eighteen hours) and closed the 
door behind her. "I think you’ve 
had enough. It will take me a 
while to quiet him. Go away.” 
"Sure, sure,” said the gentleman 
from the Times-Herald. "But is 
that really a Neanderthal or is this 
some kind of gag?” 
"I assure you,” said Hoskins’ 
voice suddenly, from the background, "that this no gag. The 
child is authentic Homo neanderthalensis.” 
"Is it a boy or a girl?” 
LASTBORN 
“Boy,” said Miss Fellowes 
briefly. 
“Apeboy,” said the gentleman 
from the News, “That’s what weVe 
got here. Apeboy. How does he 
act, Nurse?” 
“He acts exactly like a little 
boy,” snapped Miss Fellowes, annoyed into the defensive, “and he 
is not an apeboy. His name is — 
is Timothy, Timmie — and he is 
perfectly normal in his behavior.” 
She had chosen the name Timothy at angry random. It was the 
first time a name for him had occurred to her. 
“Timmie the Apeboy,” said the 
gentleman from the News and, as 
it turned out, Timmie the Apeboy 
was the name under which the 
child became known to the world. 
The gentleman from the Globe 
turned to Hoskins and said, “Doc, 
what do you expect to do with the 
apeboy?” 
Hoskins shrugged. “My original 
plan was completed when I proved 
it possible to bring him here. However, the anthropologists will be 
very interested, I imagine, and the 
physiologists. We have here, after 
all, a creature which is at the edge 
of being human. We should learn 
a great deal about ourselves and 
our ancestry from him.” 
“How long will you keep him?” 
“Until such time as we need the 
space more than we need him. 
A fairly long while, perhaps.” 
The gentleman from the News 
said, “Can you bring it out into 
the open so we can set up subetheric equipment and put on a 
real show?” 
“I’m sorry, but the child cannot 
be removed from Stasis.” 
“Exactly what is Stasis?” 
“Ah.” Hoskins permitted himself one of his short smiles. “That 
would take a great deal of explanation, gentlemen. In Stasis, time 
as we know it doesn’t exist. Those 
rooms are inside an invisible bubble that is not exactly part of our 
universe. That is why the child 
could be plucked out of time as 
it was.” 
“Well, wait now,” said the gentleman from the News discontentedly, “what are you giving us? 
The nurse goes into the room and 
out of it.” 
“And so can any of you,” said 
Hoskins, matter-of-factly. “You 
would be moving parallel to the 
lines of temporal force and no 
great energy gain or loss would be 
involved. The child, however, was 
taken from the far past. It moved 
across the lines and gained temporal potential. To move it into 
the Universe and into our own 
time would absorb enough energy 
to burn out every line in the place 
and probably blank out all power 
in the city of Washington.” 
The newsmen were writing 
down sentences busily as Hoskins 
spoke them. They did not understand and they were sure their 
readers would not, but it sounded 
scientific and that was what 
counted. 
The gentleman from the TimesHerald said, “Would you be available for an all-circuit interview 
tonight?” 
“I think so,” said Hoskins at 
once, and they all moved off. 
Miss Fellowes stared after them. 
She understood all this about 
Stasis and temporal force as little 
as the newsmen, but she managed 
to get this much: 
Timmie’s imprisonment (she 
found herself thinking of the little 
boy as Timmie) was a real one, 
and not one imposed by the arbitrary fiat of Hoskins. Apparently 
it was impossible to let him out 
of Stasis at all, ever. 
She was suddenly aware of his 
crying and she hastened in to console him. 
11/1' ISS Fellowes did not have a 
chance to see Hoskins on 
the all-circuit hookup, and though 
his interview was beamed to every 
part of the world and even to the 
outpost on the Moon, it did not 
penetrate the apartment in which 
Miss Fellowes and the ugly little 
boy lived. 
But he was down the next morning, radiant and joyful. 
Miss Fellowes said, “Did the 
interview go well?” 
“Extremely. And how is — Timmie?” 
Miss Fellowes found herself 
pleased at his use of the name. 
“Doing very well. Now come out 
here, Timmie. The nice gentleman 
will not hurt you.” 
But Timmie stayed in the other 
room, with a lock of his matted 
hair showing behind the barrier of 
the door and, occasionally, the corner of an eye. 
“Actually,” said Miss Fellowes, 
“he is settling down amazingly. He 
is quite intelligent.” 
“Are you surprised?” 
She hesitated just a moment, 
then said, “Yes, I am. I suppose I 
thought he was an apeboy.” 
“Well, apeboy or not, he’s done 
a great deal for us. He’^s put Stasis, 
Inc., on the map. We’re in. Miss 
Fellowes — we’re in.” It was as 
though he had to express his triumph to someone, even if only to 
Miss Fellowes. 
“Oh?” She let him talk. 
He put his hands in his pockets 
and said, “We’ve been working on 
a shoestring for ten years, scrounging funds a penny at a time wherever we could. We had to shoot 
the works on one big show. It 
was everything or nothing. And 
when I say the works, I mean it. 
This attempt to bring in a Neanderthal took every cent we could 
borrow or steal, and some of it was 
stolen — funds for other projects, 
used for this one without permission. If that experiment hadn’t succeeded, I’d have been through.” 
LASTBORN 
Miss Fellowes said abruptly, ‘‘Is 
that why there are no ceilings?” 
“Eh?” Hoskins looked up. 
“Was there no money for ceilings?” 
“Oh. Well, that wasn’t the only 
reason. We didn’t know in advance exactly how old the Neanderthal might prove to be, except 
that it was a child. We can detect 
only dimly in time, and it was 
possible we might have had to 
deal with him from a distance, 
like a caged animal.” 
“But since that hasn’t turned 
out to be so, I suppose you can 
build a ceiling now.” 
“Now, yes. We have plenty of 
money now. Funds have been 
promised from every source. This 
is all wonderful. Miss Fellowes.” 
His broad face gleamed with a 
smile that lasted, and when he 
left, even the back of his head 
seemed to be smiling. 
Miss Fellowes thought: He’s 
quite a nice man when he’s offguard and forgets about being 
scientific. 
She wondered for an idle 
moment if he was married, then 
dismissed the thought in self-embarrassment. 
“Timmie,” she called. “Time to 
eat, Timmie.” 
TN the months that passed. Miss 
Fellowes felt herself grow to 
be an integral part of Stasis, Inc. 
She was given a small office of her 
own with her name on the door, 
an office close to the dollhouse (as 
she never stopped calling Timmie’s Stasis bubble). She was 
given a substantial raise. The dollhouse was covered by a ceiling; 
its furnishings were elaborated and 
improved; a second washroom was 
added — and, even so, she gained 
an apartment of her own on the 
institute grounds and, on occasion, did not stay with Timmie 
during the night. An intercom was 
set up between the dollhouse and 
her apartment and Timmie learned 
how to use it. 
Miss Fellowes got used to Timmie. She even grew less conscious 
of his ugliness. One day she found 
herself staring at an ordinary boy 
in the street and finding something 
bulgy and unattractive in his high 
domed forehead and jutting chin. 
She had to shake herself to break 
the spell. 
It was more pleasant to grow 
used to Hoskins’ occasional visits. 
It was obvious he welcomed escape from his increasingly harried 
role as head of Stasis, Inc., and 
that he took a sentimental interest 
in the child who had started it all, 
but it seemed to Miss Fellowes 
that he also enjoyed talking to 
her. 
(She had learned some facts 
about Hoskins, too. He had invented the method of analyzing 
the reflection of the past-penetrating mesonic beam; he had invented 
the method of establishing Stasis; 
his coldness was only an effort to 
hide a kindly nature; and, oh yes, 
he was married.) 
What Miss Fellowes could not 
get used to was the fact that she 
was engaged in a scientific experiment. Despite all she could do, 
she found herself getting personally involved to the point of quarreling with the physiologists. 
On one occasion, Hoskins came 
down and found her in the midst 
of a hot urge to kill. They had no 
right; they had no right — even 
if he was a Neanderthal, he still 
wasn’t an animal! 
She was glaring after them in a 
blind fury; glaring out the open 
door and listening to Timmie’s 
sobbing, when she noticed Hoskins 
standing before her. He might 
have been there for minutes. 
He said, “May I come in?” 
She nodded curtly, then hurried to Timmie, who clung to her, 
curling his little bandy legs — still 
thin, so thin — about her. 
Hoskins watched, then said 
gravely, “He seems quite unhappy.” 
Miss Fellowes said, “I don’t 
blame him. They’re at him every 
day now with their blood samples 
and their probings. They keep him 
on synthetic diets that I wouldn’t 
feed a pig.” 
“It’s the sort of thing they can’t 
try on a human, you know.” 
“And they can’t try it on Tim
mie, either. Dr. Hoskins, I insist! 
You told me it was Timmie’s 
coming that put Stasis, Inc., on the 
map. If you have any gratitude for 
that at all, you’ve got to keep them 
away from the poor thing at least 
until he’s old enough to understand a little more. After he’s had 
a bad session with them, he has 
nightmares; he can’t sleep. Now 
I warn you—” she reached a sudden peak of rage— “I’m not letting 
them in here any more!” 
She realized that she had 
screamed that, but she couldn’t 
help it. 
She said, more quietly, “I know 
he’s a Neanderthal, but there’s a 
great deal we don’t appreciate 
about Neanderthals. I’ve read up 
on them. They had a culture of 
their own. Some of the greatest 
human inventions arose in Neanderthal times. The domestication 
of animals, for instance; the wheel; 
various techniques in grinding 
stone. They even had spiritual 
yearnings— they buried their dead 
and buried possessions with the 
body, showing they believed in a 
life after death. It amounts to the 
fact that they invented religion. 
Doesn’t that mean Timmie has a 
right to human treatment?” 
^H£ patted the little boy gently 
^ on his bottom and sent him off 
into his playroom. As the door 
was opened, Hoskins smiled briefly at the display of toys. 
LASTBORN 
Miss Fellowes said defensively, 
‘‘The poor child deserves his toys. 
It’s all he has and he earns them 
with what he goes through.” 
“No, no. No objections, I assure you. I was just thinking how 
you’ve changed since the first day, 
when you were so angry because I 
had foisted a Neanderthal on you.” 
Miss Fellowes said in a low 
voice, “I suppose I didn’t—” and 
faded off. 
Hoskins changed the subject. 
“How old would you say he is. 
Miss Fellowes?” 
“I can’t say, since we don’t know 
how Neanderthals develop. In size, 
he’d be about three, but Neanderthals are smaller generally, and 
with all the tampering that’s done 
to him, he probably isn’t growing. 
The way he’s learning English, 
though, I’d say he was well over 
four.” 
“Really? I haven’t noticed anything about learning English in the 
reports.” 
“He won’t speak to anyone but 
m^. For now, anyway. He’s terribly afraid of others, and no wonder. But he can ask for any article 
of food; he can indicate any need, 
practically; and he understands almost anything I say. Of course—” 
she watched him shrewdly, trying 
to estimate if this were the time 
—“his development may not continue.” 
“Why not?” 
“Any child needs stimulation 
and this one lives a life of solitary 
confinement. I do what I can, but 
I’m not with him all the time and 
I’m not all he needs. What I mean. 
Dr. Hoskins, is that he needs another boy to play with.” 
Hoskins nodded slowly. “Unfortunately, there’s only one of him, 
isn’t there? Poor child.” 
Miss Fellowes warmed to him 
at once. “You do like Timmie, 
don’t you?” It was so nice to have 
someone else feel like that. 
“Oh, yes,” said Hoskins, and 
with his guard down, she could see 
the weariness in his eyes. 
Miss Fellowes dropped her 
plans to push the matter at once. 
She said, with real concern, “You 
look worn out. Dr. Hoskins.” 
“Do I, Miss Fellowes? I’ll have 
to practice looking more lifelike 
then.” 
“I suppose Stasis, Inc., is very 
busy and that that keeps you on 
the go.” 
Hoskins shrugged. “You suppose right. It’s a matter of animal, 
vegetable and mineral in equal 
parts. Miss Fellowes. But then I 
suppose you haven’t ever seen 
our displays.” 
“Actually, I haven’t. But it’s not 
because I’m not interested. It’s 
just that I’ve been so busy myself.” 
“Well, you’re not all that busy 
right now,” he said with impulsive decision. “I’ll call for you tomorrow at eleven and give you a 
personal tour. How’s that?” 
She smiled happily. “I’d love it” 
He nodded and smiled in his 
turn and left 
Miss Fellowes hummed at intervals for the rest of the day. 
Really — to think so was ridiculous, of course — but really, it was 
almost like — like making a date. 
was right on time the next 
day, smiling and pleasant. 
She had replaced her nurse’s imiform with a dress. One of conservative cut, to be sure, but she 
hadn’t felt so feminine in years. 
He complimented her on her 
appearance with staid formality 
and she accepted with equally 
formal grace. It was really a perfect prelude, she thought. And 
then the additional thought came: 
Prelude to what? 
She shut that off by hastening 
to say good-by to Timmie and to 
assure him she would be back 
soon. She made sure he knew all 
about what was for lunch and 
where it was. 
Hoskins took her into the new 
wing, into which she had never 
yet gone. It still had the odor of 
newness about it and the sound of 
construction, softly heard, was indication enough that it was still being extended. 
“Animal, vegetable and mineral,” said Hoskins, as he had the 
day before. “Animal right there; 
our most spectacular exhibits.” 
The space was divided into 
many rooms, each a separate 
Stasis bubble. Hoskins brought 
her to the viewglass of one and she 
looked in. What she saw impressed 
her first as a scaled, tailed chicken. 
Skittering on two thin legs, it ran 
from wall to wall, with its delicate 
birdlike head, surmounted by a 
bony keel like the comb of a 
rooster, looking this way and that. 
The paws on its small forelimbs 
clenched and unclenched constantly. 
Hoskins said, “It’s our dinosaur. 
We’ve had it for months. I don’t 
know when we’ll be able to let go 
of it.” 
“Dinosaur?” 
“Did you exp>ect a giant?” 
“One does, I suppose, though I 
know some of them are small.” 
“A small one is all we aimed 
for, believe me. Generally, it’s under investigation, but this seems 
to be an open hour. Some interesting things have been discovered. 
For instance, it is not entirely coldblooded. It has an imperfect method of maintaining internal temperatures higher than that of its 
environment. Unfortunately, it’s a 
male. Ever since we brought it in, 
we’Ve been trying to get a fix on 
another that may be female, but 
we’ve had no luck yet.” 
“Why female?” 
He looked at her quizzically. 
“So that we might have .a fighting chance to obtain fertile eggs, 
and baby dinosaurs.” 
LASTBORN 
“Of course ” 
He led her to the trilobite section. “That’s Professor Dwayne of 
Washington University,” he said. 
“He’s a nuclear chemist. If I recall correctly, he’s taking an isotope ratio on the oxygen of the 
water.” 
“Why?” 
“It’s primeval water; at least 
half a billion years old. The isotope ratio gives the temperature 
of the ocean at that time. He himself happens to ignore the trilobites, but others are chiefly concerned in dissecting them. They’re 
the lucky ones, because all they 
need are scalpels and microscopes. 
Dwayne has to set up a mass spectrograph each time he conducts an 
experiment.” 
“Why’s that? Can’t he-” 
“No, he can’t. He can’t take 
anything out of the room.” 
^T^HERE were samples of primordial plant life, too, and 
chunks of rock formations. Those 
were the vegetable and mineral. 
And every specimen had its investigator. It was like a museum; a 
museum brought to life and serving as a super-active center of research. 
“And you have to supervise all 
of this, Dr. Hoskins?” 
“Only indirectly. Miss Fellowes. 
I have subordinates, thank heaven. 
My own interest is entirely in the 
theoretical aspects of the matter: 
the nature of time, the technique 
of mesonic intertemporal detection and so on. I would exchange 
all this for a method of detecting 
objects closer in time than ten 
thousand years ago. If we could 
get into historical times—” 
He was interrupted by a commotion at one of the distant 
booths, a thin voice raised querulously. He frowned, muttered hastily, “Excuse me,” and hastened 
off. 
Miss Fellowes followed as best 
she could without actually running. 
An elderly man, thinly bearded 
and red-faced, was saying, “I had 
vital aspects of my investigations 
to complete. Don’t you understand 
that?” 
A uniformed technician with 
the interwoven SI monogram (for 
Stasis, Inc.) on his lab coat said, 
“Dr. Hoskins, it was arranged with 
Professor Ademewski at the beginning that the specimen could 
remain here only two weeks.” 
“I did not know then how long 
my investigations would take. I’m 
not a prophet,” said Ademewski 
heatedly. 
Dr. Hoskins said, “You understand, Professor, that we have 
limited space; we must keep specimens rotating. That piece of chalcopyrite must go back; there are 
men waiting for the next specimen.” 
“Why can’t I have it for myself 
then? Let me take it out of there.^ 
"You know you can’t have it.” 
"A piece of chalcopyrite; a miserable five-kilogram piece? Why 
not?” 
“We can’t afford the energy expense!” said Hoskins bluntly. “You 
know that.” 
“I know it’s what you say would 
happen,” Ademewski retorted. 
“Meaning we haven’t tested 
with anything this large? Microtests have given us more than 
enough evidence—” 
The technician interrupted. “The 
point is, Dr. Hoskins, that he tried 
to remove the rock against the 
rules and I almost punctured Stasis while he was in there, not 
knowing he was inside.” 
There was a short silence and 
Dr. Hoskins turned on the investigator wit ha cold formality. “Is 
that so. Professor?” 
Professor Ademewski coughed. 
“I saw no harm—” 
Hoskins reached up to a handpull dangling just within reach, 
outside the specimen room in 
question. He pulled it. 
Miss Fellowes, who had been 
peering in, looking at the totally 
undistinguished sample of rock 
that had caused the dispute, drew 
in her breath sharply as its existence flickered out. The room was 
empty. 
Hoskins said, “Professor, your 
permit to investigate matters in 
Stasis is permanently voided.” 
“But wait—” 
“I am sorry. You have violated 
one of the stringent rules.” 
“I will appeal to the International Association—” 
“Appeal away. In a case like 
this, you will find I can’t be overruled.” 
He turned away deliberately, 
leaving the professor still protesting, and said to Miss Fellowes, his 
face still white with anger, “Would 
you care to have lunch with me. 
Miss Fellowes?” 
¥TE took her into the small administration alcove of the 
cafeteria. He greeted others and 
introduced Miss Fellowes with 
complete ease, although she herself felt painfully self-conscious. 
What must they think, she 
thought, and tried desperately to 
appear businesslike. 
She said, “Do you have that 
kind of trouble often, Dr. Hoskins? I mean like that you just 
had with the professor?” She took 
her fork in hand and began eating. 
“No,” said Hoskins forcefully. 
“That was the first time. Of course 
I’m always having to argue men 
out of removing specimens, but 
this is the first time one actually 
tried to do it.” 
“I remember you once talked 
about the energy it would consume.” 
“That’s right. Of course, we’ve 
tried to take it into account. Ac
LASTBORN 
cidents will happen and so weVe 
got sF>ecial power sources designed 
to stand the drain of accidental removal from Stasis, but that doesn’t 
mean we want to see a year’s supply of energy gone in half a second — or can afford to, without 
having our plans of expansion delayed for years. Besides, imagine 
the professor’s being in the room 
while Stasis was about to be punctured!” 
“What would have happened to 
him?” 
“We’ve experimented with inanimate objects and with mice and 
they’ve all disappeared. Presumably, they’ve traveled back in 
time; carried along, so to speak, 
by the pull of the object simultaneously snapping back into its 
natural time. For that reason, we 
have to anchor objects within 
Stasis that we don’t want to move, 
and that’s a complicated procedure. The professor would not have 
been anchored and he would have 
gone back to the Pliocene at the 
moment when we abstracted the 
rock — plus, of course, the two 
weeks it had remained here in 
the present.” 
Miss Fellowes said, “Couldn’t 
you get him back? The way you 
got the rock in the first place?” 
“No, because once an object is 
returned, the original fix is lost 
unless we deliberately plan to retain it, and there was no reason to 
do that in this case. There never 
is. Finding the professor again 
would mean relocating a specific 
fix, which would be like dropping 
a line into the ocean for the purpose of catching a particular fish. 
My God, when I think of the precautions we take to prevent accidents, it makes me mad!” 
“Precautions?” Miss Fellowes 
repeated. “Like what?” 
“We have every individual Stasis unit set up with its own puncturing device. We have to, since 
each unit has its separate fix and 
must be collapsible independently. The point is, though, none of 
the puncturing devices is ever activated until the last minute. And 
then we deliberately make activation impossible except by the pull 
of a rope carefully led outside the 
Stasis. The pull is a gross mechanical motion that requires a strong 
effort — not something that could 
be done accidentally.” 
1%/T ISS Fellowes said, “But 
doesn’t it — change history 
to move something in and out of 
time?” 
Hoskins shrugged. “Theoretically, yes; actually, except in unusual cases, no. We move objects 
out of Stasis all the time. Air 
molecules. Bacteria. Dust. About 
ten per cent of our energy consumption goes to make up microlosses of that nature. But moving 
even large objects in time sets up 
changes that damp out. Take 
• 28 
that chalcopyrite from the Pliocene. Because of its absence for 
two weeks, some insect didn’t 
find the shelter it might have 
found and is killed. That could 
initiate a whole series of changes, 
but the mathematics of Stasis 
indicates that this is a converging 
series. The amount of change diminishes with time and then 
things are as before.” 
“You mean reality heals itself?” 
“In a manner of speaking. Abstract a human from time or 
send one back, and you make a 
larger wound. If the individual 
is an ordinary one, that wound 
still heals itself. Of course, there 
are a great many people who 
write to us each day and want 
to bring Abraham Lincoln into 
the present, or Mohammed, or 
Lenin. That can’t be done, of 
course. Even if we could find 
them, the change in reality in 
moving one of the history-molders would be too great to be 
healed. There are ways of calculating when a change is likely 
to be too great and we avoid 
even approaching that limit.” 
Miss Fellowes said, “Then 
Timmie— ” 
“No, he presents no problem 
in that direction. Reality is safe. 
But—” He gave her a quick, 
sharp glance, then went on, “But 
never mind. Yesterday, you said 
Timmie needed companionship.” 
“Yes.” Miss Fellowes smiled 
her delight. “I didn’t think you 
paid that any attention.” 
“Of course I did. I’m fond of 
the child. I appreciate your feelings for him and I was concerned 
enough to want to explain to 
you. Now I have; you’ve seen 
what we do; you’ve gotten some 
insight into the difficulties involved; so you know why, with 
the best will in the world, we 
can’t supply companionship for 
Timmie.” 
“You can’t?” said Miss Fellowes, with sudden dismay. 
“But I’ve just explained. We 
couldn’t possibly expect to find 
another Neanderthal his age without incredible luck, and if we 
could, we wouldn’t. We’re learning all we need to know about 
Neanderthals from the study of 
Timmie. There’s no way to justify the expense of bringing — ” 
Miss Fellowes put down her 
spoon and said energetically, 
“But Dr. Hoskins, that is not at 
all what I meant. I don’t want 
you to bring another Neanderthal into the present. I know 
that’s an impossible request. But 
it isn’t impossible to bring another child to play with Timmie.” 
Hoskins stared at her in concern. “A human child?” 
Another child,” said Miss Fellowes, completely hostile now. 
“I couldn’t dream of such a 
thing.” 
LASTBOR N 
‘Why couldn’t you? What is 
wrong with the notion? You 
pulled that child out of time and 
made him a lonely little prisoner. 
Don’t you owe him something? 
Dr. Hoskins, if there is any man 
who, in this world, is that child’s 
father in every sense but the 
biological, it is you. Why can’t 
you do this little thing for him?” 
Hoskins said, “His father?** He 
rose, somewhat unsteadily, to his 
feet. “Miss Fellowes, I think I’ll 
take you back now.” 
They returned to the dollhouse 
in a freezing silence that neither 
broke. 
¥T was a long time after that 
before she saw Hoskins again, 
except for an occasional glimpse 
in passing. She was sorry about 
that at times; then, at other times, 
when Timmie was more than 
usually woebegone or when he 
spent silent hours at the window 
with its prospect of little more 
than nothing, she thought 
fiercely: Stupid man. 
Timmie’s speech grew better 
and more precise each day. It 
never entirely lost a certain soft 
slurriness that Miss Fellowes 
found rather endearing. In times 
of excitement, he fell back into 
tongue-clicking, but those times 
were becoming fewer. He must 
be forgetting the days before he 
came into the present — except 
for dreams. 
As he grew older, the physiologists grew less interested and the 
psychologists more so. Miss Fellowes was not sure that she did 
not like the new group even less 
than the first. The needles were 
gone, the injections and withdrawals of fluid, the special diets. But 
now Timmie was made to overcome barriers to reach food and 
water. He had to lift panels, 
move bars, reach for cords. And 
the mild electric shocks made 
him cry and drove Miss Fellowes 
into outraged protests. 
She did not wish to appeal to 
Hoskins; she did not wish to 
have to go to him, for whatever 
she thought of him, she thought 
of his face over the luncheon 
table that last time. Her eyes 
moistened and she thought : 
Stupid, stupid man. 
And then one day Hoskins’ 
voice sounded unexpectedly, calling into the dollhouse, “Miss 
Fellowes.” 
She came out coldly, smoothing 
her nurse’s uniform, then stopped 
in confusion at finding herself 
in the presence of a pale woman, 
slender and of middle height. 
The woman’s fair hair and complexion gave her an appearance 
of fragility. Standing behind her 
and clutching at her skirt was 
a round-faced, large-eyed child 
of four. 
Hoskins said, “Dear, this is 
Miss Fellowes, the nurse in 
charge of the boy. Miss Fellowes, 
this is my wife.” 
(Was this his wife? She was 
not as Miss Fellowes had imagined her to be. But then, why 
not? A man like Hoskins would 
choose a weak thing to be his 
foil. If that was what he wanted—) 
She forced a matter-of-fact 
greeting. ‘‘Good afternoon, Mrs. 
Hoskins. Is this your — your little 
boy?” 
{That was a surprise. She had 
thought of Hoskins as a husband, 
but not as a father, except, of 
course — She suddenly caught 
Hoskins’ grave eyes and flushed.) 
Hoskins said, “Yes, this is my 
boy Jerry. Say hello to Miss Fellowes, Jerry.” 
(Had he stressed the word “this” 
just a bit? Was he saying this was 
his son and not — ) 
Jerry receded a bit further into 
the folds of the maternal skirt 
and muttered his hello. Mrs. Hoskins’ eyes were searching over 
Miss Fellowes’ shoulders, peering 
into the room. 
Hoskins said, “Well, let’s go 
in. Come, dear. There’s a trifling 
discomfort at the threshold, but 
it passes.” 
Miss Fellowes said, “Do you 
want Jerry to come in, too?” 
“Of course. He is to be Timmie’s playmate. You said Timmie 
needed a playmate. Or have you 
forgotten?” 
“But—” She looked at him with 
a colossal, surprised wonder. 
“Your boy?” 
He said peevishly, “Well, whose 
boy, then? Isn’t this what you 
want? Come in, dear. Come on 
in.” 
M rs. Hoskins lifted Jerry into 
her arms with a distinct 
effort and hesitantly stepped over 
the threshold. Jerry squirmed as 
she did so, disliking the sensation. 
Mrs. Hoskins said in a thin 
voice, “Is the creature here? I 
don’t see him.” 
Miss Fellowes called, “Timmie. 
Come out.” 
Timmie peered around the 
edge of the door, staring up at 
the little boy who was visiting 
him. The muscles in Mrs. Hos
I t 
kins’ arms tensed visibly. 
She said to her husband, “Gerald, are you sure it’s safe?” 
Miss Fellowes said at once, “If 
you mean is Timmie safe, why, 
of course he is. He’s a gentle little 
boy.” 
“But he’s a sa— savage.” 
(The apeboy stories in the 
newspapers!) Miss Fellowes said 
emphatically, “He is not a savage. 
He is just as quiet and reasonable 
as you can possibly expect a 
five-and-a-half-year-old to be. It 
is very generous of you, Mrs. 
Hoskins, to agree to allow your 
boy to play with Timmie, but 
please have no fears about it.” 
LASTBORN 
Mrs. Hoskins said with mild 
heat, “I’m not sure that I agree.” 
“WeVe had it out, dear,” ^aid 
Hoskins. “Let’s not bring up the 
matter for new argument. Put 
Jerry down.” 
Mrs. Hoskins did so and the 
boy backed against her, staring 
at the pair of eyes which were 
staring back at him from the next 
room. 
“Come here, Timmie,” said 
Miss Fellowes. ‘T)on’t be afraid.” 
Slowly, Timmie stepped into 
the room. Hoskins bent to disengage Jerry’s fingers from his 
mother’s skirt. “Step back, dear. 
Give the children a chance.” 
The youngsters faced one another. If they were the same age, 
Jerry was nevertheless half a 
head taller, and in the presence of 
his straightness and his high-held, 
well-proportioned head, Timmie’s 
grotesqueries were suddenly almost as pronounced as they had 
been in the first days. 
Miss Fellowes’ lips quivered. 
It was the little Neanderthal 
who spoke first, in childish treble. 
“What’s your name?” And Timmie thrust his face suddenly forward as though to inspect the 
other’s features more closely. 
Startled, Jerry responded with 
a vigorous shove that sent Timmie tumbling. Both began crying 
loudly and Mrs. Hoskins snatched 
up her child, while Miss Fellowes, 
flushed with silent anger, lifted 
Timmie and comforted him. 
Mrs. Hoskins said, “They just 
instinctively dislike each other.” 
“No more instinctively,” said 
her husband wearily, “than any 
two children dislike each other. 
Now put Jerry down and let him 
get used to the situation. In fact, 
we had better leave. Miss Fellowes can bring Jerry to my office 
after a while and I’ll have him 
taken home.” 
^ I ^HE two children spent the 
next hour very aware of each 
other. Jerry cried for his mother, 
struck out at Miss Fellowes, and 
finally allowed himself to be comforted with a lollipop. Timmie 
sucked at another, and at the end 
of an hour. Miss Fellowes had 
them playing with the same set of 
blocks, though at opposite ends 
of the room. 
She found herself almost maudlinly grateful to Hoskins when 
she brought Jerry to hm. 
She searched for ways to thank 
him, but his very formality was a 
rebuff. Perhaps he could not forgive her for making him feel like 
a cruel father. Perhaps the bringing of his own child was an attempt, after all, to prove himself 
both a kind father to Timmie and, 
also, no father at all. Both at the 
same time! 
So all she could say was, 
“Thank you. Thank you very 
much.” 
^ LASTBORN 
^ ^ 
And all he could say was, “It’s 
all right. Don’t mention it.” 
It became a settled routine. 
Twice a week, Jerry was brought 
in for an hour’s play, later extended to two hours’ play. The 
children learned each other’s 
names and ways and played 
together. 
And yet, after the first rush of 
gratitude. Miss Fellowes found 
herself disliking Jerry. He was 
larger and heavier and in all 
things dominant, forcing Timmie 
into a completely secondary role. 
All that reconciled her to the situation was the fact that, despite 
difficulties, Timmie looked forward with more and more delight 
to the periodic appearances of his 
playmate. 
It was all he had, she mourned 
to herself. 
And once, as she watched them, 
she thought: Hoskins’ two children, one by his wife and one by 
Stasis. 
While she herself — 
Heavens, she thought, putting 
her fists to her temples and feeling ashamed: I’m jealous! 
\ 
^^IVT Fellowes,” said Timmie (carefully, she had 
never allowed him to call her 
anything else), “when will I go to 
school?” 
She looked down at those eager 
brown eyes turned up to hers and 
passed her hand softly through 
his thick, curly hair. It was the 
most disheveled portion of his 
appearance, for she cut his hair 
herself while he sat restlessly under the scissors. She did not ask 
for professional help, for the very 
clumsiness of the cut served to 
mask the retreating forepart of 
the skull and the bulging hinder 
part. 
She said, “Where did you hear 
about school?” 
“Jerry goes to school. Kin-dergar-ten. There are lots of places 
he goes. Outside. When can I go 
outside. Miss Fellowes?” 
A small pain centered in Miss 
Fellowes’ heart. Of course, she 
saw, there would be no way of 
avoiding the inevitability of Timmie’s hearing more and more of 
the outer world he could never 
enter. 
She said, with an attempt at 
gaiety, “Why, whatever would 
you do in kindergarten, Timmie?” 
“Jerry says they play games; 
they have picture tapes. He says 
there are lots of children. He says 
A thought, then a triumphant 
upholding of both small hands 
with the fingers splayed apart. 
“He says this many.” 
Miss Fellowes said, “Would 
you like picture tapes? I can 
get you picture tapes. Very nice 
ones. And music tapes, too.” 
So Timmie was temporarily 
comforted. 
He pored over the picture tapes 
in Jerry^s absence and Miss Fellowes read to him out of ordinary 
books by the hours. 
There was so much to explain 
in even the simplest story, so 
much that was outside the perspective of his three rooms. Timmie took to having his dreams 
more often, now that the outside 
was being introduced to him. 
They were always the same, 
about the outside. He tried haltingly to describe them to Miss 
Fellowes. In his dreams, he was 
outside, an empty outside, but 
very large, with children and 
queer indescribable objects halfdigested in his thoughts out of 
bookish descriptions half-imderstood, or out of distant Neanderthal memories half-recalled. 
But the children and objects 
ignored him, and though he was 
in the world, he was never part 
of it, but was as alone as though 
he were in his own room — and 
he would wake up crying. 
Miss Fellowes tried to laugh 
at the dreams, but there were 
nights in her own apartment when 
she cried, too. 
NE day, as Miss Fellowes 
read, Timmie put his hand 
under her chin and lifted gently 
so that her eyes left the book and 
met his. 
He said, “How do you know 
what to say. Miss Fellowes?’’ 
“You see these marks? They 
tell me what to say. These marks 
make words.” 
He stared at them long and 
curiously, taking the book out of 
her hands. “Some of these marks 
are the same.” 
She laughed with pleasure at 
this sign of his shrewdness and 
said, “So they are. Would you 
like to have me show you how to 
make the marks?” 
“All right. That would be a nice 
game.” 
It had not occurred to her that 
he could learn to read — up to the 
very moment that he read a book 
to her. 
Then the enormity of what had 
been done struck her. Timmie sat 
in her lap, following word by word 
the printing in a child’s book, reading to her. He was reading to her! 
She struggled to her feet in 
amazement and said, “Now, Timmie, I’ll be back later. I want to 
see Dr. Hoskins.” 
Excited nearly to frenzy, it 
seemed to her she might have an 
answer to Timmie’s unhappiness. 
If Timmie could not leave to enter 
the world, the world must be 
brought into those three rooms to 
Timmie — the whole world in 
books and film and sound. He must 
be educated to his full capacity. 
That much the world owed him. 
^HE found Hoskins in a mood 
^ that was oddly analogous to 
her own, a kind of triumph and 
LASTBORN 
glory. His offices were unusually 
busy and, for a moment, she 
thought she would not get to see 
him, as she stood abashed in the 
anteroom. 
But he saw her and a smile 
spread over his broad face. “Miss 
Fellowes, come here.” He spoke 
rapidly into the intercom, then 
shut it off. “Have you heard? No, 
of course, you couldn’t have. WeVe 
done it. WeVe actually done it. 
We have intertemporal detection 
at close range!” 
“You mean — ” she tried to detach her thought from her own 
good news for a moment — “that 
you can get a person from historical times into the present?” 
“That’s just what I mean! We 
have a fix on a 14th-century individual right now. Imagine. Imagine! If you could only know how 
glad I’ll be to shift from the eternal 
concentration on the Mesozoic, replace the paleontologists with the 
historians — But there’s something 
you wish to say to me, eh? Well, 
go ahead; go ahead. You find me 
in a good mood. Anything you 
want, you can have.” 
Miss Fellowes smiled. “I’m glad. 
Because I wonder if we might not 
establish a system of instruction 
for Timmie.” 
“Instruction? In what?” 
“Well, in everything. A school. 
So that he might learn.” 
“But can he learn?” 
“Certainly, he is learning. He 
can read. I’ve taught him how 
myself.” 
Hoskins sat there, seeming suddenly depressed. “I don’t know. 
Miss Fellowes.” 
“You just said that anything I 
wanted — ” 
“I know and I should not have. 
You see. Miss Fellowes, I’m sure 
you must realize that we cannot 
maintain the Timmie experiment 
forever.” 
She stared at him with sudden 
horror, not really imderstanding 
what he had said. How did he 
mean “cannot maintain”? With an 
agonizing flash of recollection, she 
recalled Professor Adamewski and 
his mineral specimen that was 
taken away after two weeks. She 
said, “But you’re talking about a 
boy. Not about a rock — ” 
Hoskins said uneasily, “Even a 
boy can’t be given undue importance, Miss Fellowes. Now that 
we expect individuals out of historical time, we will need Stasis 
space, all we can get.” 
She still didn’t grasp it. “But 
you can’t. Timmie — ” 
“Now, Miss Fellowes, please 
don’t upset yourself. Timmie won’t 
go right away; perhaps not for 
months. Meanwhile, we’ll do what 
we can.” 
She was still staring at him. 
“Let me get you something. 
Miss Fellowes.” 
“No,” she whispered. “I don’t 
need anjrthing.” She arose in a 
kind of nightmare and left. 
Timmie, she thought, you will 
not die. You will not die. 
TT was all very well to hold 
tensely to the thought that 
Timmie must not die, but how was 
that to be arranged? In the first 
weeks, Miss Fellowes clung only 
to the hope that the attempt to 
bring forward a man from the 14th 
century would fail completely. 
Hoskins’ theories might be wrong 
or his practice defective. Then 
things could go on as before. 
Certainly, that was not the hope 
of the rest of the world and, irrationally, Miss Fellowes hated the 
world for it. ‘‘Project Middle Ages” 
reached a climax of white-hot publicity. The press and the public 
had hungered for something like 
this. Stasis, Inc., had lacked the 
necessary sensation for a long time 
now. A new rock or another ancient fish failed to stir them. But 
this did. 
A historical human, an adult 
speaking a known language, someone who could open a new page 
of history to the scholar. 
Zero hour was coming and now 
it was not a question of three onlookers from a balcony. This time 
there would be a worldwide audience. This time the technicians of 
Stasis, Inc., would play their role 
before nearly all of mankind. 
Miss Fellowes was herself all 
but savage with waiting. When 
young Jerry Hoskins showed up 
for his scheduled playtime with 
Timmie, she scarcely recognized 
him. He was not the one she was 
waiting for. 
(The secretary who brought 
him left hurriedly after the barest 
nod for Miss Fellowes. She was 
rushing for a good place from 
which to watch the climax of Project Middle Ages. And so ought 
Miss Fellowes with far better 
reason, she thought bitterly, if only 
that stupid girl would arrive.) 
Jerry Hoskins sidled toward her, 
embarrassed. “Miss Fellowes?” He 
took the reproduction of a news 
strip out of his pocket. 
“Yes? What is it, Jerry?” 
“Is this a picture of Timmie?” 
Miss Fellowes stared at him, 
then snatched the strip from 
Jerry’s hand. The excitement of 
Project Middle Ages had brought 
about a pale revival of interest in 
Timmie on the part of the press. 
Jerry watched her narrowly, 
then said, “It says Timmie is an 
apeboy. What does that mean?” 
Miss Fellowes caught the youngster’s wrist and repressed the impulse to shake him. “Never say 
that, Jerry. Never, do you understand? It is a nasty word and you 
mustn’t use it.” 
Jerry struggled out of her grip, 
frightened. 
Miss Fellowes tore up the news 
strip with a vicious twist of the 
wrist. “Now go inside and play 
L ASTBORN 
with Timmie. He’s got a new book 
to show you.” 
And then, at last, the girl appeared. Miss Fellowes did not 
know her. None of the usual standins she had used when business 
took her elsewhere was available 
now, not with Project Middle Ages 
at climax, but Hoskins’ secretary had promised to find someone 
and this must be the girl. 
Miss Fellowes tried to keep 
querulousness out of her voice. 
“Are you the girl assigned to 
Stasis Section One?” 
“Yes, I’m Mandy Terris. You’re 
Miss Fellowes, aren’t you?” 
“Thafs right.” 
“I’m sorry I’m late. There’s so 
much excitement” 
“I know. Now I want you — ” 
Mandy said, “You’ll be watching, I suppose.” Her vacuously 
pretty face filled with envy. 
“Never mind that. Now I want 
you to come inside and meet Timmie and Jerry. They will be playing for the next two hours, so 
they’ll be giving you no trouble. 
They’ve got milk handy and plenty 
of toys. In fact, it will be better if 
you leave them alone as much as 
possible. Now I’ll show you where 
everything is located and — ” 
“Is it Timmie that’s the ape — ” 
“Timmie is the Stasis subject.” 
“I mean he’s the one who’s not 
supposed to get out, is that right?” 
“Yes. Now come in. There isn’t 
much time.” 
And when she finally left, Mandy Terris called after her shrilly, 
hope you get a good seat and, 
golly, I sure hope it works.” 
Miss Fellowes did not trust herself to make a reasonable response. 
She hurried on without looking 
back. 
"OUT the delay meant she did 
not get a good seat She got no 
nearer than the wall viewing-plate 
in the assembly hall. Bitterly, she 
regretted that. If she could have 
been on the spot, if she could somehow have reached out for some 
sensitive portion of the instrumentation, if she were in some way 
able to wreck the experiment — 
She found the strength to beat 
down her madness. Simple destruction would have done no good. 
They would have rebuilt and made 
the effort again. And she would 
never be allowed to return to 
Timmie. 
Nothing would help. Nothing 
but that the experiment itself fail, 
that it break down irretrievably. 
So she waited through the countdown, watching every move on the 
giant screen, scanning the faces 
of the technicians as the focus 
shifted from one to the other, 
watching for the look of worry and 
uncertainty that would mark something going unexpectedly wrong; 
watching, watching — 
The count reached zero and 
very quietly, very unassumingly, 
the experiment succeeded. 
In the new Stasis that had been 
established, there stood a bearded, 
stoop-shouldered peasant of indeterminate age, in ragged, dirty 
clothing and wooden shoes, storing in dull horror at the sudden 
mad change that had flung itself 
over him. 
And while the world went wild 
with jubilation. Miss Fellowes 
stood frozen in sorrow, jostled and 
pushed, all but trampled; surrounded by triumph while bowed 
down with defeat. 
And when the loudspeaker 
called her name with strident 
force, it sounded it three times 
before she responded. 
"Miss Fellowes, Miss Fellowes. 
You are wanted in Stasis Section 
One immediately. Miss Fellowes. 
Miss Fell - ” 
"Let me through!” she cried 
breathlessly, while the loudspeaker 
continued its repetitions without 
pause. She forced her way through 
the crowd with fierce energy, beating at it, striking out with closed 
fists, flailing, moving toward the 
door in a nightmare slowness. 
IVf’ ANDY Terris was in tears. 
"I don’t know how it happened. I just went down to the 
edge of the corridor to watch a 
pocket viewing-plate they had put 
up. Just for a minute, and then, 
before I could move or do anything — ” She cried out in sudden 
accusation, “You said they would 
make no trouble; you said to leave 
them alone — ” 
Miss Fellowes, disheveled and 
trembling uncontrollably, glared at 
her. “Where’s Timmie?” 
A nurse was swabbing the arm 
of a wailing Jerry with disinfectant and another was preparing an 
anti-tetanus shot. There was blood 
on Jerry’s clothes. 
“He bit me. Miss Fellowes,” 
Jerry cried. “He bit me.” 
But Miss Fellowes didn’t even 
see him. 
“What did you do with Timmie?” she rapped out. 
“I locked him in the bathroom,” 
said Mandy. “I just threw the little 
monster in there and locked him 
in.” 
Miss Fellowes ran into the dollhouse. She fumbled at the bathroom door. It took an eternity to 
get it open and to find the ugly 
little boy cowering in the corner. 
“Don’t whip me. Miss Fellowes,” 
he whisp>ered. His eyes were red. 
His lips were quivering. “I didn’t 
mean to do it.” 
“Oh, Timmie, who told you 
about whips?” She caught him to 
her, hugging him wildly. 
“She said with a long rope. She 
said you would hit me and hit 
me.” 
“She was wicked to say so. But 
what happened? What happened?” 
“He called me an apeboy. He 
said I wasn’t a real boy. He said 
I was an animal.” Timmie dissolved in a flood of tears. “He said 
he wasn’t going to play with a 
monkey any more. I said I wasn’t 
a monkey! I wasn*t a monkey. 
He said I was all funny-looking. 
He said I was horrible ugly. He 
kept saying and saying and I bit 
him.” 
They were both crying now. 
Miss Fellowes sobbed, “But it 
isn’t true. You know that, Timmie. 
You’re a real boy. You’re a dear, 
real boy and the best boy in the 
world. And no one — no one will 
ever take you away from me.” 
¥ T was easy to make up her 
mind now, easy to know what 
to do. Only it had to be done 
quickly. Hoskins wouldn’t wait 
much longer, with his own son 
mangled — 
No, it would have to be done 
tonight, this night; with the place 
four-fifths asleep and the remaining fifth intellectually drunk over 
Project Middle Ages. 
It would be an unusual time for 
her to return, but not an unheardof one. The guard knew her well 
and would not dream of questioning her. He would think nothing 
of her carrying a suitcase. She rehearsed the noncommital phrase: 
“Games for the boy,” and the calm 
smile. 
Why shouldn’t he believe that? 
When she entered the dollhouse 
again, Timmie woke and ran to 
LASTBORN 
her and she maintained a desperate normality to avoid frightening 
him. She talked about his dreams 
with him and listened to him ask 
wistfully after Jerry. 
There would be few to see her 
afterward, none to question the bundle she would be carrying. Timmie 
would be very quiet and then it 
would be done and what would 
be the use of trying to undo it? 
They would let her be. They would 
let them both be. 
She opened the suitcase, took 
out the overcoat, the woolen cap 
with the earflaps and the rest. 
Timmie said, with the beginning of alarm, ‘Why are you putting all these clothes on me. Miss 
Fellowes?” 
She said, “I am going to take 
you outside, Timmie. To where 
your dreams are.” 
“My dreams?” His face twisted 
in sudden yearning, yet fear was 
there, too. 
“You won’t be afraid. You’ll 
be with me. You won’t be afraid 
if you’re with me, will you, Timmie?” 
“No, Miss Fellowes.” He buried 
his little misshapen head against 
her side, and under her enclosing 
arm she could feel his small heart 
thud. 
It was midnight and she lifted 
him into her arms. She disconnected the alarm and opened the 
door softly. 
And she screamed, for facing 
her across the open door was Hoskins. 
^^HERE were two men with him 
and he stared at her, as astonished as she. 
Miss Fellowes recovered first by 
a second and make a quick attempt to push past him; but even 
with the second’s delay, he had 
time. He caught her roughly and 
hurled her back against a chest of 
drawers. He waved the men in 
and confronted her, blocking the 
door. 
“I didn’t expect this. Are you 
completely insane?” 
She had managed to interpose 
her shoulder so that it, rather than 
Timmie, had struck the chest. She 
said pleadingly, “What harm can 
it do if I take him. Dr. Hoskins? 
You can’t put energy loss ahead 
of a human life!” 
Firmly, Dr. Hoskins took Timmie out of her arms. “An energy 
loss that size would mean millions 
of dollars lost out of the pockets 
of investors. It would mean a terrible setback for Stasis, Inc. It 
would mean eventual publicity 
about a sentimental nurse destroying all that for the sake of an 
apeboy.” 
“Apeboy.'” said Miss Fellowes, 
in helpless fury. 
“That’s what the reporters would 
call him,” said Hoskins. 
One of the men emerged now, 
looping a nylon rope through eye
lets along the upper portion of the 
wall. 
Miss Fellowes remembered the 
rope that Hoskins had pulled outside the room containing Professor 
Ademewski’s rock specimen so 
long ago. 
She cried out, “No!” 
But Hoskins put Timmie down 
and gently removed the overcoat 
he was wearing. “You stay here, 
Timmie. Nothing will happen to 
you. We’re just going outside for 
a moment. All right?” 
Timmie, white and wordless, 
managed to nod. 
Hoskins steered Miss Fellowes 
out the dollhouse ahead of himself. 
For the moment. Miss Fellowes 
was beyond resistance. Dully, she 
noticed the hand-pull being adjusted outside the dollhouse. 
“I’m sorry. Miss Fellowes,” 
said Hoskins. “I would have 
spared you this. I planned it for 
the night so that you would know 
only when it was over.” 
She said in a weary whisper, 
“Because your son was hurt. Because he tormented this child into 
striking out at him.” 
“No. Believe me. I understand 
about the incident today and I 
know it was Jerry^s fault. But the 
story has leaked out. It would 
have to, with the press surroimding us on this day of all days. I 
can’t risk having a distorted story 
about negligence and savage Neanderthalers, so-called, distract 
from the success of Project Middle Ages. Timmie has to go soon 
anyway; he might as well go now 
and give the sensationalists as 
small a peg as possible on which 
to hang their trash.” 
“It’s not like sending a rock 
back. You’ll be killing a human 
being!” 
“Not killing. There’ll be no sensation. He’ll be simply a Neanderthal boy in a Neanderthal world. 
He will no longer be a prisoner 
and alien. He will have a chance 
at a free life.” 
“What chance? He’s only seven 
years old, used to being taken 
care of, fed, clothed, sheltered. He 
will be alone. His tribe may not 
be anywhere near where you 
snatched him from , — that was 
over three years ago! And even if 
they were, they would never recognize him! He will have to take care 
of himself. How will he know 
how?” 
Hoskins shook his head in hopeless negative. “Miss Fellowes, do 
you think we haven’t thought of 
that? Do you think we would 
have brought in a child if it weren’t 
that it was the first successful fix 
of- a human or near-human we 
made, and that we did not dare 
to take the chance of unfixing him 
and finding another fix as good? 
Why do you suppose we kept 
Timmie as long as we did, if it 
were not for our reluctance to send 
a child back into the past?” 
LASTBORN 
His voice took on a desperate 
urgency. “It’s just that we can 
wait no longer. Timmie stands in 
the way of expansion; Timmie is 
a source of possible bad publicity; 
we are on the threshold of great 
things and I’m sorry, Miss Fellowes, but we can’t let Timmie 
block us.” 
“Well, then,” said Miss Fellowes 
sadly, “let me say good-by. Spare 
me that much. Only five minutes 
to say good-by.’^ 
Hoskins hesitated. “All right. 
Go ahead.” 
F or the last time, Timmie ran 
to her, and for the last time. 
Miss Fellowes clasped him in her 
arms. 
She hugged him blindly. She 
caught at a chair with the toe of 
one foot, moved it against the wall 
and sat down. 
“Don’t be afraid, Timmie.” 
“I’m not afraid if you’re here. 
Miss Fellowes. Is that man mad 
at me, the man out there?” 
“No, he isn’t. He just doesn’t 
understand about us. Timmie, do 
you know what a mother is?” 
“Like Jerry’s mother?” 
“Did he tell you about his 
mother?” 
“Sometimes. I think maybe a 
mother is a lady who takes care 
of you and who’s very nice to you 
and who does good things.” 
“That’s right. Have you ever 
wanted a mother of your very 
own, Timmie?” 
Timmie pulled his head away 
from her so that he could look into 
her face. Slowly, he put his hand 
to her cheek and hair and stroked 
her, as long, long ago she had 
stroked him. 
He said, “Aren’t you my mother?” 
“Oh, Timmie!” 
“Are you angry because I 
asked?” 
“No. Of course not.” 
“Because I know your name is 
Miss Fellowes; but — but sometimes I call you mother inside. Is 
that all right?” 
“Yes, yes. It’s all right. And I 
won’t leave you any more and 
nothing will hurt you. I’ll be with 
you, to care for you always. Call 
me mother so I can hear you.” 
“Mother,” said Timmie contentedly, leaning his cheek against 
hers. 
She rose and, still holding him, 
stepped up on the chair. The sudden beginning of a shout from outside went unheard; with her free 
hand, she hauled with all her 
weight at the stout nylon cord 
where it hung suspended between 
two eyelets. 
And Stasis was punctured and 
the room was empty. 
— ISAAC ASIMOV
SFGRAM_STOP_ASIMOV
ON THE 
By UOYD BIGGIE, JR. 
Failure was impossible — they 
had the one true formula: the 
victor belongs to the spoils! 
Illustrated by DICK FRANCIS 
G roup Leader Mivar stood 
rigidly at attention and 
tried not to think of the 
maddening itch in the scar tissue 
at the base of his spine. The unfamiliar, sweltering clothing constricted his limbs and gave him an 
alarming sensation of impending 
suffocation. In that moment of exr 
treme discomfort, he allowed him
self a treasonable thought. 
He did not want to be a hero. 
He could not recall the precise 
steps by which he had blundered 
into this mess, but he wanted out. 
General Zort paced back and 
forth in front of Mivar, flourishing 
his tail as he pivoted. It was a 
magnificent tail, long and sturdy, 
stylishly trimmed. There were ru
ON THE DOUBLE 
mors that the general dyed his 
tail, but Mivar couldn’t detect any 
irregularity of color in its glimmering blackness. He allowed his eyes 
to follow it enviously. 
The general noticed this, or perhaps Mivar inadvertently allowed 
a thought to escape. The general 
halted. 
“Too bad about your tail, Mivar,” he said, affectionately caressing his own. “But it had to be 
done. You understand that. A tail 
just can’t be hidden under those 
silly clothes.” 
“I understand, sir,” Mivar said. 
The itch had become a throbbing torment. He shouldn’t have 
let them do it, he thought He 
should have defended his tail with 
his life. To lose a tail in combat 
would be bad enough, but to have 
it sliced off by a doctor, under local anesthesia, was utterly humiliating. There were not enough honors in the Empire to compensate 
for it. Females would ridicule him. 
He would lose his coveted position 
in the Palace Guard. How could 
he parade his men without a tail? 
1^ HE general was scrutinizing 
him carefully. “The face is excellent. It is an amazing likeness.” 
The royal surgeon stepped forward and bowed. “The hearing 
flaps must be done again,” he 
said. “They are not large enough.” 
“Not large enough!” Mivar exclaimed. 
“Come, now,” the general said. 
“You can have them removed 
when you return.” 
Mivar jerked back to attention. 
“Vril?” the general said. 
The general’s chief scientist 
stepped forward. 
“What do you think?” 
“It’s developing nicely,” Vril 
said. “The preparation will have 
to be intensive, but I am certain 
we shall succeed.” He whirled on 
Mivar and spoke in harsh, alien 
tones. “Who are you?” 
Mivar’s tongue struggled awkwardly to form the strange words. 
“I am Major Jeffery Holder, Commander of the First Venus Expedition.” 
Vril moved to the side of the 
room and touched a button. 
Soimds boomed at them. Alien 
soimds. The voice of an Earthman. “I am Major Jeffery Holder, 
Commander of the First Venus 
Expedition.” 
“Not bad,” the general said. 
“Certainly it is not bad,” Vril 
said. “It is also not good, and it 
must be perfect. But we shall work* 
at it. It will be done.” 
“And you are certain of success?” 
Vril bowed. “As positive as one 
can be amidst life’s many complicated imcertainties.” 
“Carry on,” the general said. 
He walked majestically away, 
flourishing his tail. His entourage 
filed out after him, also with tails 
'■ ^ 
waving. As soon as their backs 
were turned, Mivar’s hand leaped 
to the base of his spine and 
scratched energetically. 
“Now then — ” Vril began. 
Mivar sat down wearily. Standing was a difficult process, without the aid of a tail. “More?’^ he 
said. 
“More. Who can tell what situations you must face, what emergencies? Reciting a few statements 
will not be enough. You must 
speak the language, and speak it 
perfectly. You must study this 
Major Jeffery Holder — study him 
in his cell, and study the films we 
have taken. You must talk like 
him, and walk like him, and act 
like him. You must even think like 
him. They did a very good job on 
your face, and your form is similar 
to his. But appearance is only the 
first step. The gods have generously presented us with this opportunity and we dare not blunder. 
Now then, listen, and repeat the 
words. Imitate the voice.” 
He touched the button and the 
alien voice filled the room. “I am 
Major Jeffery Holder, Commander of the First Venus Exp>edition.” 
A ND so it went. For half a lightcycle, Mivar slaved under the 
sharp eyes of Vril. Hidden, he observed Vril’s interviews with the 
captured Earthman. He watched 
films. He learned to mimic the 
Earthman's walk, and his gestures. 
and even his facial expressions. The 
Earthman’s recorded conversation 
was played to him as he slept. And 
in time, even Vril had to admit 
that he was becoming proficient. 
Somewhere nearby, another officer was studying the other Earthman, Lieutenant Roger Anderson 
— studying him under the sharp 
tutelage of Vril’s assistants, and 
making, Vril informed Mivar, excellent progress. 
“The first surgery didn’t turn 
out as well as yours,” Vril said. 
“But they have that corrected now. 
It’s too bad that stupid patrol had 
to kill the other three. The odds 
would be more in our favor if we 
could send back a full crew of 
five.” 
“Why not?” Mivar asked. “We 
know what they looked like.” 
“But we don’t know what they 
talked like, or how they acted. 
There’s no point in training an officer and sending him along if he’s 
going to give the entire project 
away the first time he opens his 
mouth. No, we’ll send back the 
two of you, and you can regretfully explain that the others were 
killed in an accident, which is 
true. Better make it wild animals. 
They expected wild animals. Now 
then.” He switched to the alien 
language.“Tell me. Major, what 
did you find on this planet Venus?” 
Mivar delivered a brief lecture, 
based entirely upon carefully 
planned misinformation. 
General Zort held a meeting at 
his headquarters to review progress, 
and as Mivar stood waiting, an 
Earthman entered the room and 
approached him. He halted in 
front of Mivar, snapped to attention, and delivered an Earth salute 
with his hand. 
“Lieutenant Anderson reporting, 
sir,” he said. 
“At ease, Lieutenant,” Mivar 
said. 
The onlookers applauded, and 
the lieutenant flashed a thought at 
Mivar; “Group Leader Hezzit.” 
“Group Leader Mivar,” Mivar 
flashed back. “Wonder why they 
kept us apart all this time.” 
“They didn’t want us to get the 
Earthmen confused.” 
“But now,” Vril said, “you know 
your subjects well. Next you must 
learn how they behave with each 
other. We are placing them in the 
same cell, for observation purposes.” 
General Zort interrupted. “It is 
time we did some serious planning.” 
^ I ''HERE are many obstacles,” 
Vril said, “but in my opinion, 
it needs only proper planning.” 
“I am in complete agreement,” 
the general said. “What you have 
accomplished is astonishing. Do we 
show Mivar and Hezzit to the 
Earthmen? I would like to see 
their reactions.” 
“Definitely not,” Vril said. “We 
must not let them suspect our 
plans. Without being aware of it, 
they are giving us valuable information, and if they become suspicious, they will certainly create 
difficulties.” 
“You are entirely correct, as 
usual,” the general said hastily. 
“Let us discuss these obstacles.” 
“First,” Vril said, “they must 
learn to operate the ship.” 
“Obviously.” 
“This can be done. They will 
return it to the planet Earth, and 
a short time before they reach 
their destination, they will communicate with Earth. They will 
say their communication device 
had broken down and they had 
just succeeded in repairing it. They 
will place the ship in an orbit near 
the space station which the Earthmen have circling their planet. This 
is according to plan, because the 
Earthmen feared there would not 
be sufficient fuel remaining for a 
landing on Earth. Our own calculations confirm this. 
“No doubt they will receive a 
hero’s welcome when they arrive 
on Earth. We confidently expect 
that they will receive every honor 
and consideration. So — when they 
complain of extreme fatigue after 
their long and trying expedition, it 
is to be expected that they will be 
placed in seclusion for the rest 
which their heroic efforts have 
earned. We hope this will be done 
with a minimum of contacts with 
Earthmen. The fewer the contacts. 
ON THE DOUBLE 
the less likely it is that their real 
identities will be discovered. 
‘‘At the first opportunity after 
they are placed in seclusion, they 
will escape. Disappear.*’ 
“Won’t that arouse suspicion?” 
the general asked. 
“It will arouse concern, but not 
suspicion. The Earthmen will believe that the hardship of the expedition has unbalanced them mentally. There will be an intensive 
search, of course, but it will not 
be a search for alien spies. It will 
be a search for two mentally ill 
Earthmen. 
“As soon as Mivar and Hezzlit 
have escaped, they will alter their 
appearances according to a plan 
which they will practice. We have 
studied the captured Earthmen 
and all reproductions of Earthmen which were found in the ship, 
and we have devised composite 
identities which will serve as a 
satisfactory disguise. There are dif
✓ 
ficulties that must be worked out, 
but it can be done. They will disappear. If they have been separated, they can easily arrange to 
meet, because telepathic communication is known to the Earthmen 
only as a theory. They will meet, 
and then they will be able to collect the information we must have.” 
f^l^OULDN’T it be less risky 
™ to have them land on the 
planet in secret?” asked General 
Zort. 
“The Earthmen have detection 
devices and an attempt at a secret 
landing would be highly suspicious,” Vril replied. “It might alarm 
the Earthmen. That is one thing 
we must avoid.” 
“Very well,” the general said. 
“And how do they bring the information back to us?” 
“A very critical question. We 
are developing a more compact 
fuel for the ship. We can arrange 
secret compartments for it. They 
will be able to return once they 
get back to the ship. This will be 
difficult, whether the ship is left 
in orbit or whether the Earthmen 
refuel it and return it to Earth. 
But Mivar and Hezzit are resourceful and ingenious, as we well 
know. They will find a way. Their 
return does not worry me. The 
most critical stage of the operation will occur when they land on 
Earth. I would like to show you 
some dream-strips. This one is 
Major Holder’s.” 
Vril signaled and the screen at 
the far end of the room flashed to 
life. 
The spaceship had landed. It 
stood surrounded by a throng of 
wildly cheering Earthmen. Major 
Holder appeared in the airlock 
and clasped his hands above his 
head. 
As he started down the ramp, 
a figure broke loose from the 
crowd, dashed up the ramp and 
hurled itself into his arms. 
The scene shifted abruptly. An 
interior scene. A large sleeping 
cushion in the background, 
mounted ridiculously above the 
floor. 
The strange figure clung to 
the major, who stooped, lifted it 
and turned. 
Vril raised his hand and the 
screen went blank. 
“What follows is disgusting,” 
Vril said. 
“What is it?” the general wanted 
to know. 
“An Earth female. That one is 
Major Holder’s mate.” 
“Ah!” 
“You see the problem. The 
Earthmen have a single mate and 
they spend their lives in close association. It is likely that their 
mates know them more familiarly 
than any of their other associates. 
The mates will certainly be present to greet them when they return. In my opinion, this is the 
most dangerous obstacle they will 
face. If they pass it successfully, 
our plan must succeed. Here is a 
dream-strip of Lieutenant Anderson.” 
In the company of a group of 
obviously important personages, 
the lieutenant made his way 
through a crowd. Guards pushed 
the cheering spectators aside to 
make way for them. Suddenly the 
lieutenant turned, battled his way 
into the crowd, and clasped a female in his arms. 
^^^RIL stopped the picture with 
^ a wave of his hand. “There are 
exaggerations and inaccuracies in 
a dream-strip, of course, but by 
comparing enough strips we can 
obtain an excellent idea of how 
to surmount this obstacle. The 
females alter their appearance in 
subtle ways, but Mivar and Hezzit 
must be able to recognize these 
mates of Major Holder and Lieutenant Anderson under any circumstances. If the mates do not 
come to them on the landing, they 
must seek them out. The greeting 
can be brief and undemonstrative, 
but there must be a greeting, and 
the mates must be convinced.” 
“What about afterward?” Mivar 
said, squirming nervously on his 
cushion. The sight of the room 
with the sleeping cushion had incited an apprehensive itching in 
his scar tissue. 
“You are tired. You need rest. 
Even the presence of your mate 
would be disturbing to you. You 
might even be ill. There shouldn’t 
be any problem about afterward. 
But you must greet the mates properly, according to Earth custom. 
Not to do so would be fatal.” 
Hezzit said uneasily, “We 
must—” 
“It is called a kiss,” Vril said. 
“The mouths meet. The Earthmen have no tails, as you well 
know. They use the kiss as a substitute. Come — certainly you will 
not allow a mere Earth female to 
ON THE DOUBLE 
stand in the way of our glorious 
conquest.” 
"Does the Earthman say anything to his mate?” Mivar asked. 
"As you might expect from a 
species that does not have thought 
contact, the Earthman says much. 
You will be well rehearsed on 
that point. I have compiled all of 
the dream-strips in which the 
mates appear. And there are many 
of them. We will add others as 
we record them. It is unfortunate 
that the Earthmen lost all of their 
personal possessions in the river 
crossing when they were attempting to escape our patrol. I understand that they had life photos of 
their mates, and there is always a 
danger that the appearance of 
these Earth females may be exaggerated or modified in the dreamstrips. 
"But we can make the dreamstrips serve our purpose. You will 
watch now, Mivar, and remember 
that you must be able to recognize Major Holder’s mate, and 
you must know how to manage 
the greeting.” 
They ran the dream-strips. 
Major Holder’s and Lieutenant 
Anderson’s. 
Mivar had the major’s mate so 
thoroughly impressed into his conscious and subconscious mind that 
even he dreamed of her. The major 
called her Sally. He dreamed of 
her in a variety of odd settings, 
both public and private. The 
dream-strips showed them going 
through the pointless motions 
which were called dancing, striking 
a ball with a stick in some absurd 
test of skill, swimming, dressing or 
undressing, usually with each 
other’s assistance. 
Hezzit was suffering the same 
familiarity with Lieutenant Anderson’s mate, who was called Klathy. 
The ultimate indignity occurred 
when Vril made them practice the 
Earthman greeting, the kiss. He 
made them practice it on each 
other. 
HEY learned to fly the Earth
men’s ship, suffering near-disaster on the takeoff, but successfully placed it in an orbit around 
their planet They gazed in awe 
at their cloud-shrouded home and 
apprehensively at the distant light 
in the sky that was Earth. For 
the first time, they saw the stars. 
Vril, who accompanied them, 
made observations and films. Hezzit, a mathematical genius, amused 
himself by laying out courses for 
Earth and sarcastically commenting on the inefficiency of the Earthmen’s computer. 
"Our people have lived in blindness,” Vril said. "The ship operates on a simple principle. We 
could have built one centuries ago, 
if we had known what lay beyond 
our sky. We speculated, but we 
did nothing because there seemed 
to be no purpose. And now — look! 
Worlds to conquer! Thousands of 
worlds!” 
They were badly shaken up on 
landing, but suffered no serious 
damage. They continued to practice, using the fuel that Vril developed. 
They traveled long distances 
in toward the sun, and turned back 
to explore space on the Earthward 
side. They used the ship to put a 
space station in orbit above the 
clouds of their own planet. They 
saw the completion of the first of 
the giant warships Vril had 
planned, and they tested it, and 
started the training of the crew 
that would operate it They could 
reasonably call themselves experts. 
They were ready. 
There was an audience with the 
emperor. His Majesty descended 
from his throne and presented 
both group leaders with the Order 
of the Tail, and as the sparkling 
insignia was pinned to his Earth 
clothing, Mivar felt compensated, 
at least to a degree, for his own lost 
tail. 
More honors — greater honors 
— would be theirs after they successfully completed their mission, 
His Majesty informed them. There 
would be an entire world to divide, and honor enough for all. 
‘‘When you return,” Vril told 
them, “the invasion fleet will be 
ready. Our success depends upon 
yours.” 
They left for Earth. 
A SINGLE E^rth week from 
the end of their journey, 
Mivar broke radio silence. “Morning Star calling Earth,” he announced. 
There was a blank, nerve-wracking silence, and then the response 
exploded at him. “Good God, man! 
We^d given you up. What happened?” 
“Transmitter broke down,” Mivar said. “We just got it fixed.” 
“How are you?” 
Mivar said laconically, “Three 
men lost. Holder and Anderson 
returning. Expect to orbit in seven 
days.” 
“How are you holding up?” 
“It’s been a rough trip, with 
just the two of us. We’re pretty 
tired. Reserve a couple of rooms 
for us at the bottom of a coal 
mine.” 
“Will do. This is great, just 
great. Tough about the others, of 
course, but — what sort of place 
is Venus?” 
“Damp,” Mivar said, and signed 
off. 
From the pilofs seat, Hezzit 
asked, “Ever3rthing all right?” 
“Seems to be,” said Mivar. 
“This will be a great triumph 
for Vril. And he deserves it.” 
“He certainly gave us a thorough preparation,” Mivar said. He 
remembered one interview with 
Major Holder, when Vril had 
asked, “How do you feel after a 
trip through space?” And the ma
ON THE DOUBLE 
jor had replied, “You feel like 
reserving a room at the bottom of 
a coal mine.” Mivar had memorized and absorbed the major’s habits of speech until they were his 
own. He had memorized the major’s own responses to himdreds of 
situations. Had it not been for 
the necessity of greeting the major’s mate, he would have looked 
forward eagerly to his visit to the 
planet Earth. 
Hezzit was imdergoing similar 
apprehensions. “This distinctive 
odor the Earthmen have,” he said. 
“Do you remember it?” 
“How could I forget it?” 
“Will the E^rth females have 
the same odor?” 
“I don’t know. I suppose they 
might. We can try to make it a 
short greeting.” 
“I wasn’t thinking about that. I 
can always — what’s the Earth 
expression?” 
“Hold your nose.”, 
“Right. I can always hold my 
nose — mentally, of course. But I 
was wondering if we have an odor 
that would be distinctive to the 
Earthmen.” 
Mivar caught his breath. “I 
hadn’t thought about that. Vril 
didn’t think of it.” 
“It’s a possibility. One never 
knows how one might smell to 
another species. And then — supposing they notice the lack of an 
Earthmah odor?” 
“There should be other things 
to keep their attention away from 
odors when we land.” 
“There’d better be.” 
O NE hour later. Earth time. 
General Rysdale, the commander of the Venus Project, 
called them. Mivar delivered his 
first report of a nonexistent Venus, 
and the general absorbed it intently. 
“The place sounds like a roaring 
hell,” he announced. 
“It certainly is that, sir,” Mivar 
said. 
“And you found nothing but 
those dismal swamps from pole 
to pole?” 
“There are a few low hills in the 
south-temperate zone, and what 
might be the remains of a mountain range around the north pole. 
Nothing much at either place but 
some rocks sticking up. And the 
place is hotter than the proverbial 
underworld.” 
“Then I guess we won’t be 
sending colonists to Venus.” 
“I should hope not, sir. If you 
do, don’t ask me to volunteer.” 
“What did you do for oxygen? 
You didn’t have enough for all this 
time. It’s more than two years 
since you left.” 
“There’s plenty of oxygen there, 
sir. It comes mixed with some 
gases that made the guinea pigs 
drop dead after one whiff. We 
didn’t try it ourselves, but we 
extracted the oxygen.” 
“You’re sounding good, Holder. 
How do you feel?” 
“Tired,” Mivar said. “Very tired. 
I won’t feel like much of anything 
until I get some rest.” 
“We’ll see that you get it — all 
you want. How’s your health?” 
“All right, as far as we know. 
We’re just tired.” 
The general signed off. The following day, Mivar was asked to 
dictate an official report on his 
experiences. He was prepared. He 
already had it memorized. 
After that, they reported their 
position twice daily, and shrugged 
off Earth’s solicitous interest in 
their welfare. They orbited on 
schedule and a small space tug 
towed them to the space station. 
They moved down a connecting 
tube to the station and their first 
contact with Earthmen. 
A colonel met them. Mivar 
came to attention, saluted snappily 
and began, “Colonel — ” 
“Nuts!” the colonel said, slapping him heartily on the back. 
“You never called me colonel before. Jim is good enough now. 
Besides, you’re a colonel yourself 
now. Mean to say they didn’t tell 
you?” 
Mivar accepted the hand the 
colonel thrust at him and said, 
“No. They didn’t tell us.” 
“Maybe the general’s keeping 
it for a surprise. Be sure and let 
it surprise you, or he might skin 
me.” 
H e stepped back and scrutinized Mivar. “You don’t look 
bad, fellow, considering what 
you’ve been through. I thought 
you’d be a stretcher case. You 
look just the same, except you’ve 
lost some weight.” 
“I feel different,” Mivar admitted. 
“Well, no wonder! You’ll get 
over that. All you need is some 
rest and some good cooking. But 
you’ve accomplished something, 
fellow. We’ve been wondering for 
centuries just what was behind 
those Venus clouds. Now we know. 
Nothing but swamp, eh?” 
“Not much more than swamp.” 
“And those big lizards — holy 
terrors, eh?” 
“I suppose you’d call them holy 
terrors. I don’t know that they 
were lizards. They just looked 
that way. Jones was our biologist, 
you know, and we never had a 
chance to discuss them with him.” 
“Tough. Poisonous, you say?” 
“One swipe of the claws and 
that was it” 
“Tough. I supFHDse we shouldn’t 
call them lizards. It’s natural to 
try to compare extraterrestrial life 
with Earth life, but it’s probably 
wrong. What did you call them?” 
“Nothing for publication,” Mivar said. 
The colonel slapped his back 
again and said, “Well, the rocket 
is ready to go. How are you, 
Anderson? Didn’t mean to neglect 
ON THE DOUBLE 
you. It’s Captain Anderson now, 
you know. I guess we’d better not 
keep the general waiting — especially since he has a mob of VIPs 
waiting with him.” 
They took seats in the rocket 
ship and strapp>ed themselves 
down. Hezzit flashed a thought at 
Mivar. ‘‘They don’t seem suspicious.” 
“No reason why they should,” 
Mivar flashed back. 
They had passed the first obstacle. 
Mivar had time for careful reflection as they dropped Earthward. He remembered the colonel 
from one of Major Holder’s dreamstrips, but the major had not given 
his name. In spite of this, no embarrassment had resulted. The 
Earthmen had accepted him naturally. 
It came to him as a momentous 
revelation that what they were 
doing was such a fabulous thing, 
such an inconceivable thing, that 
the Earthmen could not possibly 
susp>ect. The Earthmen had no 
reason to believe there was intelligent life on Venus. Even if there 
were, the Earthmen had no reason 
to believe it resembled themselves 
in any way. And if it did — who 
among them would expect inhabitants of Venus to return in the 
Morning Star, looking, talking, acting like members of the ill-fated 
crew, even knowing their innermost thoughts? 
If Mivar were to confess his 
deception now, they would think 
him mentally unbalanced. A medical examination would prove 
otherwise, of course, but Mivar 
and Hezzit would disappear before they became the subjects of 
examinations. 
He flashed a thought at Hezzit. 
“It’s going to be all right. They 
can’t possibly suspect anything.” 
Hezzit flashed back nervously, 
“I think we should have spent 
more time practicing that kiss.” 
“You didn’t have to remind 
me,” Mivar grumbled. 
T here were crowds at the 
landing field. It was much like 
the tumultuous welcome the returning Earthmen had been accorded in the dream-strips. Mivar, 
however, had the impression that 
the onlookers were curious radier 
than joyful. He walked down the 
landing ramp, waited for Hezzit, 
and the two of them moved off 
side by side. 
“How do you feel?” Mivar 
flashed. 
“Like I’ll be glad when it’s 
over.” 
The official welcoming party 
stood some distance away. The 
crowd was held back by a rope — 
Mivar had seen the same arrangement in several dream-strips. There 
were the photographers, the newsmen, and after looking at so many 
dream-strips, the whole seemed so 
familiar to Mivar that he had the 
impression of having been there 
before. 
When they approached the official party, he saw that there were 
several females among it. He 
searched their faces anxiously for 
one, and only one, and failed to 
find it. As he slowed his steps, one 
of the females broke away and 
raced toward them. She threw herself into Hezzifs arms, and Mivar 
saw with a thrill of satisfaction that 
Hezzit was handling himself with 
masterful correctness. 
“Everything all right?” Mivar 
flashed. 
Hezzit flashed back, “The thing 
reeks.” 
Mivar turned again to the little 
group that stood waiting. The familiar face, the hauntingly familiar 
face, was not there. He hesitated 
with a growing feeling of panic, 
running his eyes over the crowd 
that stood watching quietly. 
Suddenly he saw it. There could 
be no doubt. The female stood in 
the front line, hands on the rope. 
It was Holder’s mate. 
He hurried toward it. 
The face was smiling and weeping as he reached it. He stood with 
the rope between them and took 
the female into his arms. Its arms 
tightened around his neck. Its 
words came to him clearly above 
the noise of the crowd. 
“Jeff! Oh, Jeff. But— you shouldn’t have — ” 
The face brushed his. The lips 
moved toward his. He knew then 
that everything was all right. The 
deception was complete. No one 
would ever know. 
The next moment, pain exploded in his brain. 
G eneral Rysdale said, “One 
dead. What about the other?” 
“He just wouldn’t be taken alive, 
sir. Whatever they are, they’re 
some fighters. He took on an entire 
squad and flattened every one of 
them. Then he took their guns 
and started shooting. I didn’t think 
the casualties were worth it, and 
there was always the chance he’d 
turn a gun on himself the last 
minute.” 
“You’re probably right. I doubt 
that we could have made him talk, 
even if we’d taken him. If it had 
to be, it had to be.” 
“Did you get the report on Holder — I mean the one that looked 
like Holder?” 
“I got it. Extraterrestrial life, 
highly intelligent and damned 
cunning. The thing could have 
fooled Holder’s own mother. 
Colonel Meyers has known Holder 
all his life and he didn’t suspect a 
thing. Those two were equipped to 
do a more thorough spying job on 
this planet than could be imagined. 
How they were going to get the 
information back to Venus, I don’t 
know. We’ll have to take a careful look at the Morning Star,** 
ON THE DOUBLE 
“That’s being worked on now, 
sir.” 
“As for their procedure — I’ve 
been wondering about that insistence on a secluded rest. It didn’t 
sound unusual at the time, but 
now I’m beginning to wonder. 
They had something planned. They 
were going to collect information 
and get it back to Venus. What 
next? An invasion?” 
“I suppose it’s possible.” 
“You’re darned right it’s possible. They have an incredibly 
high technology. The miniature 
photographic equipment this phony 
Holder was carrying is beyond 
anything we can make. People 
with that ability can copy a spaceship, and we know darned well 
they can fly one. They got the 
Morning Star back here, and they 
put it on the station’s orbit about 
as slickly as the boys up there had 
ever seen it done. Well, we’re forewarned now. We’ll have a few surprises ready for any invaders.” 
“Since they won’t be getting the 
information, they might not invade.” 
“That’s possible, but we won’t 
count on it. We might even plan a 
little invading ourselves. We’ll 
throw out that tripe they fed us 
about Venus, too. Since it has a 
high civilization, it might even be 
a nice place to live. Did you talk 
to the girl?” 
“Yes, sir. She says she never 
knew Holder.” 
“That was a rather warm greeting for a man she never knew. 
Check it out. Holder had a reputation as a ladies’ man, and I think 
you’ll find she was number one 
on his list at the time he left 
Earth.” 
“I’ll check it all the way 
through, sir.” 
“It was a good plan they had. 
We shouldn’t underestimate them. 
It scares me to think how close 
they came to bringing it off. But—” 
he grinned and tilted back in his 
chair — ‘Sve had two good breaks. 
I don’t pretend to understand how 
they happened, but here they are. 
The first was that Holder had a 
jealous wife. The second was that 
this double of Holder’s greeted 
another woman so warmly right 
under Mrs. Holder’s nose. It horrified me at the time, but when I 
think back on it, it was nothing 
short of marvelous the way Mrs. 
Holder grabbed that guard’s gun 
and shot the Venusian dead.” 
— LLOYD HIGGLE, JR. 
★ ★ ★ ★ ★ 
irAl 
iiAL 
wIK^m 
1 HAVE the faint feeling that 
the word “moa” would be 
far less known than it is 
if it were not such a useful word 
for crossword-puzzle purposes. No 
statistics are available— as so often 
happens in the case of cultural 
items of probably undisputed value 
— but I would guess that a diligent 
researcher could turn up a different crossword puzzle for every 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
day in the year which shows three 
spaces to be filled in with something defined as “extinct bird.” 
To the naturalist, the three letters M-O-A spell something else 
again — it might as well be D. O. A. 
Exploring and literate men got to 
New Zealand too late to see the 
moas, just as they have been too 
late in quite a number of other 
places. To make the whole story 
more lamentable, exploring seamen occasionally did get to such 
interesting places in time. 
But they did not know what to 
look for, from our point of view. 
Maybe they simply missed what 
we would consider interesting. In 
some cases, one may suspect that 
they merely failed to write down 
what they saw. At any event, 
a modern naturalist, transported 
back to earlier but still historical 
times by time machine, could seize 
on various lost opportunities. 
He would have joined the Phoenician sailors, for example, who set 
out in 596 b.c. to round Africa at 
the request of Pharaoh Nekho (or 
Niku) and who actually succeeded 
in doing it during the two years 
that followed. We don’t know 
whether they passed through the 
channel separating Madagascar 
from the African mainland or 
whether they sailed “outside” of 
Madagascar. We do know that 
they made numerous landings; one 
of them may have been on Madagascar. If a modern naturalist had 
been along, he would have made 
sure of such a landing in order to 
look for the near-fabulous Aepyornis, the enormous ostrichlike extinct bird of that island. 
We don’t really know how it 
looked. Of course we can reconstruct its skeleton; in fact, we have. 
But we have no idea of its plumage. All we know is that it has not 
been extinct for very long. The 
Phoenicians of that trip would 
surely have found it; even the 
Crusaders might still have been in 
time. 
4 MODERN naturalist would 
also accompany the Arabs 
who at a reasonably early time 
sailed the Indian Ocean and did go 
as far east as Sumatra and Borneo. 
The modern naturalist would have 
talked the shipmaster into turning due south there to get to the 
Australian shore. Presumably he 
would have been in time to see 
the now extinct giant marsupials of 
Australia, colossi as large as the 
strongest bull. They were no longer 
among those present when Australia was actually discovered. 
Such a naturalist might even 
have seen the Megalania, indubitably preferring a safe shelter if 
this occasion came up. The Megalarda was a monitor lizard of which 
the following things are certain: it 
was enormous in size and did not 
become extinct until fairly recent 
times. 
As to its size, learned opinions 
differ — some scientists felt that 
the animal might have been more 
than thirty feet long; others gave 
it only twenty feet. 
The date of its extinction is 
equally uncertain. Anthropologists 
have concluded from native legends (which may or may not refer 
to this monitor) that the Megalarda was still alive less than a 
thousand years ago. But the remains actually found by naturalists look older than that. 
The last item in this condensed 
list of missed opportunities is that 
our naturalist should have been 
aboard the good ship Heemskirk 
when its captain, Abel Janszoon 
Tasman, saw high mountains rise 
from the sea on December 16, 
1642. This date marks the discovery of New Zealand. The modern naturalist would have made 
Tasman land instead of just sailing on. He then would certainly 
have been able to show Tasman 
a few moas. 
Like the Aepyomis of Madagascar, the moas were ostrichlike birds, 
many of them very large. But 
there were also smaller varieties. 
They were distributed over the 
three islands which comprise New 
Zealand, the two large ones which 
are now called North Island and 
South Island, and small Stewart 
Island to the south of South Island. 
The qualifying statement “now 
called” was necessary because on 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
some old maps you can find the 
present Stewart Island labeled as 
South Island. On these maps, the 
present South Island logically appears under the name of Middle 
Island. ^ 
We know the moas mostly from 
their bones that have been found 
in all three islands. In addition to 
the bones, a few feathers are known 
and quite a large number of eggshells that could be restored. Naturally we cannot tell which eggs 
belonged to which bird, for comparative size is no guide. The still 
living New Zealand kiwi, though 
probably not a direct relative of 
the moas, is at least of the same 
general type, and it throws any 
guesswork into the wastepaper basket. The kiwi, a smallish bird, lays 
an egg which is far larger, by comparison, than that of the African 
ostrich. On the other hand, the 
eggs of the cassowary are smaller 
than one would expect. 
OOTPRINTS are known, too, 
of both the larger and the 
smaller species. 'The small ones 
show a stride of not quite 20 
inches, while the large ones show 
a stride of over 30 inches. The 
large ones look surprisingly like 
some dinosaur footprints of much 
greater age. In the case of the footprints as well as of the length of 
the stride, there is a definite correlation between size of print and 
length of stride and the size of the 
bird. For this reason, at least some 
of the footprints can be tentatively ascribed to a species. 
The moas of the past are now 
subdivided into five different genera, each with several species. It 
should be said at the outset that 
some of the species are doubtful, 
since they are based on only a 
few remains. It is quite possible 
that we have a few more species in 
our catalogues than existed in 
reality; it has happened with other 
extinct animals that male and 
female were classified as two different species if they differed considerably. However, the following 
is the tentative list of the moas, 
by genera: 
Dinornis, The moas belonging 
to this genus were the tallest of 
the lot, their heads towering more 
than 12 feet above the ground. 
Largest of the six species was 
Dinornis maximus. All species were 
rather light-boned. 
Euryapteryx. The moas of this 
genus were squat and heavy but 
not very tall, their heads being five 
to six feet above the ground. They 
must have been very numerous at 
certain times. There are five recognized species; a sixth is uncertain. 
Megalapteryx. Two species from 
the South Island only. These were 
large for birds but small for moas, 
being not much over three feet 
tall. As the name of the genus indicates (from Greek megas, meaning large, and apteryx, the scien
Fig. 1: Reconstructed skeleton of a moo 
Fig. 2: The Kiwi, living bird of some type os 
moas but not closely related to them 
tific name of the kiwi), they might 
also be taken for giant kiwis. 
Emeus, Three recognized species 
with a fourth one uncertain, standing about four feet tall. 
Anomalapteryx, Five species, 
most of them very early and rather 
small, of about the size of the 
Megalapteryx moas. One of these 
five species grew seven feet tall; 
it is also the most recent of this 
genus. 
This list of genera, comprising 
just short of two dozen species, 
must not be misunderstood. At no 
time could one have found all 
twenty-two species alive on the 
islands. The best one could have 
expected would have been ten or 
eleven species alive simultaneously. 
Unfortunately, we cannot say what 
time that would have been. The 
era of the Homeric heroes— 1000 
B.C.— seems like a good guess. 
TlY now, I have told what is 
really known about the moas; 
ever 3 Tthing else is either unknown, 
or uncertain, or at least disputed. 
Even the story of how the moas 
became known to science is rather 
complicated. The first explorer to 
Fig. 3: Dinornis and eariy Maori, group in a New Zealand museum 
All photographs: Courtesy New Zealand Government, Tourist Department 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
land on New Zealand and to talk 
to the Maori living there was Captain James Cook, during his visit 
in November 1769. With the aid 
of interpreters who seem to have 
been of doubtful value, Captain 
Cook spoke to the Maori chieftain 
Tawaihura and asked him, among 
other things, about the animals occurring on the island. 
Chief Tawaihura told the captain about a large and dangerous 
lizard — which must have been 
purely mythological, since no really 
large lizard does or did exist on 
New Zealand — but did not say a 
word about large birds. We can be 
rather certain now that there were 
no moas in the area where Tawaihura lived, even though they may 
still have existed elsewhere. With 
great fire and lack of logic, some 
scientists have made much of this 
omission, taking the negative evidence of Captain Cook’s journals 
as positive proof that the moas 
became extinct at a much earlier 
date. 
Beginning about the year 1800, 
people began to visit New Zealand 
and write books about their travels. 
Strangely enough, none of the first 
six books written on New Zealand 
(or about New Zealand) even 
mentions the moas. The first book 
to mention them does not use the 
name; it is a narrative that was 
published in LfOndon in 1838. Its 
writer was a trader by the name of 
Joel S. Polack and it is merely one 
more kink in the story that a missionary who knew Polack swore 
that Polack could not write. 
Well, the book with Polack’s 
name on it exists; the New York 
Public Library at Fifth Avenue 
and 42 nd Street has a copy of it 
and I have read it myself. I cannot imagine that a trader can pursue his business and presumably 
make a profit without being able 
to write, but it might easily be that 
trader Polack did not write English 
and that the printed book is a 
translation of a manuscript in another language. At any event, 
trader Polack relates that he was 
shown very large bones and adds 
that the animals these bones came 
from were alive on the South 
Island. But he did not make clear 
what made him say so. Did the 
Maori tell him? Or did he draw 
this conclusion himself? 
At about the time trader Polack 
was there, a Reverend William 
Colenso began hearing stories about 
gigantic birds from natives, and 
another missionary, the Reverend 
William Williams, started collecting moa bones. 
^ ■''HE first moa relic to be placed 
into scientific hands was a large 
leg bone with both ends broken 
off. The year was 1839 and the 
hands which received this bone 
were very competent indeed, belonging to Professor Richard Owen, 
of London. They also happened 
to be reluctant hands — Professor 
Owen actually took it to be a soup 
bone at first glance. Even the 
simple fact that Owen received 
this bone has been embroidered 
nearly out of recognition. A story 
has it that “an illiterate sailor” left 
the bone for Owen when the professor was not at home. 
Well, the man who took it there, 
and Owen was at home, was a 
. sailor all right, but far from illiterate. He was the surgeon Dr. 
John Rule who had specifically 
traveled to England with the bone 
to see Professor Owen. When 
Owen was imiihpressed. Rule persuaded him to devote more time 
to it 
Owen first “tried” the bone in 
the museum by holding it against 
the skeleton of a cow. It did not 
“fit” Owen tried the skeleton of 
a horse next. Finally, having run 
out of large mammals, he held it 
next to the leg of an ostrich skeleton. This was it! The bone matched 
that of the ostrich, except for size. 
Once Owen was convinced, 
nothing could hold him back. His 
colleagues, though admitting that 
it seemed to belong to a bird, suggested that he wait imtil more and 
undamaged bones became available. But Owen would have none 
of it. He knew that this was a bird 
bone, having belonged to a bird 
of the general build of an ostrich, 
but bigger and more massive by 
far. And since the bone was not 
fossil, the bird could not be dead 
for very long. 
Thus Owen prepared a scientific report. It could not be very 
long, but what there was of it was 
very positive. Moreover, Owen 
reasoned, a layman does not know 
what to look for unless a scientist tells him. So he ordered the 
printing of 500 extra copies of his 
short report, to be distributed in 
New Zealand among missionaries, 
shipping agents and settlers. The 
500 copies were crated for shipment to New Zealand to serve as 
a call for more evidence. But before the crate with the pamphlets 
had even crossed the equator, 
another crate arrived in London. 
It was full of moa bones, the 
bones collected by the Reverend 
Williams. 
There was, it is reported, some 
ludicrous trouble with the Royal 
customs inspectors who found some 
kind of rule against the importing 
of bones. Fighting, so to speak, the 
British Museum and the Royal 
Society, not to mention Owen himself, the ones who lost were the 
customs inspectors. The final outcome of it all was a magnificent 
report by Professor Richard Owen. 
A FEW years later, an interesting story came from New 
Zealand. Governor FitzRoy had 
met an old Maori chieftain by the 
name of Haumatangi. The year 
was 1844 and Haumatangi was 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
about 85 years old. The old man 
told the governor proudly that he 
remembered seeing Captain Cook. 
Since the visit referred to was the 
one of November 1773, Haumatangi must have been about 14 at 
the time, so the claim sounded 
credible. Haumatangi added that 
the last moa in his province had 
been seen two years before Captain Cook’s visit This statement, of 
course, had to be taken on face 
value. 
Another story which was circulated a little later had it that 
another chieftain, Kawana Paipai, 
said he had taken part in a moa 
hunt when he was a boy. The date 
figured out to be 1798 or 1799. 
Two or three other Maori, questioned around the middle of the 
last century about moas, declared 
that their grandfathers had told 
them about moa hunts. These dates 
all worked out to about 1770. It 
looked, therefore, as if the last 
moas were hunted to death around 
1800. 
In New Zealand itself, scientific 
opinions began to be sharply divided, the battle cry being, strangely enough, “the men of The Fleet” 
who did, or did not, find islands 
populated with moas. It has to be 
explained here that the Maori had 
come from islands near Tahiti in 
several waves of immigration. The 
main (and latest) wave is called 
The Fleet and the generally accepted date is “around 1350 aj)..” 
One school of thought — which 
became the minority party — had 
it that the Maori of The Fleet 
began to kill the moas for food and 
that the process of extermination 
was complete in Captain Cook’s 
time. Another school of thought, 
however, claimed that the men of 
The Fleet arrived just about in 
time to see the last of the moas 
die. 
It has to be said that everything written and printed about 
the moas in New Zealand for several decades was not written to 
establish facts, but to defend either 
the one or the other school of 
thought 
The ones who said the moas had 
died out very early had quite a 
number of ingenious arguments. 
So-and-so-many Maori (say 
during the period from 1840 to 
1860) did not know that moa 
bones had belonged to birds when 
they were shown them. 
The word “moa” itself was used 
to mean “stone” or a raised small 
piece of land, like a flower bed. 
There were only a very few 
proverbs and sayings in which the 
moas figured; they were usually 
figures of speech like “gone like 
the moa.” These proverbs seemed 
to be centuries old. 
As regards the statement that 
“my grandfather said that he 
hunted moas,” it was pointed out 
that the words “grandfather” and 
“ancestor” are the same in the 
Maori language. As for old Haumatangi, he had probably just embellished on his memories of long 
ago hearing folk legends. 
And Kawana Paipai was disposed of in two ways. One was 
that he also told about battles 
which were obviously invented. 
The other was that he had never 
made his statement about the moa 
hunt; the point being that there 
were at least three white witnesses 
to the statement and only one of 
them repeated it later. 
TN the meantime, places where 
moas had been slaughtered and 
cooked were foimd. There could 
be absolutely no doubt that humans and moas had lived together 
at one time. The problem was to 
say when. 
Some scientists assumed a different native population, not only 
pre-Fleet but pre-Maori, which 
must have been the moa hunters. 
Other scientists said that the moahunter period did not have to be 
any other culture than Maori; they 
had been Maori of an earlier cultural level. This idea was contradicted mostly by the Maori themselves, who refused to believe that 
their ancestors should ever have 
changed, and who imagined the 
sailors of The Fleet to have been 
precisely like their fathers and 
grandfathers of about 1800. This, 
of course, just wasn’t so — the 
Maori, like all peoples, changed 
considerably through the centuries. 
Actually, everybody seems to be 
right depending on where you look. 
A number of moa-hunter campsites are indubitably Maori Some 
others are almost certainly not 
Maori — of any cultural level 
There seem to have been earlier 
castaways who settled on New 
Zealand and who did not come as 
organized immigrants like the 
Maori of The Fleet. 
A fairly new scientific tool has 
been brought into play with some 
hopes of deciding the endless battle 
about the time of the moa hunters and, if possible, of the last of 
the moas. This tool is radio-carbon 
dating, or the C-14 method, which 
can tell the age of many things 
by their amount of carbon- 14. 
There are just two requirements. 
The first is that whatever it is that 
must be dated must once have 
been alive, bone or wood or even 
charcoal, for non-living things do 
not take up carbon- 14 from the 
atmosphere. The second is that the 
object must not be older than 
25,000 years or thereabouts; after 
that time, the carbon- 14 is gone 
and the age becomes uncertain, 
except that it clearly is more than 
25,000 years. Another aspect of 
the C-14 method is, unfortunately, 
that the object to be dated is 
destroyed in the process, so that 
scientists are rather handicapped 
when it comes to valuable specimens. 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
One Dinomis specimen was 
found in a freshwater deposit with 
its crop reasonably intact. And the 
crop was still full of food (plants) 
which could be sacrificed for dating. The result — these plants were 
eaten by the bird about 670 years 
ago or about 1300 a.d. To some, 
this was a surprisingly late date 
for Dinomis, because they had assumed that even the pre-Fleet 
Maori only knew the heavy Euryapteryx type. 
T he argument of whether the 
moa hunters were pre-Maori 
people, pre-Fleet Maori or just 
Maori after The Fleet must not 
be taken to mean that the extinction of the moas is placed squarely 
on the shoulders of the moa hunters, whoever they were. 
Even if nobody had ever come 
to New Zealand prior to Captain 
Cook, the moas would probably be 
rare birds by now. They were 
completely flightless, they probably 
bred slowly, and they were most 
exceptionally stupid, for the brain 
of a six-foot moa was the same size 
I 
as that of a turkey. Many moas 
died in swamps, indicating they 
probably could not swim. On the 
North Island, many perished at 
one time because of forest fires set 
by volcanic eruptions. There is 
some evidence of disease among 
the moas. But the main reason 
their numbers declined seems to 
have been a fairly small climatic 
change which diminished the open 
plains and increased the forest and 
swamp areas. 
The moas were obviously on 
the downgrade for natural reasons. 
The moa hunters merely helped 
along and may have provided the 
final touch in the demise of the 
moa. But when was that? 
Nobody will commit himself. 
The proof that even the tall 
Dinomis type was still active and 
alive at the time of The Fleet has 
been rather a blow to some of the 
archeologists of New Zealand. In 
the course of time, the party which 
had proclaimed a very early date 
for the last of the moas had succeeded in attaining the position of 
“the voice of science.** What they 
said was “science** and what the 
others had said was either amateurish, or just the spirit of the 
nineteenth century, or else a wrong 
conclusion due to lack of evidence 
that has become known since — 
the phrasing depended to some extent on whose opinion was being 
demolished. 
In one point, however, even the 
most conservative wing of the New 
Zealand scientists was rather lenient. It was admitted that small 
moas of the Megalapteryx type 
may have survived imtil quite recent times on the South Island. 
Roger Duff, the Director of the 
Canterbury Museum in New Zealand (and one of those “shocked** 
by the outcome of the carbon- 14 
dating), dates two Maori-made artifacts using moa skin and moa 
feathers as from the seventeenth 
and eighteenth century respectively. Roger DufFs dating, incidentally, is based entirely on archeological and ethnological evidence. 
Zoologists seem to feel that 
something must be wrong, even 
though they can’t say what or 
why. 
The simple fact is that some 
of the moa remains do not look as 
old as the archeologists say they 
must be. And New Zealand is not 
a place with a dry climate which 
tends to preserve animal remains 
indefinitely. 
¥T is interesting that the most 
recent story of a moa hunt 
came from the South Island, in 
fact from the southwestern end 
of the South Island where the 
Takahe — scientific name Notornis — was finally discovered alive 
after having been thought extinct. 
That stoiy takes up just one 
part of one paragraph in vol. II 
of Sir Walter Lawry Buller’s History of the Birds of New Zealand, 
published in London in 1888. The 
sentence reads: "Sir George Grey 
tells me that in 1868 he was at 
Preservation Inlet and saw a party 
of natives there who gave him a 
circumstantial account of the recent killing of a small Moa, describing with much spirit its cap. 
ture out of a drove of six or 
seven.” 
That’s all, but it might be prudent to say that Sir George Grey 
had been, in succession, Governor 
of South Australia, twice Governor of New Zealand and then Governor of the Cape Colony — in 
short, not somebody you would 
expect to make up tales. 
It is true that there has been 
no report since then, at least not 
one that could be called definite. 
But there still are virtually unknown areas on the South Island. 
Maybe the last of the moas, even 
if a small type, is still somewhere 
around. I don’t assert that this 
must be the case. But there is also 
no reason for stating categorically 
.that the final chapter has been 
written. 
-—WILLY LEY 
The Big News Next Month . 
TIME KILLER 
by 
Robert Sheckley 
It stands to reason that the last thing a man can bungle is his own 
death. But not Blaine! See why in this first book-length Sheckley story! 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
The massive planet, Mesklin, was 
tauntingly just out of reach of Earth's 
scientists. Marooned deep at its south 
pole was a specially designed rocket 
filled with measuring instruments and 
vital facts about the strangely shaped 
planet and its fantastic force of gravity. But no man could land and recover the rocket; no man could sustain that force of gravity. 
The small Mesklinites were earth's 
only hope. One of Earth's young scientists made a deal with a Mesklin 
sea captain who agreed to make the 
long, arduous journey to the south 
pole and recover the rocket. It was 
a strange deal, and the daring and 
resourceful little captain never made 
quite clear just what he would expect 
in return. 
Thus the Bree and her crew started 
on their odyssey into the unknown 
across the wastes of Mesklin, over 
seas and lands bristling with barbarians. Overhead, the scientists directed 
them from their hovering space ship, 
little suspecting the devious plans of 
the captain, or the possibility that all 
the science on Earth might not be 
able to meet the demands of the 
sturdy Mesklinites. 
the stroke of the sun 
By ARTHUR C. CLARKE 
''Kill the umpire!" the audience 
cried — and why shouldn't they? 
He was on the ball, wasn't he? 
S OMEX)N£ else should be 
telling this story — someone who understands the 
funny kind of football they play 
down in South America. Back in 
Moscow, Idaho, we grab the ball 
and run with it. In the small but 
prosperous republic which I’ll call 
Perivia, they kick it aroimd with 
their feet. And that is nothing to 
what they do to the umpire. 
One of the first things I learned 
when I got to Perivia, after various distressing adventures in the 
less democratic parts of South 
America, was that last year’s 
match had been lost owing to the 
knavish dishonesty of the referee. 
He had, it seemed, penalized most 
of the players on the team, disal
lliustrated by WOOD 
THE STROKE OF THE SUN 
lowing a goal, and generally made 
sure that the best side wouldn’t 
win. 
This diatribe made me quite 
homesick, but remembering where 
I was, I merely commented, “You 
should have paid him more 
money.” 
“We did,” was the bitter reply, 
“but the Panagurans got at him 
later.” 
“Too bad,” I answered. “It’s 
hard nowadays to find an honest 
man who stays bought” 
The customs inspector who’d 
just taken my last hundred-dollar 
bill had the grace to blush beneath 
his stubble as he waved me across 
the border. 
The next few weeks were tough, 
but presently I was back in what 
I prefer to call the agricultural 
machinery business. The last thing 
I had time to bother about was 
football; I knew that my expensive imports were going to be used 
at any moment, and wanted to 
make sure that this time my profits 
went with me when I left the 
country. 
Even so, I could hardly ignore 
the excitement as the day for the 
return match drew nearer. For one 
thing, it interfered with business. 
I’d go to a conference, arranged 
with great difficulty and expense 
at a safe hotel, and half of the 
time everyone would be talking 
about football. 
“Gentlemen!” Fd protest “Our 
next consignment of rotary drills is 
being unloaded tomorrow, and imless we get that permit from the 
Minister of Agriculture, some busybody may open the cases and 
then . .” 
“Don’t worry, my boy,” General Sierra or Colonel Pedro would 
answer airily, “that’s already taken 
care of. Leave it to the Army.” 
1 KNEW better than to retort 
“Which army?” and for the 
next ten minutes Fd have to listen 
to arguments about football tactics and the best way of dealing 
with recalcitrant referees. 
It was then that Don Hernando 
Dias’ name came up foi^ the first 
time. I knew of him as one of the 
country’s leading industrialists, but 
he had an equal reputation as playboy, racing-car driver and scientific dilettante. It surprised me to 
learn that he was one of us, for he 
was also a favorite of President 
Ruiz. Naturally Fd never met 
him; he had to be very particular 
about his friends, and there were 
few people who cared to meet me 
unless they had to. 
I suspected that something was 
happening when I took my place 
in the football stadium on that 
memorable day. If you think I had 
no wish to be there, you are quite 
correct. But Colenel Pedro had 
given me a ticket and it was unhealthy to hurt his feelings by not 
using it 
There had been a slight delay 
in admitting the spectators; the 
police had done their best, but it 
takes time to search a hundred 
thousand people for concealed firearms. The visiting team had insisted on this, to the great indignation of the locals. The protests 
faded swiftly enough, however, as 
the artillery accumulated at the 
checkpoints. 
Then a sweating band played 
the two national anthems, the 
teams were presented to El Presidente and his lady, and the Cardinal blessed everybody. 
While we were waiting, I 
examined the program, a beautifully produced affair that had been 
given to me by the lieutenant. It 
was tabloid-sized, printed on art 
paper, and bound in metal foil that 
gleamed like silver. You could see 
your face in it, and I noticed a 
number of ladies using it to make 
last -minute repairs and adjustments. I also noticed that this 
“Special Victory Souvenir Issue” 
had been paid for by an impressive list of subscribers, headed by 
Don Hernando, who had himself, 
it seemed, presented fifty thousand 
free copies to our gallant fighting men. 
If this was a bid for popularity, 
it seemed a rather naive one. And 
surely President Ruiz wouldn’t 
let half his army be bottled up 
in this stadium for the best part 
of an afternoon . 
These reflections were interrupted by the roar of the enormous crowd as play started. For 
the first ten minutes, it was a 
pretty open game and I don’t 
think there were more than three 
fights. The Perivians just missed 
one goal; the ball was headed out 
so neatly that the frantic applause 
from the Panaguran supporters 
(who had a special police guard 
and a fortified section of the 
stadium all to themselves) went 
quite unbooed. I began to feel 
disappointed. Why, if you changed 
the shape of the ball, this might 
be a good-natured Idaho game. 
T^HERE was no real work for 
the Red Cross until nearly 
half-time, when three Perivians 
and two Panagurans (or it may 
have been the other way round) 
fused together in a magnificent 
melee from which only one survivor emerged under his own 
power. The casualties were carted 
off amid much pandemonium and 
there was a short break while replacements were brought up. 
This started the first major 
incident: the Perivians complained 
that the other side’s wounded were 
shamming so that fresh reserves 
could be poured in. But the referee 
was adamant, the new men came 
on, and -the background noise 
dropped to just below the 
threshold of pain as the game resumed. 
THE STROKE OF THE SUN 
The Panagurans promptly scored, 
and though none of my neighbors 
actually committed suicide, several 
seemed close to it. The transfusion 
of new blood had apparently 
pepped up the visitors, and things 
looked bad for the home team. 
Their opponents were passing the 
ball with such skill that the Perivian defenses were as porous as a 
sieve. At this rate, I told myself, 
the ref can afford to be honest; 
his side will win anyway. And to 
give him his due, I’d seen no sign 
of any obvious bias so far. 
I didn’t have long to wait. A 
last-minute rally by the home team 
blocked a threatened attack on 
their goal, and a mighty kick by 
one of the defenders sent the ball 
rocketing toward the other end of 
the field. Before it had reached 
the apex of its flight, the piercing 
shriek of the referee’s whistle 
brought the game to a halt. There 
was a brief consultation between 
ref and captains; the crowd was 
roaring its disapproval. 
“Whafs happening now?” I 
asked plaintively. 
“The ref says our man was offside.” 
“But how can he be? He’s on 
top of his own goal!” 
“Shush!” said the lieutenant, obviously unwilling to waste time 
enlightening my ignorance. I don’t 
shush easily, but this time I let 
it go and tried to work things out 
for myself. It seemed that the ref 
had awarded the Panagurans a 
free kick at our goal, and I could 
imderstand the way everybody felt 
about it. 
The ball soared through the air 
in a beautiful parabola, nicked 
the post — and cannoned in. A 
mighty roar of anguish rose from 
the crowd, then died abruptly to a 
silence that was even more impressive. It was as if a great animal 
had been wounded ■— and was biding the time for its revenge. 
Despite the heat pouring down 
from the not-far-from-vertical sun, 
I felt a sudden chill as if a cold 
wind had swept past me. Not for 
all the wealth of the Incas would 
I have changed places with the 
man sweating out there on the 
field in his bulletproof vest. 
W E were two down, but there 
was still hope — a lot could 
happen before the end of the game. 
The Perivians were on their mettle 
now, playing with almost demonic 
intensity, like men who had accepted a challenge and were going to show that they could beat it. 
The new spirit paid off promptly. The home team scored one 
impeccable goal within a couple 
of minutes and the crowd went 
wild with joy. By this time, I was 
shouting like everyone else and 
telling that referee things I didn’t 
know I could say in Spanish. It 
was 1 — 2 now, and a hundred 
thousand people were pra 3 ong and 
THE 
STROKE OF THE SUN 
cursing for the goal that would 
bring us level again. 
It came just after half-time. The 
ball had been passed to one of 
our forwards; he ran about fifty 
feet with it, evaded a couple of 
the defenders with some neat footwork, and kicked it cleanly into 
the goal. It had scarcely dropped 
down from the net when that 
whistle blew again. 
Now what? I wondered. He 
can’t disallow that. 
But he did. The ball, it seemed, 
had been handled. I’ve got pretty 
good eyes and I never saw it. So 
I cannot honestly say that I blame 
anyone for what happened next. 
The police managed to keep the 
crowd off the field, though it was 
touch and go for a minute. The 
two teams drew apart, leaving the 
center of the pitch bare except for 
the stubbornly defiant figure of the 
referee. He was probably wondering how he could make his escape 
from the stadium, and was consoling himself with the thought that 
when this game was over, he could 
retire for good. 
The thin, high bugle call took 
everyone completely by surprise— 
everyone, that is, except the fifty 
thousand well-trained men who 
had been waiting for it with mounting impatience. The whole arena 
became instantly silent, so silent 
that I could hear the noise of the 
traffic outside the stadium. A 
second time that bugle sounded — 
and all the vast acreage of faces 
opposite me vanished in a blinding sea of fire. 
I cried out and covered my 
eyes; for one horrified moment, I 
thought of atomic bombs and 
braced myself uselessly for the 
blast. But there was no concussion — only that flickering veil of 
flame that beat even through my 
closed eyelids for long seconds, 
then vanished as swiftly as it had 
come when the bugle blared out 
for the third and last time. 
Everything was just as it had 
been before, except for one minor 
item. Where the referee had been 
standing, there was a small, smoldering heap, from which a thin 
column of smoke curled up into 
the still air. 
What in heaven’s name had 
happened? 
I turned to my companion, who 
was as shaken as I was. ^^Madre 
de Dios,” I heard him mutter. “I 
never knew it would do that** 
He was staring, not at the small 
funeral down there on the field, 
but at the handsome souvenir program spread across his knees. And 
then, in a flash of incredulous comprehension, I understood. 
S ELDOM do we realize just 
how much energy there is in 
sunlight. I’ve since looked it up, 
and the experts say that more than 
a horsepower hits every square 
yard of the E^arth. Those fifty 
thousand well-trained fans with 
their tin-foil reflectors had intercepted most of the heat falling on 
one side of that enormous stadium 
and aimed it all in one direction. 
Even allowing for the programs 
that weren’t tilted accurately, the 
late ref must have absorbed the 
heat of about a thousand electric 
fires. He couldn’t have felt much; 
it was as if he had been dropped 
into a blast furnace . 
I doubt if even the ingenious 
Don Hernando realized exactly 
what would happen when he had 
talked his trusting friend, President Riaz, into lending him the 
necessary manpower. The welldrilled fans had been told that the 
ref would merely be dazzled out 
of action for the game. But I’m 
sure that no one had any regrets; 
they play football for keeps in 
Perivia. 
Likewise politics. While the 
game was continuing to its now 
predictable end, beneath the benign gaze of a new and understandably docile referee, my 
friends were hard at work. When 
our victorious team had marched 
off the field (the final score was 
14 — 2), everything had been settled, There had been practically no 
shooting, and as the President 
emerged from the stadium, he was 
politely informed that a seat had 
been reserved for him on the 
morning flight to Mexico City. 
A S General Sierra remarked to 
me, when I boarded the same 
plane as his late chief, “We let the 
Army win the football match, and 
while it was busy, we won the 
country. So everybody’s happy.” 
Though I was too polite to voice 
any doubts, I could not help thinking that this was a rather shortsighted attitude. Several million 
Panagurans were very unhappy indeed, and sooner or later there 
would be a day of reckoning. 
I suspect that it’s not far away. 
Last week a friend of mine, who 
is one of the world’s top experts 
in our specialized field, indiscreetly blurted out one of his problems 
to me. 
“Joe,” he said, “why the devil 
should anyone want me to build 
a guided missile that can fit inside a football?” 
— ARTHUR C. CLARKE 
★ ★ ★ ★ ★ 
THE STROKE OF THE SUN 
FROM AN 
By ROSEL GEORGE BROWN 
You can't beat my Unde Isadore — he's 
dead but he's quick — yet that is just 
what he was daring me to try and do! 
Illustrated by DILLON 
UNSEEN CENSOR 
U NCLE Isadore’s ship wasn’t 
in bad shape, at first 
glance. But a second look 
showed the combustion chamber 
was crumpled to pieces and the 
jets were fused into the rocks, making a smooth depression. 
The ship had tilted into a horizontal position, nestling in the hollow its last blasts had made. Dust 
had sifted in around it, piling over 
the almost invisible seam of the 
port and filming the whole ship. 
We circled around the ship. It 
was all closed and sealed, blind as 
a bullet. 
‘‘Okay,” Rene said. “He’s dead. 
My regrets.” He coughed the word 
out as though it were something 
he had swallowed by accident. 
“But how do you know?” I 
asked. “He might be in there.” 
“That port hasn’t been opened 
for months. Maybe , years. I told 
you the converter wouldn’t last 
more than a month in dock. He 
FROM AN UNSEEN CENSOR 
couldn’t live locked up in there 
without air and water. Lrefs go.” 
My guide had no further interest 
in the ship. He hadn’t even looked 
to see what the planet was like. 
I stood shivering in my warm 
clothes. The ship seemed to radiate 
a chill. I looked around at the 
lumpy, unimaginative landscape 
of Alvarla. There was nothing in 
sight but a scraggly, dun heather 
sprouting here and there in the 
rocks and dust, and making hirsute 
patches on the low hills. 
I had some wild idea, I think, 
that Uncle Izzy might come sauntering nonchalantly over the hills, 
one hand in the pocket of a grilchdown jacket and the other holding 
a Martian cigarene. And he would 
have on his face that look which 
makes everything he says seem 
cynical and slightly clever even 
if it isn’t. 
“The scenery is dull,” he might 
say, ^^ut it makes a nice backdrop for you.” Something like that, 
leaving the impression he’d illuminated a side of your character 
for you to figure out later on. 
IYOTHING of the kind happened, of course. I just got 
colder standing there. 
“All right,” Rene said. “We’ve 
had a moment of silence. Now let’s 
go.” 
“I— there’s something wrong,” I 
told him. “Let’s go in and see the 
—the body.” 
“We can’t go in. That diip’s 
sealed from the inside. You think 
they make those things so any 
painted alien can open the door 
and shoot in poisoned arrows? Believe me, he has to be inside if 
those outside ports are sealed. And 
he has to be dead because that 
port hasn’t been opened in months. 
Look at the dust! It’s a fourth 
of the way up the port” 
Rene lumbered over to it and 
blew away some of the lighter dust 
higher up. 
“See that?” he asked. 
“No.” 
He groaned. “Well, you’ll have 
to takp my word for it It’s a raindrop. Almost four months old. A 
very light rain. You could see 
the faint, crusted outline of the 
drop if you knew how to look.” 
“I believe you,” I said. “I hired 
you because you know which side 
of the trees the moss grows on 
and things like that. Still . .” 
Rene was beginning to stomp 
around impatiently. “Still what?^ 
“It just isn’t like Uncle Isadore.” 
I was trying to search out, myself, 
what it was that struck me as incongruous. “It’s out of character.” 
“It’s out of character for anybody to die,” Rene said. “But I’ve 
seen a lot of them dead.” 
“I mean at least he would have 
died outside.” 
“Oh, for Pete’s sake! Why outside? You think he took rat 
poison?” 
N ot until five years later did I 
find out what happened to the 
rest of good old Uncle Algernon’s 
fortune. 
I was stretched out on a gently 
undulating force-field in my interior patio, a huge, scarlet fanflower tree sifting in the sunshine. 
Leda, her pink hair flowing down 
to her knees, was just emerging 
from the pool of grilch milk. She 
bent to an Aphrodite of Cnidos 
position. 
‘‘Perfect!” I said, and threw 
away my cigarene. 
“Depart!” I told the robot, who 
came rolling in. 
“But, master, it’s the Cha’n of 
Betelgeuse, Lord of the Seven 
Planets and the Four Hundred 
Moons.” 
“Get dressed, Leda,” I said regretfully. “We have company.” 
I’d never met him, but I knew 
he was one of Uncle Isadore’s best 
friends and I felt obliged to see 
him. 
The Cha’n had several meals 
and four cigarenes, maintaining a 
courteous silence all the while. 
Then he loosened his belt, reached 
into his furry pouch and handed 
me a piece of copper scroll. 
It was a check for five million 
dollars. 
“You won,” he told me. “Or lost, 
as the case may be.” 
I just looked at him. 
“I was holding it in trust for 
you,” the Cha’n explained, “in accordance with your Uncle Isadore’s last wishes.” 
I blew a perfect smoke ring, 
let it float before my face for a 
perfect moment, and then asked, 
“And suppose I had lost? Or won, 
as the case may be?” 
“I was to save it to try on your 
son, the gods permitting you have 
one.” 
“If necessary,” I told him, “I’ll 
try it on him myself, O Cha’n of 
the Seven Planets and the Four 
Hundred Moons.” 
“Call me Charlie,” he said. 
— ROSEL GEORGE BROWN 
FOR 2500 YEARS 
Man has sought the state of ”CLEAR'^ 
This state is now attainable for the first time in Man's History. 
The goal of all Mystic and Occult Science has been attained. 
It can be done for you. 
Write H A S I 
1812 19th Street, N.W. Washington 9, D.C. 
But that dream of the African 
estate kept irritating the back of 
my mind. And the large, free sky 
of Alvarla was soothing to the 
eye, when compared to the little 
squares of blue I noted occasionally when riding the slidewalks of 
Brooklyn. 
What did I want out of life, anyway? Damn Uncle Isadore. I’d 
never test 10:9 on job adjustment 
again. 
I was still thinking when evening swept in fast,- as it does in dry 
climates, and the birds began to 
wake up and climb out of the 
crater, presumably to forage for 
food. 
‘^Wait!” I cried. "Isadore!” 
T DREW out a lunch package 
and spread it to attract him. 
It attracted all of them. 
I pulled out "The Dodo.” 
" "Tell me what thy lordly name 
is / On the Night’s Plutonian 
shore.’ ” 
"Isadore,” he volunteered, swallowing fast while I climbed aboard 
him. 
"Take me back.” ; 
Then I realized I had made a 
mistake with the food. 
"Gro!” I cried. "Spaceship! More 
food!” He just stood there, his 
beak poking around the groimd 
for crumbs. 
But I had to get that skin spray 
washed off before twenty-four 
hours were up. 
"Nepenthe!” I shouted desperately. 
The dodo was off like a flash 
and didn’t stop till we were back 
at the ship. 
"You were gone quite a while,” 
Rene said nonchalantly. "Find 
an5^ing?” 
"Enough to pay you off,” I said. 
"And we’ll make it five thousand 
because I found it. Stow this somewhere. It’s perfume.” 
He did. "Find anything else?” 
"Nothing that would interest 
you. ni be ready to blast off as 
soon as I’ve had a shower.” 
Rene shrugged. 
The perfume, when we returned 
to Earth, proved to be worth what 
he’d said it would be. A lot of 
people wanted to know where I’d 
gotten it. "The crops on Odoria,” 
they said, "are entirely sewed up 
by Odoria, Inc.” 
"They certainly are,” I always 
replied agreeably. 
It took all I cleared from the 
perfume to put a down payment 
on a ship and hire an expert on 
fertilizing perfume flowers. But 
this time I wanted to run the show. 
Mr, Picks shook his head sadly 
when I told him to replace me 
permanently. 
"You have a great future ahead 
of you in studs and neck clasps,” 
he said. "Why not take a little 
time and reconsider your decision? 
Or-” 
"Nevermore,” I answered. 
FROM AN UNSEEN CENSOR 
dream Fd had since the one about 
succeeding Mr. Picks. Only very 
different. 
I’d made a fortxme cultivating 
perfume trees. My dream was full 
of perfume. Some of it came from 
the exotic plants of my African estate. Some of it was from a longlegged, pink-haired girl, the kind 
African millionaires have. 
It was the sort of dream, I 
mused, unable to keep it in mood 
any longer, as large-minded men 
have. Men like — Uncle Isadore! 
I sat up suddenly. Uncle Isadore — large-minded? Why hadn’t 
he had the avuncular decency to 
leave me his fortune the usual 
way? 
Why? 
B ecause then he wouldn’t be 
able to play penny-ante psychology and get me dreaming 
about wild schemes with perfume 
trees and African estates. That’s 
why. 
Or maybe there wasn’t any fortune! Suddenly I understood why 
people smoke. It gives them something to do when they feel helpless. 
If there wasn’t any fortune, then 
I was hopelessly tied to the perfume trees. If Uncle Izzy had lost 
his last cent, it would be very 
like him to borrow enough from 
friends to finance a perfume tree 
scheme. And if he didn’t make it 
to the planet he had in mind — 
why, he’d make the planet he’d 
crashed on do. 
Anyone else would have shot 
the birds for fresh meat. Anyone 
else would have seen immediately 
that Alvarla was the last planet 
in the Galaxy where perfume trees 
would grow. 
Anyone else would have seen 
immediately that I was one of the 
minor, comfortable people in the 
world who likes the happy regularities of a little job and an assured, if limited, future. Anyone 
else would have seen I had the 
sort of personality that could not 
be changed. 
But Uncle Izzy wasn’t anyone 
else. 
Why did I keep smelling the 
perfume from my dream? 
I followed my nose out of the 
crater and found the snow melting around a water tank about 
four feet long and two feet in 
diameter ~ part of the ruined fuel 
system from Uncle Izzy*s ship. 
I dislodged it from the ice beneath and shook it. The perfume 
was so strong, as it unfroze, that 
it made me dizzy. And all that 
smell was coming from a pinhole. 
There seemed to be half a 
gallon in it. Enough to pay off 
Mother’s bonds and whatever I 
owed Rene, with a handsome sum 
left over for me. 
I could go home and forget 
about perfume trees and Alvarla 
and Uncle Isadore. 
was almost dawn and the last dodo 
had tucked his head into his 
feathers. 
Daylight showed me four little 
trees, nothing like the usual scraggy vegetation of Alvarla. They 
must be perfume trees, I thought. 
But they were too young to have 
blossoms or pods. 
I didn’t go too near them, remembering what Rene had said. 
And, remembering that, I began 
to figure out how they grew here. 
^^HIS place was a little valley. 
No, a crater. Several feet deep>er than my height, with sloping 
sides. The birds apparently kept 
it warm with their body heat, plus 
the heat the rocky sides would 
store. Since it was a crater, the 
winds wouldn’t reach it. The crater 
made a basin to catch the snow 
which I could see beginning to 
melt at the edges and ooze down 
the slope. 
The birds provided more than 
ample fertilizer and Uncle Izzy 
had apparently trained at least 
one of them to cultivate the soil 
under the trees. 
I climbed out of the crater to 
see that I was indeed in the regions 
of snow. To the north were huge 
drifts, and far off loomed towering glaciers. 
To the south, the hills tapered 
off from white to spotted brown. 
That was the reason for Uncle 
Izzy’s crazy setup. Rene and I 
would never have come across this 
crater in an ordinary search. Of 
course, the setup needn’t have been 
quite so crazy. That was the personal equation of which Uncle 
Izzy was so fond. 
The trees would, I assumed, 
poke their heads up over the crater 
as they grew, reaching toward the 
cold, and finally getting the frostbite to fill their pods properly. 
At two thousand dollars an 
ounce. 
I had neglected to ask Rene how 
many pods a tree could be expected to produce or how big the 
pods were. But, say, half an ounce 
in each pod and a conservative 
fifty pods on each tree. 
A hundred thousand dollars. 
I slid back into the crater, sat 
leaning against a somnolent dodo 
and ate a lunch package with a 
cupful of melted snow. 
All sorts of thoughts were jostling my brain. 
But I was bone-weary. I hadn’t 
slept since we hit Alvarla and the 
ride last night had been a tremendous strain, because I wasn’t in 
the habit of getting any exercise 
at all. 
Therefore, I fell asleep in midthought. 
It was the noon sun that woke 
me. I wasn’t just warm. I was hot 
And I was very reluctant to let 
go of my dream; I kept grabbing 
at the tag ends of it with both 
hands. It was the most exciting 
FROM AN UNSEEN CENSOR 
/ 
Picks, was reassuringly assured. 
Then, out of nowhere, into the 
picture galloped a yellow-skinned 
monster astride a huge, white bird. 
It turned out to be me and I 
tumbled off the bird, crying, “Mr. 
Picks! I don’t know what came 
over me!” 
t 
But I was answered only by a 
multitude of squawks, rustles and 
scratchings. 
The bird was home. 
1 COULD almost see vague 
forms. The darkness was beginning to give a little. I was 
warm, itchy and uncomfortable 
under whatever it was that Rene 
had sprayed on me. 
Warm? 
Perfume trees? 
All I could smell were bird 
roosts. 
I stood up, finding my limbs 
weak, trembling and painful. First, 
I glanced at my watch. Five hours 
terran time since we left the ship. 
At fifty miles per hour, we’d have 
gone two hundred and fifty miles. 
If we’d gone due north, as the 
bird started out, we must be in 
the snow zone. And I was warm! 
I switched my flash around. All 
I could see were birds. There 
seemed to be hundreds of them. 
I couldn’t tell which one was my 
bearer. 
“Where is the perfume?” I 
bawled. 
All I got was squawks. Some of 
the birds were, in fact, standing on 
one foot and tucking their heads 
away. 
It was growing lighter. The 
birds were going to bed. 
Feverishly, I pulled out Uncle 
Izzy’s old volume of poetry. 
Brushing from my mind a vision 
of Mr. Picks in a state of shock 
and another picture of Uncle Isadore snickering triumphantly, I 
stood on that desert land enchanted — on that home by horror 
haunted, and solemnly read “The 
Dodo” to a colony of wingless 
birds. 
My dodo identified himself at 
the proper place, but I kept on, 
waiting for something to show me 
my inheritance. 
“Then methought the air grew 
denser,” I read. 
“Perfume from an unseen censor!” a bird croaked from the back 
row. 
“Where?” I cried, pushing my 
way through the birds crowding 
around me in various stages of 
roost and curiosity. 
“Then,” I repeated, “the air grew 
denser.” 
“Perfume,” the bird now in 
front of me said, “from an imseen 
censor.” 
He began to scratch at the 
groxmd assiduously under one of 
four dim shapes about the level of 
my eyes. Then he yawned gapingly, gave up and went to sleep. 
I sat down to wait, because it 
“Don’t be stupid,” Rene said. 
“He can’t carry both of us and 
you’d be a fool either to go alone 
or stay here alone.” 
“As a tribute to my deceased 
uncle, I’m going to be a fool.” 
I stuck my flashlight into one of 
my many pockets and climbed 
onto the huge bird’s back. The 
down beneath his outer feathers 
was as soft and strong as heavy 
fur. I dug in with my hands and 
feet, my head braced against the 
thickened part of his neck. 
He started off with a lurch that 
brought my stomach out of hiding. 
I kept my eyes squeezed closed. I 
couldn’t have seen anything, anyway. Not even the impossible creature that was rushing through the 
darkness carrying me, for all I 
knew, straight to damnation. 
The night rushed past my ears 
in a wild keening and it crossed 
my mind to wonder what Mr. 
Picks, my supervisor, would say 
if he saw me now. 
I had a sudden vision of Mr. 
Picks, even more neatly dressed 
than I always was, with middlecost neck clasp and stud discreetly shining from a plain, 
square-edged bag shirt and dun 
suit. I pictured him opening a 
refined little box and holding it 
two feet under the customer’s 
eyes with a gesture of faint, unconscious supplication. A comfortable, warm, happy picture in which 
my place, one counter behind Mr. 
FROM AN UNSEEN CENSOR 
they could get plenty of frost” 
“That’s all they’d get. Where’s 
the warm, moist climate to germinate in? Where’s the parasitical 
Rhns to cultivate their soil? The 
Rhns couldn’t exist without their 
Gleees and the Gleees can’t exist 
without — never mind. The only 
place perfume trees can grow is 
on Odoria and that’s why the 
perfume is worth two thousand 
dollars an ounce.” 
“I have never heard of anything,” I informed him, “that 
spelled TTncle Isadore’ so exactly. 
He always said, ‘If it can’t be done, 
I can do it’ Well, there’s only one 
way to find out. Surely there’s 
something on the ship I can wear.” 
“You mean you’re going out 
into that frozen inkpot after that 
idiotic bird?” 
“That’s exactly what I mean.” 
“For Pete’s sake! You’re as 
brainless as the bird is!” But I 
think, for all his attitude, he was 
curious, too. 
TTE began to spray me with 
something. “Close your eyes 
and mouth. If you don’t wash this 
off with soap and water in twentyfour hours, you’ll die. But it sure 
keeps in the body heat.” 
I stuck the book in my pocket 
for good luck, and Rene handed 
me a gun, some lunch packages, 
an antibiotic kit and a water purification kit. 
“All right,” I said, pocketing 
them, “but it can’t be far. Uncle 
Izzy wouldn’t have gone more 
than a day’s journey.” 
“Then why haven’t we smelled 
the perfume? And why would he 
have gone through all this rigmarole when he must have known 
you’d search that far?” 
I didn’t know why. 
I pushed the door open. The 
bird hopped out and I realized 
how easy it would be to lose him 
from the small, round glow of my 
fiash. 
He looked curiously at me, as 
though expecting something further. 
I looked curiously at him, wondering where he would lead to. 
Then he was off. There was no 
question of following him. That 
big, awkward bird ran so fast that 
in a few minutes we could no 
lohger hear the beat of his huge 
claws on the rocks, even in the 
perfectly still, dry air. 
“How fast do you figure he’s 
going?” I asked Rene. 
“How the hell would I know?” 
“Roughly.” 
“Roughly? Maybe fifty miles 
an hour.” 
“But that’s incredible!” 
“The big point-tails on Aldebaran kappa can do eighty with a 
native on their backs.” 
“Ah!” I said. “So thafs it! Maybe tomorrow night . .” 
But we could hear the drumming of the returning dodo. 
pages until I found “The Dodo ” 
Maybe there’d be something in 
that 
“Listen to this, Rene,” I said, 
“and see if you catch anything 
I might have missed.” 
Rene looked discomfited, but he 
didn’t stop up his ears. 
When I came to the part, “ ‘Tell 
me what thy lordly name is /On 
the Night’s Plutonian shore . 
the dodo looked up and said, 
“Isadora.” 
Clearly, this was it, although I 
couldn’t recall that any of the questions in the poem were to the point. 
I got to, “ ‘On the morrow he 
will leave me /As my hopes have 
flown before.’ /Then the bird 
said . .” 
“Ask me more,” said the dodo 
without missing a beat. 
I read on, getting excited. 
“‘Quaff, oh, quaff this kind nepenthe, /And forget this lost Lenore.’ 
/ Quoth the Dodo . .” 
“Give me more,” he supplied, 
pointing his beak at the alcohol tap. 
I gave him another cup and 
continued, sure that he must be 
going to say something relevant to 
Uncle Izzy’s fortune. 
“‘Is there — is there balm in 
Gilead? — Tell me, tell me, I implore!’ Quoth the Dodo . .” 
“Probably not,” the dodo said, 
breaking the Grilch Hop rh3^m 
at last, “but there are perfume 
trees on Alvarla.” 
“Perfume trees!” Rene shouted. 
“That bird’s lying. It’s impossible.” 
“Shut up!” I yelled at him. “The 
poem’s not over.” 
T READ on, somewhat ashamed 
-■-of having to say such inhospitable words to a dodo who had 
been, after all, cooperating with 
me. 
“‘Take thy beak from out my 
heart,/ And take thy form from 
off my door!’/ Quoth the Dodo . .” 
“I was just leaving,” the bird 
said, and struggled to his feet and 
went and stood by the door expectantly. 
I got up. “Wait!” I commanded 
the bird, who couldn’t do much 
. else because the door was closed. 
“Do you know what perfume trees 
are, Rene?” 
“Yeah, I know what they are, 
and they don’t grow on this planet. 
You can take my word for it. They 
need a warm, moist soil to germinate in. They need to have their 
soil cultivated every day for a 
year. They die fast on contact 
with any sort of industrial fumes. 
They die in captivity, like some 
wild animals. They die if you sweat 
on them. They die if you breathe 
on them. They need to start off 
warm and get colder every month 
until they form their flowers. Then 
they need a frost for the pods to 
fill with the perfume, along with 
the seeds.” 
“There aren’t any industrial 
fumes here,” I pointed out, “and 
FROM AN UNSEEN CENSOR 
I addressed the bird. ‘^Sir,^ I 
began, and caught myself, “or perhaps madam, can you say anything else?” 
“Nepenthe,” the bird said firmly. 
I shrugged and drew a cup. The 
dodo lifted the cup and drained it 
in one smooth gesture. This, as 
it turned out, was the only thing 
it seemed to do smoothly. 
It began a wild attempt to 
scratch its head with one claw and 
remain upright. Then, abandoning all dignity, it rolled to its side 
and scratched furiously to satisfaction. After that, it began what 
looked like a hopeless attempt to 
right its awkward body, legs struggling in the air and back bumping 
around the ship. 
I couldn’t help remembering 
Uncle Izzy after a meal, slim and 
suave, lighting up a tapered, perfectly packed cigarene and blowing out one round, shapely smoke 
ring that hovered before his light, 
sardonic grin like a comment on 
his thoughts. 
An uncomfortable comparison. I 
shook myself to life. 
I righted the bird, no small 
problem, for he weighed almost 
two hundred pounds. 
“Well,” Rene finally said, coming out of his mood, “now that 
you have this bird, what are you 
going to do with it?” 
“I had thought it might lead us 
to Uncle Izzy’s fortime,” I explained. 
bird obviously had no such 
intention. It was getting ready 
to take a nap. 
“A night bird,” I told it reprovingly, “shouldn’t take a nap 
in the middle of the night.” 
“All you’re proving is that he 
has no self-respect,” Rene pointed 
out. “Why don’t you look to see 
if he’s got a note tagged to his leg 
or something?” 
I did. He didn’t. 
“I think this whole thing is 
crazy,” Rene said, “but since he’s 
a talking bird, you might ask him 
a few questions. Maybe he’s 
trained to say something else.” 
“Where is Uncle Izz^s fortune?” 
I asked, when I had tugged at the 
dodo’s feathers until he opened 
one eye. 
He closed it. 
“Do you have a message for 
me?” 
He drew away from me irritably 
and closed the eye again, ruffling 
down into his feathers. 
“He may be keyed to respond 
to certain phrases. Try your uncle’s 
name — he obviously knows that,” 
Rene suggested coldly, wanting no 
part of this but unable to hold 
down the suggestion. 
“My name,” I screamed at the 
somnolent dodo, “is Isadore Summers.” 
He reared back and pecked the 
hell out of me. 
I picked the book up off the 
floor and flipped through the bent 
soon as we had eaten and fed the 
converter. I hydrated a package of 
crackers so that they were fullsized but not soggy, broke them 
into pieces and tossed them out. 
I admit I felt a little embarrassed. 
I sat there in the chill quiet, on 
this ugly, alien world, reading ‘‘The 
Dodo” by the light of a miniature 
flash, so as not to disturb Rene. 
Pretty soon I began to feel 
creepy. “The Dodo” is a ghastly 
poem. There’s an insidious morbidity about it. It had sounded 
merely funny the first time I read 
it. 
Now, the more I read it, the 
more I began to hear strange, impossible creakings and sighs, which 
might or might not be due to temperature changes. 
The night outside was a deep, 
cold cup of darkness where no 
human thing moved. 
There was a knock at the door. 
I dropped the book and flashlight. Rene was up like a cat He 
didn’t turn on the light. 
“Who’s there?” he shouted. 
There was a scratching noise at 
the door. Then a voice croaked, 
“My name is Isadore Summers.” 
REACHED a trembling hand 
for the door. 
“Wait, you fool!” Rene cried. He 
picked up the flash and got his 
gun. “Stand behind me and keep 
your hands off your gun. I know 
when to shoot and when not to 
shoot. You don’t.” 
“If it’s Uncle Isadore . .” 
“I tell you you’ve got to leave 
it up to me, if you want to get 
off this planet alive. Now stand 
back and keep your mouth shut, 
no matter what happens.” 
He kicked the door open and 
stood back and to one side of it 
“Come in with your arms up!” 
There was a sort of rustling 
sound and in walked a huge, white, 
wingless bird. 
“My name,” the dodo repeated, 
somewhat plaintively this time, 
with a glance toward the limch 
compartment, “is Isadore Summers.” 
I couldn’t help it. I rolled all 
over the ship with laughter. Rene 
looked a little shamefaced, tossed 
his gun onto the rack and punched 
the lighting on. 
Obviously the dodo recognized 
our lunch compartment from familiarity with Uncle Izz^s ship. 
Then he looked at the alcohol tap 
that led from the fuel conversion. 
“Nepenthe?” he begged. 
I hesitated. “Isn’t there something,” I asked Rene, “about corrupting the natives of a primitive 
planet?” 
But Rene was sitting on his 
bunk, his jaw slack. “This is the 
first time I’ve ever been made a 
fool of by an alcoholic bird.” 
“If it’s just a bird, of course. 
Like a parrot . .” 
FROM AN UNSEEN CENSOR 
‘‘Some people crack on alien 
planets,” he said. “I have a padded 
room in my ship. You’d be surprised how often I have to use it.” 
I told him about the poem I 
found in Uncle Izzy’s book. “We 
look for a white bird,” I said. “Or 
perfume.” 
“You’re nuts,” he pointed out 
with some justice, because he 
hadn’t known Uncle Isadore. “How 
do you know these changes weren’t 
made by somebody else a long 
time ago? Maybe this ancient 
printer printed it wrong and had 
to change it afterward.” 
“I don’t think they were that 
primitive back then.” 
But I didn’t know what “back 
then” meant or how primitive ancient printing was. All I knew for 
sure was that, as the poem stood, 
it sounded as if somebody had 
loused up a perfect Grilch Hop 
rhyme. And Uncle Izzy knew I 
was a Grilch Hop expert in Middle School and this was the only 
real Grilch Hop rhythm in the 
book. What’s more. Uncle Izzy 
could depend on me to go over 
that book in painstaking detail because a studs and neck clasp man 
has to be good on details. 
46 A LL right,” I said. “You look 
your way and I’ll look my 
way.” 
“We’re not looking any more 
any way today,” Rene said, emerging from Uncle Isadore’s ship 
loaded down with removings. “It’ll 
be night and below freezing in 
half an hour.” 
“What do you think,” I asked, 
“a dodo would like to eat?” 
“A what?^* 
“The birds. I want to put something out to attract them. Crackers 
or something?” 
“I think you’re crazy. If you 
have any idea of sitting outside 
to wait for them, you’ll freeze to 
death. Not only that, there’s no 
moon. You wouldn’t be able to 
see your hand in front of your 
face.” 
“How do the birds see?” 
“Maybe they aren’t night birds. 
Maybe they migrated somewhere 
else.” 
“And if I use a light, it might 
scare them away,” I mused. “Well, 
maybe I’m not supposed to wait 
outside, anyway.” 
Rene went in and switched on 
the heat and lights. 
“Leave the outside port open,” I 
said. 
“Why?” 
“So the birds can knock.” 
“Can what?** 
“Well, it’s possible,” I said defensively. “It won’t hurt anything 
to leave it open.” 
“All right,” he consented, curving his mouth around unpleasantly, “just to show you what a jackass you are.” 
Rene had the heat turned low, 
for sleeping, and the lights off, as 
and “raven” with “Dodo’7 
Furthermore, it had not struck 
me the first time I read the poem 
quickly that there was anything 
odd about a bird being named 
“Isadore.”' People who keep pet 
grilches frequently name them 
after famous Reed players and 
Isadore is a common name. 
On the other hand, it was my 
Uncle’s name. And the word 
“Dodo” didn’t rhyme as it should. 
I got out a magnifying glass to 
examine the ancient print. Sure 
enough, it had been tampered with. 
The print looked so odd to me, 
anyway, I hadn’t noticed the part 
that had been changed. But it was 
obvious under the glass that 
“Dodo” had been substituted for a 
word of almost equal length. The 
same with “Isadore.” 
I went over the whole poem 
now, carefully, to see which words 
had been changed. There weren’t 
many. “White” in a couple of 
places. “Dodo” and “Isadore” 
wherever they occurred. An “o” in 
the line “Perfume from an unseen 
censor.” “S” in the line “ Wretch,’ 
I cried, ‘Isadore hath sent 
thee . .”’ 
CITTING back, I thought about 
^ what I had read. It made no 
sense at all. Was I to look for a 
white bird, “grim, ungainly, ghastly”? And what if I found him? 
Why was he like a raven? What 
was this perfume from an unseen 
FROM AN UNSEEN CENSOR 
censor? I could picture the ghost 
of Uncle Isadore, knowing his financial imagination, as the “unseen censor” because he always 
criticized me. Was I to look for 
perfume? Did he have a fortune in 
perfume stowed somewhere? It 
seemed to me it would take an 
awful lot of even the most expensive perfume to comprise a fortune. 
I decided to start with the bird. 
I went outside Rene’s ship and 
looked around. No birds. 
“Rene!” I called. He was still 
looking through Uncle Izzy’s ship. 
“Have you seen an ungainly white 
bird around?” 
“What!” he snapped, sticking an 
indignant face out of the door. 
“I guess you haven’t. Can your 
woodsy lore tell if there are birds 
on this planet?” 
“Obviously,” Rene said. “I don’t 
know why you can’t find your own 
spoor. I noticed the droppings 
immediately.” 
“Where are the birds?” 
“How the hell would I know?” 
But he couldn’t contain his 
special knowledge. “They’re probably night birds,” he said. 
“Oh, yes.” It checked. “Wandering from the Night’s Plutonian 
shore.” 
He looked at me suspiciously. 
“You ever had a nervous breakdown?” 
“I have not, I test 10:9 on job 
adjustment and 10:8 on life adjustment.” 
bending over. And the pages keep 
flipping and make you lose your 
place. 
Still, I read it all the way 
through. It wasn’t too bad. Not like 
Edgar Guest, of course, who was 
the only ancient author I liked 
in General Studies. But I found 
there was a sort of Grilch Hop 
beat to it that reminded me of the 
Footlooses I u^d to go to in Middle School. I grinned. It was funny 
to think of now. 
I found no clues in the book. 
The only thing to do was read it 
again, more carefully. 
¥ NOTICED there was one 
poem with a real Grilch Hop 
beat. I thought suddenly of Sally, 
my regular partner at the Footlooses. She was very blonde and 
she affected a green crestwave in 
her hair, pulled over her forehead 
with a diamond clip. She was a 
beauty, all right. But she was a 
little silly. And she had that tendency to overdress. 
No, I sighed, she wouldn’t have 
done for a studs and neck clasp 
man. But I couldn’t help wondering where she was now and what 
she was like now. Did she remember me, and did she think about 
me when she heard that song we 
used to dance to, because it was 
about a girl named Sally? 
Once I knew a girl named Sally 
Met her at a Footloose rally 
I began humming the Grilch 
Hop tune to the ancient poem in 
Uncle Algy’s book. It was fantastic how closely it fitted, though, 
of course, the words in the poem 
were plain silly. 
But imagine finding a poem 
with a perfect Grilch Hop beat before anybody even knew what a 
grilch was! Before Venus was even 
discovered. Jump on both feet. 
Hop three times on the left foot. 
Jump. Hop three times on the 
right foot. The rhythm was correct, 
right down to the breakaway and 
four-step at the end of each run. 
It was while I was singing this 
poem to a Grilch Hop tune that I 
noticed the clue. The poem was 
named “The Dodo.” And the 
rhyming was very smooth until 
I came to the lines: 
“Though thy crest be shorn and 
shaven, 
Thou,” I said, ‘^art like a Raven 
Ghastly, grim, and ancient Dodo, 
Wandering from the Nightly 
shore; 
Tell me what thy lordly name 
is 
On the Nighfs Plutonian shore” 
Quoth the Dodo, *Tsadore” 
Now the author had gone to a 
lot of trouble in the previous 
verse not to break the Grilch Hop 
rhyme scheme. He made ‘thereat 
is” rhyme with “lattice” and “that 
is.” Why did he follow “shaven” 
In that case, we look for a key. 
Or he might have a block of Eretrevium buried somewhere. Your 
guess is as good as mine.’^ 
“If he’s dug up the ground,” 
Rene said, “I’ll recognize the spot 
But that’ll mean walking over 
every inch of ground for a day’s 
journey around. Or more, if he 
did any overnight traveling.” 
“Not Uncle Izzy,” I said. “He 
wouldn’t be at all likely to spend 
a freezing night out on Alvarla, 
even for a good joke.” 
“Radar equipment’s in perfect 
shape,” Rene said, shifting his activities to another segment of the 
ship’s equipment. “I wonder why 
he didn’t leave it on so we could 
locate him easier. Not that we had 
any trouble. Or why he didn’t continue broadcasting for help until 
he died . Mind if I take some 
of the equipment?” 
“You haven’t been exactly generous with me.” 
“I intend to subtract its value 
from the cost of supplies and 
milage on my ship. I never said 
I was generous, but, by God, I’m 
honest.” 
T) ENE slid out the compartment 
of lunch packages, dumped 
them on the floor. 
“All unopened,” he was saying 
disgustedly. Then he picked up a 
heavy, square object with sharp 
corners, open on three sides. “What 
the hell is this?” 
“A book,” I informed him. 
Rene opened it. “Hey! A real, 
antique book! Must be worth at 
least a thousand! Look at the size 
of that print! You can read it with 
the naked eye, like an instrument 
panel! Well, here’s a little piece of 
your fortune.” 
He tossed it to me and went on 
examining the lunch packages. He 
didn’t trust me to help him because I wouldn’t be able to tell if 
they’d been opened and something 
inserted. 
I hung the book by the covers 
and let the pages flip open. Nothing fell out I sighed. I’d have to 
go through the whole damn thing. 
“I’m going back to your ship 
and read in comfort,” I told Rene. 
“You’re no help here anyway,” . 
he said, putting the lunch packages 
in a large plastic bag he’d found 
somewhere. “No use letting these 
go to waste.” 
I didn’t tell him I had the clue 
to Uncle Isadore’s fortune in my 
hand. He didn’t know Uncle Isadore, so he wouldn’t have believed 
me. 
Nothing is more uncomfortable 
than reading an antique book. 
There is no way to lie back and 
flash it on a screen or run the 
tape over your reading glasses 
while you lie prone and relax. 
You have to hold it. If you try to 
hold it lying down, your arms get 
tired. If you put it down on a table 
to read, your neck gets tired from 
FROM AN UNSEEN CENSOR 
He shrugged and shouldered the 
inside door open. 
He came out, his face a study 
in perplexity. “Not here!” he said. 
“This is the first time IVe been 
wrong in fifteen years!” 
“That's because ifs the first 
time you’ve been up against Uncle 
Izzy. He must have closed the port 
behind him the same way I opened 
it.” 
I climbed through the door, 
feeling immensely relieved. I realized then what had really been 
worrying me. If the gods had 
abandoned Isadore at the last, 
what did they have in mind for 
the rest of us mere mortals? 
I kicked at my mind irritably, 
knowing these were young 
thoughts. But then I am young, I 
explained to myself. 
T he inside of the ship was neat 
and empty. Stuck on the instrument panel with a vaccup was 
a note, in Uncle Izzy’s flowery 
script 
My hoy, I have died of boredom, Do not look for the remains, I have hidden my body 
to avoid the banality of a decent 
burial, I bequeath you my entire fortune. Find it, 
Rene groaned. “I suppose now 
you want to look for the body.” 
“No. If he says it’s hidden, it’s 
hidden. But it would be a little 
silly to go off without finding his 
fortune, wouldn’t it?” 
“Looking for buried treasure 
wasn’t in the contract,” Rene 
pointed out “You’ll have to make 
it worth my while.” 
“Another five thousand,” I said. 
“Make it ten. Payable if I find 
it” 
“Suppose I find it?” 
“Don’t be ridiculous. You’d be 
a fool to take two steps on this 
planet without me.” 
He was right, of course. And if 
we left, I wouldn’t get anything. 
I thought of Mother living by the 
bells at a Comfort Park. “All 
right,” I said. 
“What form was his fortune 
in?” Rene asked. “Money? Bonds? 
Polarian droplets? It would help 
to know what I’m looking for.” 
“I have no idea,” I confessed. 
“Ordinarily it would take a computer to figure out Uncle Isadore’s 
financial affairs. But he’d have been 
perfectly capable of selling out 
everything and taking his entire 
fortune along with him for some 
new project” 
Rene had skillfully imscrewed 
the instrument panel and he lifted 
it off and began poking inside and 
removing mysterious bits of machinery. “That makes it harder. 
You don’t know whether he sold 
out or not?” 
“I have no idea. He might have 
all his money piled in the locker 
of the Whist Club of Sirius beta. 
advertised — that keeps them a 
luxury item, you know.^ 
“So your Uncle Isadore pasted 
one of them on the port button.” 
“He didn’t have to paste. All he 
had to do was stick it on. All I had 
to do was line up the mate to it 
and the attractive force pushed the 
button.” 
That’s very neat,” Rene said. 
“But why the hell didn’t he just 
leave the port open? He’d hardly 
do this sort of thing with his dying 
gasp.” 
“I’m not sure,” I admitted. “As 
a matter of fact, I wonder why he 
radared me if he really wanted to 
be rescued. He had plenty of friends 
who could rescue him more reliably.” 
T HAD an inkling of what had 
-*• been on Uncle Isadore’s mind. 
Although Uncle Izzy had had three 
— or was it four? — wives, he’d 
very carefully had no children. 
And it had occurred to him at an 
advanced age to take an interest 
in me. 
He’d sent me through two years 
of general studies and reluctantly 
let me specialize in studs and neck 
clasps. 
“You were a grilch hop expert 
in Middle School,” he had told 
me. “How come you’re getting so 
stuffy?” 
“Because I can’t be an adolescent all my life. Uncle Isadore,” 
I had replied stiffly. “I would like 
to get into some solid line of work 
and be a good citizen.” 
“Phooey!” he’d said. But he had 
let me do what I’d wanted. It was 
because of this that I had felt duty 
bound to answer his call for help. 
I’d not felt duty bound to take 
all the opportunities he’d tried to 
force on me when I got out of 
school. Mining the semi-solid seas 
of Alphard kappa. Fur trading on 
Procyon beta. And a hundred 
others, all obviously doomed to 
failure imless there was one lucky 
chance. 
“But I’m happy here with my 
little room and my little job,” I 
kept telling Uncle Isadore. 
“You only think you’re happy 
because you don’t know any better,” he kept telling me. 
Only, now that he was dead, he 
seemed to have me where he 
wanted me. Now that nothing 
could matter to him any longer. 
“Maybe he was getting senile,” 
Rene suggested. 
“Uncle Izzy always said he’d 
rather die than — he did die,” I 
replied, suddenly recalling myself 
to the present and the open outside port of the ship. I realized 
how reluctant I was to go in. It 
was one thing to admit Uncle Izzy 
was dead — I cherished no great 
affection for him — but it was 
something else to have to face his 
dead body. 
“Would you mind going in first?” 
I asked Rene. 
FROM AN UNSEEN CENSOR 
Now I don’t like adventure. I 
don’t like strange planets. All Fve 
ever asked of life was my little 
four-by-six cubby in the Brooklyn 
Bloc and my job. A job I know 
inside out. It’s a comfortable, happy, harmless way to live and I 
test 10:9 on job adjustment 
All the same, it was a thrill to 
discover a clue that Rene would 
have thrown away if he’d been 
the one looking. 
I tossed it casually in the air 
and showed it to Rene. 
“Know what that is?” I asked. 
“Slug for a halfdec slot machine?” 
“Nope. Know what I can do 
with it?” 
He didn’t say. 
“I’m going to open Uncle Izzy’s 
ship from the inside.” 
R ene lighted a fresh cigarette 
from the old one and let the 
smoke out of his nose. It gave 
rather the impression of a bull 
resting between picadors. 
“Can you show me, on the outside, approximately where the button is that you push on the inside 
to unseal the ship?” I inquired 
casually. 
“I can show you exactly.” 
He pointed to a spot next to the 
entrance port I wet my finger and 
made a mark in the dust so I could 
get it just right Then I found a 
sharp stone and cut aroimd the 
edges of the lead. As I slipped off 
the back half of the coinlike affair, I clapped it over the finger 
mark. 
The entrance ixwrt swung open. 
If I’d had a feather, I would 
have taken great pleasure in knocking Rene over with it 
“It’d be worth a million dollars,” 
he breathed, “to know how you 
did that” 
“Oh, a lot less than that,” I 
said airily. 
“Well? Explain!” 
“Uncle Isadore had it set up,” I 
told him, using the same patiently 
impatient tone he used on me. “He 
knew I’d recognize that lead coin. 
There was a cuff link in it” 
“A cuff link!” 
“A studs and neck clasp man 
has to know about cuff links, too. 
This happens to be an expensive 
cuff link, but worth only about a 
year’s salary, not a million dollars. They’re held together by a 
jazzed-up electromagnetic force 
rather than by a clasp. This force 
is so strong it would take a derrick to pull them apart. The idea 
is to keep you from losing one. If 
you drop it to the floor, you just 
wave the mate around a little 
and it pops up through the air.” 
“How do you get them apart?” 
“Just slip them sideways, like a 
magnet. You can sheathe them in 
lead, like the one I found, to cut 
down the attraction. This is how 
they’re packaged. You don’t know 
about them because they’re not 
G A LAXY 
FROM AN UNSEEN CENSOR 
staying a week,” I told Rene as 
authoritatively as I could manage. 
“You haven’t actually showed me 
Uncle Izzy’s — er — corpus delicti, 
so I have you on a legal technicality.” I didn’t know whether or 
not this was true, but it sounded 
good. 
“All right, we’ll stay.” Rene spat 
the sentence out onto the ground. 
“But if you think I’m going to do 
any more looking, take another 
guess.” 
He tramped back into his own 
ship, leaving the outside port and 
the pressure chamber open. 
If only Uncle Izzy had done 
that! 
I went over his ship inch by 
inch, feeling with my hands, to be 
sure there was no extra door that 
might be opened. Rene would have 
laughed, but I was beginning to 
build up antibodies against Rene’s 
laughter. 
I got the bottom part of the ship 
dusted off and found nothing. 
I pushed open the door of Rene’s 
ship and asked him for a ladder. 
“You’ll have to pay for it,” he 
warned. “Once it’s open, I can’t 
carry it in my ship and I’ll have to 
get another.” 
“Okay, okay! I’ll pay for it.” 
H e handed me a synthetic affair that looked like a meshed 
rope, wound tight, about the size 
of a Venusian cigar. 
“This is a ladder?” I asked in
credulously, but he had shut the 
door in my face. 
I slipped the cellophane off and 
unrolled it. It seemed to unroll 
endlessly. When it was ten feet 
long and four feet wide, I stopped 
unrolling. Sure enough, it hardened 
into a ladder in about ten minutes. 
It was so strong I couldn’t begin 
to bend it over my knee. 
I set it against the side of the 
ship and began to investigate the 
view ports. The first two were 
sealed tight as a drum. 
The third slipped off in my 
hands and clattered over the side 
of the ship onto the rocks. 
I was almost afraid to look 
through the “glass” beneath. I 
needn’t have been. I could see absolutely nothing. It was spaceblack inside. 
I went back to Rene’s ship for a 
flashlight. He was unimpressed by 
my discovery. 
“Even if you could break the 
glass, which you can’t,” he said, 
“you still couldn’t get through that 
little porthole. Here’s the flash. 
You won’t be able to see anything.” 
He came with me this time. Not 
because he was interested, but because he wanted another cigarette 
and never smoked in the ship. 
He was right. I couldn’t see a 
darned thing in the ship with the 
flashlight. But I foimd something— 
a little lead object that looked like 
a coin. It had rolled into a comer 
of the port. 
I went around to the other side 
of the spaceship, mostly to get 
away from Rene for a moment. 
I*m only a studs and neck clasp 
man and Rene had twenty years^ 
exp>erience on alien planets. So he 
was right, of course, about the 
evidence. There was no getting 
around it. Still . 
I circled back around to where 
Rene was smoking his first cigarette 
since we left Earth. His face was 
a mask of sunbaked wrinkles pointing down to the cigarette smack in 
the middle of his mouth. 
“Uncle Izzy wouldn’t die like 
an ordinary mortal,” I said. “He’d 
have a brass band. Or we’d find 
his body lying in a bed of roses 
with a big lily in his’ hand. Or he 
might even disappear into thin air. 
But not f/us.” I waved a hand toward the dead ship. 
“Look,” Rene said. “My job was 
to find your Uncle Isadore. I’ve 
found him. We can’t get inside that 
ship with anything short of a matter reducer, which I don’f happen 
to have along since they weigh 
several tons. You’ll have to take 
my word for it that his body’s in 
there. Now let’s go home.” He managed to talk without moving the 
cigarette at all. 
64^^ OU said a week,” I reminded Rene. 
“I said if I didn’t find him in 
a week, then he wasn’t there. I’ve 
found him. I’m sorry if he was your 
favorite imcle or something.” 
“As a matter of fact, I never 
liked him. He was frivolous. He 
never had a job. He thought life 
was a big game.” 
“Then how come he got so 
rich?” 
“He always won.” 
“Not this time, brother! But if 
he’s not your favorite uncle, why 
all this concern? You can take my 
word for it he’s dead and you’ve 
done your duty.” 
“Theye are two things that 
bother me. One is curiosity. I just 
don’t believe Uncle Izzy died in 
an ordinary fashion locked up in 
a spaceship. You don’t know him, 
so you wouldn’t understand. The 
other thing I’m concerned about is 
— well, his will.” 
Rene barked a couple of times. 
I had learned this indicated laughter. “I figured what you were 
really after was his money.” 
Under my yellow over skin, I 
could feel myself coloring. That 
wasn’t at all the point. I’d mortgaged Mother’s bonds to finance 
this trip, confident that Uncle Izzy 
would make it good when we 
found him. If I couldn’t get 
Mother’s bonds out of hock, she’d 
have to live out her life in a Comfort Park. I shuddered at the 
thought. Uncle Isadore must have 
known that when he radared for 
help. He must have provided some 
way . 
“You said a week and we’re 
FROM AN UNSEEN CENSOR 
GALAXY'S 
5 Star Shelf 
THE MIND CAGE by A. E. van 
Vogt, Simon & Schuster, N, Y,, 
$ 3.50 
an Vogt, master of the tortuous 
* plot, goes through torture here 
to prove it. Or, as one of his present characters mutters confusedly, 
“Wheels within wheels within 
wheels.’’ More interior wheels 
might have been mentioned without overstating the case. 
WW III brings the rise of a dictator over most of Earth known 
as the Great Judge. He is alienated from his military leader. 
Group Master David Marin, by 
the latter’s defense of a seditious 
scientist who advocated changes in 
the weird group-free-enterpwrise 
social setup. 
Trask, the scientist, has been 
sentenced to death, but custom 
permits him complete freedom for 
one week prior to execution. Having secretly perfected a technique 
for tranposing personalities from 
one body to another, he springs it 
on Marin the day after being sentenced. 
Marin awakens to find himself in the other’s body. From there 
in, the E. Phillips Oppenheim atmosphere soupens. 
★ ★★★★ SHELF 
To lead the scheduled invasion 
of a minor country, he has to disguise his Trask body as himself, a 
nice touch. Then he has to find 
Trask with his own body and retransfer or be executed within the 
week. Meanwhile, an intelligent 
super-computer, the Brain, purportedly destroyed during the war, is 
secretly engaged in throwing its 
weight around. 
What follows is less clear — I 
wouldn’t attempt to summarize it. 
Van Vogt, though, still is high-, 
ly imaginative and his patented 
jig-saw puzzles are good fun, even 
though pieces persistently remain 
missing. 
THE ANTS by Wilhelm Goetsch, 
University of Michigan, $4.50 
‘IJJTHICH savant do you read? 
™ Solomon, “Go to the ant, thou 
sluggard: consider her ways and 
be wise,” or Mark Twain, “Ants 
are the dumbest of all animals”? 
There’s something to be said 
on both sides. It’s a fact that no 
test of ants has ever determined 
true reasoning power of understanding of cause and effect. However, ants possess memory and can, 
to a limited extent, put that memory to use. 
Goetsch explodes certain myths, 
notably the cozy notion that ants 
domesticate aphids and other insects. 
They do not carry their cows 
to and from pasture but exploit 
them at their grazing grounds and 
carry in dying “cattle” for meat. 
As reluctant host to a bustling 
colony of marauders, I am glad to 
have proof that ants are our competitor and possible successor 
among social creatures. I thought 
it was just me they were against 
THE BEST FROM FANTASY 
AND SCIENCE FICTION, edited by Anthony Boucher. Doubleday and Co,, Inc,, N, Y,, $3.75 
"OOUCHER’S seventh anthology from F&SF is more restrained than hitherto in the use 
of slapstick, so the more sober 
products show up to better advantage. 
Possibly the best of the book 
is Chad Oliver’s “Between the 
Thunder and the Sun.” A civilization is dying on a backward world 
because of ecological imbalance. 
Altruistic individuals must give unwanted and thankless help in defiance of a UN decree forbidding 
contact for any reason with lowerscale civilizations. 
Other good efforts are contributed by Ward Moore, Arthur 
C. Clarke and Poul Anderson. Mildred Clingerman, particularly, offers a gem of a horror chiller. 
THEY RODE IN SPACE 
SHIPS by Gavin Gibbons, Citadel 
Press, N, Y,, $3.50 
j ^HEY” are two Americans, 
Daniel Fry and Truman 
Bethurum. “We” are those who 
haven’t and are looking to “Them” 
for proof. Gibbons is an Englishman who, himself convinced, is 
putting their experiences into print. 
Fry, a mechanical engineer, 
once worker for Aerojet General 
at White Sands. The first half of 
the book chronicles his alleged 
meetings with an ET. The level of 
interest and credibility is far higher 
than in the latter half, dealing with 
Bethurum’s meetings with a tiny 
female skipper of a space scow. 
Unfortunately, Gibbons’ sole 
evidence of verity is the ridicule 
to which Fry and Bethurum have 
subjected themselves in defense of 
their stories. A pretty frail support 
from which to hang a strong belief, 
it would seem. 
TROUBLED STAR by George 
O. Smith. Avalon Books, N. Y., 
$2.75 
CMITH proposes a comic situ^ ation as his premise in this 
frothy bit from the late TWS. 
A Galactic Survey Team has 
goofed by reporting our system 
devoid of intelligent life. As a result, Sol is to be made variable to 
serve as a marker beacon on a new 
galactic star route. Fortunately, 
one of the road gang discovers our 
thought emanations through the 
use of a menslatoT and finds that 
the most popular leader on Earth 
is TV’s Dusty Britton of the Space 
Patrol. Obviously, this is the man 
to kidnap and acquaint with the 
Galactic Plan for old Sol so that 
he can prepare our people for their 
enforced thousand-year sleep, during which Earth is to be moved 
into orbit around another star. 
But before this. Dusty had 
chickened out on an actual exploratory flight to Venus. This 
fact comes to public light when he 
is picked up on a yacht in midocean 
in company with a GIRL and 
LIQUOR after indoctrination by 
the Galactic Team. If his chances 
of influencing people were small 
before, now he can’t even make 
friends. 
Smith eventually gets Dusty 
and Earth out of the mess, even 
though his hero does occasionally 
step out of character by acting intelligent 
LUCKY STARR AND THE 
MOONS OF JUPITER, by Paul 
French. Doubleday and Co., Inc., 
N. Y., $2.75 
^I^HE prolific Isaac Asimov, and 
* his alter ego, Paul French, 
have come up with the best of the 
Lucky Starr juvenile series. The 
action is taut, the mystery sustained, the science credible. 
Councilman Starr and his sidekick Bigman are sent to Jupiter 
IX to investigate leakage to the 
★ ★★★★ SHELF 
Sirians of secret information concerning Earth’s experimental antigravity ship. Of course, we know 
they’ll succeed in their mission, but 
it’s a pretty tight squeak nonetheless, and Isaac French milks the 
situation for all its thrills, while 
painlessly imparting scientific lore 
and a code of ethics. 
THE FIRST BOOK OF 
MAMMALS by 
Margaret Williamson, 
THE FIRST BOOK OF 
ARCHAEOLOGY 
by Nora Benjamin Kubie. 
THE FIRST BOOK OF 
SUBMARINES 
by /. B, Icenhower, Capt, U.S.N, 
Franklin Watts, N. Y,, $1.95 each 
above three books are 
excellent follow-ups to last 
month’s Popular Science There* s 
Adventure series that inaugurated 
the monthly “Junior Education 
Corner.” Whereas those were experimental do-it-yourself books devoted to the physical sciences, 
these are informative volumes that 
will satisfy a knowledge hunger 
concerning more abstruse subjects. 
The most striking common denominator is the straightforward 
presentation. There is no talking 
down. Mammals first answers, 
“What is a mammal?” and then 
proceeds to populate every area 
of the world with the incredible 
variations in size, shape and struc
ture of this great animal group. 
Archaeology supplies the young 
neophyte with information concerning the ancient civilizations 
and digging lore of the modern 
archeologist. The science in its 
modern form is only a hundred 
years old, but the reader will stand 
amazed at the deductive techniques employed. Not even Sherlock Holmes could deduce more 
from water stains, bone fragments 
and shards. 
Capt. Icenhower’s book brings 
underwater routine to life and, in a 
short history, he notes the curious 
fact that many successful submarines existed before their incorporation into naval fleets. 
THE WONDERFUL WORLD 
OF ENERGY by Lancelot Hogben. Doubleday & Co., N.Y., $2.95 
T ITTLE is required to excite 
^ the interest of the young, but 
it’s quite a trick to sustain it. The 
text of Hogben’s book is rather 
advanced; fourteen-year level up. 
The profusion of excellent demonstrative and provocative illustrations, though, qualifies it for use 
with a much younger age group, 
one that can appreciate the text 
in increasing degree. In fact, so 
well is the book designed,- words 
and pictures can be mutually 
exclusive or intimately complementary. 
—FLOYD C. GALE 
By H. L. GOLD 
Illustrated by WOOD 
Ning engnr wanted: duties It, 
gravity ditto, unitd opptnty 
advcmt — as anythg but engnr! 
D owd caught hold of a 
stanchion and braced himself — it was easier to be 
forceful when you didn’t float off 
the ground with every word. 
He said persuasively: “You can 
still change your mind, Eggleston. 
Where are you going to get another job like this? Look, you’ve 
PERSONNEL PROBLEM 
been getting ten shares — how 
about if we make it twelve? The 
committee will go along. That’s 
eighty thousand dollars a year, 
man!” 
“No,” said Eggleston. 
“Be reasonable! Ceres isn’t as 
bad as all that As asteroids go, 
it’s in a class by itself. Maybe 
we’re a little cramped, but we’re 
still getting organized — why, next 
year we’ll have it fixed up so you 
can get annual leave on Earth 
and—” 
“No!” said Eggleston, even more 
positively than before. 
Dowd blew through his nostrils, 
once, hard, a snort of anger and 
exasperation. Being general manager of the miners’ co-op that had 
the Ceres franchise was an unrelieved headache. Here he was 
promising this nincompoop Eggleston twelve shares — he himself 
had only three, and an able-bodied 
vacuum-miner, risking his life and 
his health every day, got only one. 
And all because Eggleston had an 
engineering degree! 
“It isn’t the money,” Eggleston 
said. “You know what it is.” 
“No,” said Dowd grimly. “I 
don’t know.” 
E ggleston looked longingly 
at the open port of the ship. 
He hesitated and set down his 
bag — eight hundred and fifty 
pounds of personal belongings and 
equipment. It would weigh that 
much on Earth; here it was only 
a feather-light balloon. 
He said tiredly: “I’ve told you 
dozens of times. I don’t see why 
I’m bothering to tell you again. 
You didn’t understand it before 
and you won’t understand it now.” 
“Try me!” said Dowd. “Maybe 
I’ll finally get it!” 
“All right. There’s no work for 
me here, Dowd. And who wants to 
live inside a chunk of rock?” 
“Two thousand of us do!” 
“Then do it!” snapped Eggleston. “Not me! I’m tired of never 
seeing the sun — except through 
filters, after I put on a spacesuit. 
I’m tired of breathing last year’s 
air. I’m tired of living with two 
thousand miners and their squalling brats, all cooped up in an 
oversized mine shaft. And when 
it comes right down to it, Dowd, 
I’m tired of you! That’s why I’m 
leaving — right now, at fourteen 
twenty-two hours on June third, 
mean solar time, and you can 
take your twelve shares and—” 
“Okay, okay,” Dowd broke in; 
“So long.” 
He slipped his shoes back into 
the magnetic galoshes that held 
him to the floor and clumped, teetering, away. 
Behind him, he heard the shrill 
mechanical whine of the lock 
motors, sealing off the chamber 
where the rocket ship lay, and 
then the pumps that sucked the 
air out of the giant lock. When 
the lock was empty, the outer 
panels whined open, the noise coming shrilly through the rock; there 
was a sharp, shattering jar as the 
rockets started — then silence. 
Dowd didn’t even look around. 
It wasn’t very interesting any 
more. Eggleston wasn’t the first 
engineer to depart in a huff. He 
was the seventeenth, and the whole 
process was becoming impleasantly familiar. 
Dowd took the elevator down 
and reported failure to the rest of 
the managing committee. They accepted the news without comment; 
they were getting used to it too. 
Manson, the gray-haired supply manager, was the nearest to 
cheerful of the lot — it wasn’t his 
problem. Except that, of course, 
production was everybody’s problem; if there wasn’t enough production, there wasn’t enough pay. 
Still, he was able to say: “Well, 
that’s that. What do we do now?” 
Dowd said glumly: “Call a 
general meeting. We’ll have to put 
it up to the whole membership.” 
Traffic Manager Pickett scowled. 
“Put what up? We haven’t got an 
engineer and we’re not likely to 
get one. What’s to discuss?” 
Dowd shrugged, wishing he had 
the guts to call the ship back and 
join Eggleston in leaving this 
place. “The only thing we can do, 
as I see it, is try to get along without an engineer for a while. But 
that’s a matter of Policy.” 
Manson nodded. Policy required 
a general meeting; everybody 
knew that. He reached over, picked 
up the P.A. microphone, flipped 
it on and spoke into it: “Attention, everyone. Attention, everyone. General meeting in the Common at — ” he glanced at his watch 
— “fifteen hundred hours exactly.” 
^T^HE committee was down at 
the mouth, but the miners 
didn’t seem perturbed. It was a 
kind of holiday for them. There 
wasn’t much doing inside the 488mile diameter of Ceres, and even 
a general meeting, that invariable 
precursor of trouble, was better 
than nothing. 
The miners and their families 
came up out of the rock-built 
“houses”— really cubicles. Really, 
said the more disgnmtled inhabitants, caves. They were laid out 
in geometrically straight streets in 
the great, high-ceilinged chamber 
under the surface of the asteroid. 
They were not notably pretty or 
comfortable, but they would do. 
Enormous sun lamps hung, violetglowing, on spindly cables from the 
ceiling; giant street ventilators 
sucked out the old air and pumped 
in — well, the same ak, but dried, 
cooled, de-carboned and re-oxidated. 
It sounded like the noise of wind 
in trees — or, anyway, that’s what 
Dowd was in the habit of saying 
in his wheedling letters to prospective members of the co-op. 
Actually, what it sounded like was 
ventilators. 
As general manager, Dowd led 
the committee toward the Common at the center of town. It was 
the commimity’s showplace — synthetic grass, imitation trees, even 
a small pool that used to have 
the unpleasant habit of creeping 
PERSONNEL PROBLEM 
up over its margins and drenching 
everything around. This was due 
to a combination of the high surface-tension of water and the low 
gravity in the interior of Ceres; 
and the only thing that could be 
done about it was to roof the thing 
over with glass, which more or 
less spoiled the effect. From a distance, though, it didn’t look bad, 
particularly when you observed 
the surrounding shops, the theater, 
the restaurant 
Dowd couldn’t see any grass at 
all this time, not even the glassedover pool. Every square foot of 
the Common was covered with people. Dowd climbed to the bandstand — once there really had been 
a band there, and dancing on the 
green; but that hadn’t worked too 
well either, because the low gravity 
made even the best dancers prone 
to fall all over their partners. 
He picked up the loud-hailer 
and addressed the crowd. In a few 
brief words, he told the miners 
what they already knew, and outlined the problem they had already faced: “We don’t have an 
engineer. We aren’t likely to get 
one. We have to try to get along 
without one; and that’s the size of 
it. Now,” Dowd went on, “I’ll entertain a motion that we proceed 
on our own power.” 
He got his motion and it was 
passed unanimously — if you could 
call it that. At least, there weren’t 
any “nay” votes, but there were 
also only a scattering of “ayes;” 
and if the expressions on the faces 
of the two thousand miners and 
their families had been ballots, the 
whole Ceres Mining Co-operative 
would have faced a veto that afternoon. 
The committee went back to its 
work. The miners returned to their 
homes. The whole community kept 
its fingers crossed, fearing the 
worst— 
And, two days later, an oversize blast went off and one-nineteenth of the asteroid of Ceres was 
blown away into space. 
F irst concern was casualties. 
Dowd raced into a pressure 
suit and headed a party that 
grappled and clung its way around 
the mottled rock surface of the 
asteroid to where the accident had 
occurred. They foimd the miners 
— sheepish enough, pinioned under what, on Earth, would have 
been tons of rock, some of them; 
but unhurt. 
The second concern was the airtightness of the living quarters — 
and that, thank heaven, thought 
Dowd, was still all right The blast 
had occurred seventy miles from 
the town-cavern. 
The third concern was — the 
Solar System Conservation Society. 
Dowd returned to the main 
operations area and boarded a 
scout rocket with Manson and 
Simon Brodsky, the accountant. 
They jetted a few miles out into 
space, arrested their relative motion and took a good long look. 
Asteroid Ceres looked like a 
cake with a big chunk hacked out 
of it. 
“Oh, my God,” groaned Brodsky. “Now weVe in for it.” 
Dowd said shortly: “I know.” 
Manson said: “What happened? 
Did you find out?” 
Dowd shrugged. “They had the 
charge all figured, and then they 
got worried it wasn’t enough, so 
they added more. They were so 
busy arguing, they tied in with the 
stored explosive and the whole 
business went up. Lucky they 
weren’t all killed — maybe all of 
the rest of us, too.” 
“You can say lucky if you want 
to,” Brodsky complained. “Fm not 
so sure. This is going to cost us 
our franchise, you know.” 
Manson said: “You mean the 
Solar System Conservationists?” 
“What else? Our contract said 
we couldn’t do anything that would 
affect the external appearance or 
the orbit of Ceres. Believe me, this 
does both. Look at it!” 
They looked, in an atmosphere 
of gloom. “Curse them,” Dowd 
said angrily. “It’s a bloody big 
slice, all right.” 
It was. The raw cut was as 
deep and wide as a sea, and the 
undiffused sunlight cast a spaceblack shadow that made it seem 
even deeper and more naked 
among the jagged asteroidal peaks. 
“There’s no doubt about it,” 
Dowd added. “Palomar will spot 
that next time they look this way 
—if a liner from one of the outer 
planets doesn’t beat them to it.” 
“Wait a minute,” said Brodsky 
thoughtfully. “There aren’t any 
liners this time of year — none of 
the big planets are in opposition.” 
“Well?” 
“And Palomar isn’t going to 
bother with us till it has to. Listen,” 
Brodsky went on, growing excited, 
‘Svhat if we get that piece and stick 
it back?” 
Dowd stared. “Do what?” 
“You heard me,” Brodsky insisted. “Why not?” 
Dowd looked at him in astonishment. He began to laugh — until 
he realized that Brodsky was 
serious, and then he got annoyed. 
“That’s crazy. We’re miners, Brodsky. We dig out; we don’t put 
back.” 
Manson interrupted: “No, listen 
to him. Why shouldn’t we?” 
Dowd rubbed his square jaw, 
squinting down at the asteroid. 
“Well — I don’t know, maybe it’s 
an idea. Certainly we couldn’t be 
any worse off—” 
“Let’s try it,” Brodsky urged 
eagerly. “What can we lose?” 
It was a very good question and 
they all knew the answer. “All by 
ourselves,” Dowd mused. “No engineer to tell us what to do; no 
no 
experience in this sort of thing . 
Well, you’re right, Brodsky. We 
don’t have any choice, do we?” 
VI^HAT had happened to Ceres 
^ was this: A wedge of rock 
had flown off into space, like an 
axehead hurled off the handle; it 
was getting farther away every 
second, and it had picked up a fair 
amount of spin. Moreover, the 
remaining eighteen-nineteenths of 
Ceres had acquired, by natural 
law, an equal and opposite thrust, 
seriously disturbing its own orbit. 
The ore freighter department 
head checked in. “Yeah, we’ve got 
the ships,” he said. “We’ve got 
eight that we can use for towing, 
which is enough. We can kill the 
spin, sure. Don’t worry about that. 
We’ll get the chunk back to Ceres, 
right over the cavity. Then it’s up 
to the ground crews to take over. 
Of course,” he added, “we’ll need 
an engineer to check our acceleration and bearings and all that, you 
know. Say, when is the new engineer going to—” 
“Thanks,” Dowd said bitterly. 
“Thanks a lot. Just stand by. I’ll 
let you know.” 
The loading section foreman 
was less confident, but he grudgingly agreed that the problem of 
getting the chunk back down in 
place wasn’t impossible. He 
dragged Dowd to his drafting office 
and showed him the plans his section had made. They all gathered 
around his desk, arguing over a ' 
diagram. 
“See,” the foreman said, “I 
guess we could winch it down, 
like. From the bottom and sides, 
you understand? It might mean 
losing a few winches underneath, 
but I guess it’s cheaper than losing the francfiise.” 
“Hold on,” Dowd said sharply. 
“You guess you can winch it down? 
It might mean losing a couple of 
winches?” 
“Well, what do you expect me 
to say?” the foreman demanded 
righteously. “I’m no engineer.” 
“Damn it,” exploded Dowd, 
“you’ve been doing this kind of 
work for twenty years! All Eggleston would have done is check 
over your own diagram. Why 
can’t you do that?” 
The foreman said stubbornly: 
“Stress factors, things like that— 
what do I know about them, 
Dowd? It looks all right, but how 
can I say for sure?” 
Dowd pulled his lips over his 
teeth and sought out the head 
blaster. 
The blaster pointed out: “I ain’t 
an engineer, but the way it looks to 
me, we can fuse the wedge in place 
once the loading section gets it 
down. See, like we did when we 
put in the cargo lock for the 
rockets, remember?” 
Dowd asked : “And do you 
think fusing it would hold it in ' 
place permanently, allowing for 
PERSONNEL PROBLEM 
orbital spin and gravitational—” 
The blaster spread his hands. 
“How do I know? Now if I were 
an engineer—” 
“Thafs what I thought,” said 
Dowd. “I’ll let you know.” 
rk OWD called the Managing 
Committee meeting to order 
in the board room. He locked the 
door and started the tape recorder; 
for several minutes, it recorded 
only his profane remarks about 
lack of guts and self-confidence. 
“Hold it, Dowd,” Manson said 
at last. “We’ve most of us dug all 
our lives — all but Brodsky. That’s 
why he doesn’t know the problems 
in a job like this. There are all 
kinds of tricky things involved.” 
“Like what?” Dowd savagely 
wanted to know. 
Manson snapped: “If I could 
tell you that, I’d be an engineer.” 
Dowd drummed his fist on the 
desk. “Ah, what’s the use? Sometimes I wish this wasn’t a co-op. 
If I was a real boss, I’d just give 
the orders — and they’d damn well 
do what they were told, engineer 
or no engineer.” 
Pickett glanced up at him 
thoughtfully, and then returned to 
what he was doing — paring his 
cuticles with a little knife. He said : 
“You can’t, Dowd. I’d quit. I don’t 
blame the men; I wouldn’t work 
on anything as ticklish as that 
hunk of rock without an engineer. 
That’s the way it is. On routine 
operations, maybe we could get 
along — but this isn’t routine.” 
“Oh, the hell with it,” Dowd said 
in disgust. “Here, let me tell you 
something. You know why we 
can’t keep an engineer? Because 
we dortt need one. Our boys have 
done everything that can be done 
with our equipment so often that 
they can do it in their sleep — yes, 
even like dragging a hunk of Ceres 
back to where it belongs! It’s only 
the same things they’ve been doing, on a slightly larger scale. They 
only want an engineer to yes them 
because they don’t have confidence. 
That’s why we’ve lost seventeen 
engineers, one after another — they 
want work, not just a soft berth.” 
“So?” 
“So — I don’t know.” Dowd 
/ 
spread his hands, baffled. “I don’t 
blame the engineers. When a man 
gets a degree, he wants to use it. 
Not just look at radar soundings— 
which are read for him — and 
approve charge formulas — which 
are all worked out for him — and 
read loading schedules and shoring 
diagrams and — hell, the entire 
job! That’s why we can’t keep 
them. And that’s why we don’t 
need them, even now.” 
Pickett didn’t look up. “No engineer, no job,” he said softly, and 
the rest of the room murmured 
agreement. 
Dowd sat down heavily and 
stared at the ceiling. It was an 
impasse. 
TJRODSKY cleared his throat. 
“You know,” he said, “my 
sister Molly has a boy, David. He 
wanted to be a violinist, but she 
made him go to mining callege.” 
Manson lifted his head questioningly. “He’s probably got some 
nice job in a nice place,” he grumbled. “You don’t think he’d quit 
some other place just to—” 
“Oh, he doesn’t have a job yet,” 
said Brodsky. He counted on his 
fingers, nodding. “Yes, he’s just 
getting out of school now. I remember because my niece Leah 
got married when he was in his 
sophomore year and—” 
“All right! All right! What are 
you getting at, Brodsky? You 
think you can get the kid before 
somebody else signs him up?” 
. Brodsky looked surprised. “Yes.” 
Manson looked interested. “What 
do you think, Dowd?” 
Dowd banged the table. “Brodsky,” he roared, “why didn’t you 
say something about this before? 
Qet to it, man! If he’s a relative, 
maybe there’s a chance he’ll stick 
—anyway, even if he only stays 
long enough to get the damned asteroid stuck together again, that’s 
something! Look — ” he figured 
rapidly — ” we’ll get one of the 
oreboats to haul you to where you 
can pick up a liner. Pickett, you 
get on the radio and find out who’s 
in port Manson, you get the freight 
section ready to take Brodsky in. 
JV^ove!” 
F»ERSONNEL PROBLEM 
“Right!” Manson smiled. “Then 
we’ve got a chance. With a mining 
engineer, we can do the job.” 
“Yeah.” Suddenly Dowd sat 
back again. “But only the job,” he 
said wearily. “Then we’re on our 
own. Relative or not, he’ll never 
stay.” 
“Oh, he’ll stay,” Brodsky promised. “I guarantee he’ll stay.” 
A S usual in imusual situations, 
the membership of the Ceres 
Mining Cooperative was in the 
community square when Brodsky 
brought his nephew, David Bookbinder, down from the landing 
area. 
David was a tall boy, not entirely filled out yet, with light hair 
that had four great waves in it— 
a feature that the miners’ wives 
and daughters approved— and a 
long, sensitive face. He wore strong 
contact lenses — a feature that the 
minors approved; it was evidence 
of studiousness. 
Brodsky proudly introduced 
him first to the managing committee and then to the foremen of 
the various crews, who took him 
around to meet the members and 
their families. David held a violin 
case in his left hand and shook 
with his right, smiling gently and 
looking a little overwhelmed. He 
had to show his handsome diploma 
over and over to the awed and 
respectful miners. 
Dowd, Brodsky, Pickett and 
Manson stood near the bandstand 
and watched the lad answer questions, moving shyly from one 
group to another. 
‘‘They like him,” said Down. 
Brodsky nodded, pleased. “He 
was worried about that. I told him 
once in a while, say a couple of 
times a month, he could give a 
violin concert here. That would 
keep him happy. And who knows, 
people might enjoy it.” 
“They’ll enjoy anything he 
does,” Dowd said enthusiastically. 
“Speaking of keeping him happy, 
we ought to work that out in 
detail.” 
Brodsky waved his hand. “Later, 
later. First we put Ceres back together. Then we worry about that.” 
“Oh, that’s no problem now,” 
Dowd assured him. “We’re all set. 
The wedge is being towed back— 
the crews began that the minute 
we got your spacegram, saying 
you and David were on the way. 
Now he’s got the data from the 
other sections to go over— but that 
won’t take long.” 
“No, that’s true,” Brodsky 
agreed. “He’ll be glad to look it 
over.” 
“And then what?” asked Manson. “Do we lose him like the 
others? I’ll tell you what. I’m for 
voting him fifteen shares, Dowd. 
Why not? We could build him a 
big rock house down in some nice 
section of town — put in a bar, a 
ballroom, whatever he wants. And 
we can get him a little electrocar— 
maybe even a chauffeur, if he 
wants—” 
“Sure!” added Pickett. “Listen, 
why not get a little private rocket? 
It could be his— let him go to Mars 
once in a while. You know? Maybe the rest of us could use it when 
he didn’t mind— but it would be his 
all the same. And we can put 
through that leave plan right away 
—what the devil, why not give the 
guy a couple months a year on 
Earth or Mars? With pay, naturally. And the town looks a little 
drab — we could spray-paint it. 
And a mist machine up at the ceiling to give us a blue sky and white 
drifting clouds—” 
“You’re crazy!” cried Dowd, outraged. “He’s just an engineer, you 
idiots! No engineer is worth it!” 
Manson scowled blackly. “You 
say that?” he demanded. “After 
we’ve messed ourselves up trying 
to get along without one?” 
Brodsky was polishing his 
glasses. “Gentlemen,” he begged, 
looking distressed. “Please, we 
don’t have to go to all that trouble. 
He’s just a boy. The place is fine 
— maybe we could dress it up a 
little, like you say. But for us, not 
for David. David will stay, I assure you, and he’ll be happy with 
the usual ten shares and our old 
engineer’s quarters.” 
Wonderingly, Pickett said: 
“You’ve got more influence with 
your relatives than me with mine.” 
“Sure,” said Brodsky. “Say, 
Dowd, can I talk to you for a 
minute?” 
Dowd shrugged. The others 
nodded and walked off toward the 
group around the colony’s new engineer. 
D owd said suspiciously : 
‘Well?” 
Brodsky cleared his throat. “The 
1’act is,” he said, “David wanted to 
te a violinist, as I told you. But he 
went to mining college to please 
liis mother—” 
“As you told me. I know. What 
about it?” 
“Well,” Brodsky said hesitantly, 
“there was just a little trouble 
about his grades.” He took a petty 
(rash voucher out of his pocket. “I 
have here—” 
“Wait a minute! What are you 
tring to tell me, Brodsky? He’s an 
(jngineer, isn’t he? I saw his 
diploma with my own eyes!” 
“Oh, yes,” Brodsky assured him. 
‘^Of course you did. Everybody 
did— a beautiful diploma, right? 
I'Tice sheepskin. Nice lettering. 
'iPhafs what this bill I have here 
is— five dollars for parchment, forty 
dollars hand lettering. I also,” he 
iidded, “invested quite a lot for 
losin and violin strings and things 
like that, but I want to pay for 
for those myself. Call it a present 
for my nephew.” 
“A graduation present?” Dowd 
asked, more than a bit baffled. 
“Well—” Brodsky was a little 
embarrassed — “not exactly. You 
see, there was the thing with his 
grades. So I promised him that 
here things would be all right— he 
could practice his fiddle as much 
as he wanted; all we’d want from 
him is that once in a while he had 
to look over whatever the foremen 
brought him and say yes. Easy? 
He thought so. But it’s worth it 
to us.” 
Dowd swallowed hard. “You 
mean—” he started, and had to 
pause to swallow again. “You mean 
he isn’t really—” 
Brodsky shrugged. “A technicality. He’s been to school? He’s 
got a degree? What more does he 
need?” 
“But— but suppose the data’s 
wrong! Suppose the foremen make 
a mistake and—” 
Brodsky was shaking his head. 
“Never!” he said positively. “Besides, David isn’t entirely ignorant. 
He may not be an engineer to 
other engineers, but to a miner, 
believe me, he’s an engineer.” 
— H. L. GOLD 
★ ★ ★ ★ ★ 
F'ERSONNEL PROBLEM 
Tiling 
off Beauty 
By DAMON KNIGHT 
Illustrated by WOOD 
There was the gizmo 
that could put Gordon Fish 
in the chips — or 
right in the soup — 
and he didn't know 
which he was ordering! 
T here was a time slip in 
Southern California at 
about one in the afternoon. 
Mr. Gordon Fish thought it was 
an earthquake. He woke up confused and sullen from his midday 
nap, blinking fiercely, pink as a 
spanked baby’s behind, with his 
sandy-yellow beard and eyebrows 
bristling. He got off the sofa and 
listened. No screams, no rumble 
of falling buildings, so probably it 
was all right. 
He heard a knock. 
' -f 
I 
Squinting uneasily, Fish went 
to the door. He had left his glasses 
on the table, but never mind; it 
might be a client, or even an investigator from the city, in which 
case — 
He opened the door. 
A slender man in purple was 
standing there. He was small, hardly an inch taller than Gordon Fish. 
He said, “Three twenty-two and a 
half Platt Terrace?” His face was 
an oval blur; he seemed to be 
wearing some kind of tight uniform, like a bellboy’s— but purple? 
“That’s right, three twenty-two 
and a half, this is it,” said Fish, 
straining to make out the fellow’s 
salmon-colored face. He caught 
sight of some other people standing behind him, and a shadowy 
bulk, like a big box of some kind. 
“I don’t know if you—” 
“All right, fezh, bring it in,” 
said the man, turning to speak 
over his shoulder. “Bung, did we 
have a time finding you!” he said 
to Fish, and pushed his way into 
the living room. Behind him, other 
men in tight purple clothing came 
staggering under the weight of 
boxes, first a big one, then two 
smaller ones, then a really big 
one, then a clutter of smaller 
boxes. 
“Listen, wait, there must be 
some mistake,” said Fish, dancing 
out of the way. “I didn’t order—” 
The first man in purple looked 
at some papers in his hand. “Three 
twenty-two and a half Platt Terrace?^* he said. His voice sounded 
slurred and angry, as if he were 
half drunk or had just waked up, 
like Fish himself. 
]C^ISH was unreasonably irritated. “I tell you I didn’t order 
anything! I don’t care if — You 
walk in here, into a man’s home, 
just — Listen! You! You get that 
out of there!” Infuriated, he rushed 
at two of the men who were setting down one of the smaller boxes 
on the sofa. 
“This is the address,” said the 
first man in a bored voice. He 
shoved some papers into Fish’s 
hand. “You don’t want ’em, send 
’em back. We just deliver ’em.” 
The purple men began to move, 
toward the door. 
The spokesman went out last. 
“Bung, are you a dvich!” he said, 
and closed the door. 
Raging, Fish fumbled for his 
glasses — they ought to be right 
there, but the movers had upset 
everything. He went to the door 
anyway, twitching with anger — 
dammit, if he could just find his 
glasses, he’d report them, but — 
He opened the door. The purple-uniformed men, a little knot of 
them, were standing in the courtyard looking bewildered. One of 
them turned a salmon-colored dot 
of a face. “Hey, which way is—” 
It sounded like “enchmire.” 
There was a tremor, and Fish 
lurched against the door-frame. It 
felt like an earth-shock, a heavy 
one, but when he looked up, the 
palm trees in the street were not 
swaying, and the buildings were 
solid and firm. But the purple 
men were gone. 
Swearing frantically to himself, 
I'ish went back into the living 
room and slammed the door behind him. The biggest box was in 
his way. He kicked it and a slat 
hdl out. He kicked it again, grunting with angry satisfaction. The 
v^hole side fell down with a clatter, revealing a black-enameled 
panel. Fish kicked that and bruised 
his toe. 
“Hm,” said Fish, looking at the 
s eek black finish of whatever it 
v^as. “Hah.” It looked like money. 
Peering, he ran his finger along 
tlie metal. Cool and smooth. Why, 
i1 might be almost an 3 Tthing. Industrial machinery, worth thousands of dollars to the right party. 
V/ith rising excitement. Fish ran 
to the table, found his glasses 
pushed into some magazines, and 
r.an back, fitting the glasses over 
his little eyes. 
He pulled some more slats 
aside. The box fell away, disclosing an oddly shaped hunk of metal 
v'ith buttons, dials and pointers in 
tlie top. An engraved white plate 
read: “teckning maskin,” and 
tlien some numbers. It sounded 
ominous and important. Heart 
beating. Fish rubbed his fingers 
over the smooth buttons and the 
gleaming dial faces. There was a 
faint click. He had accidentally 
moved a switch, he saw, from 
“Av” to “Pa.” The ’dials were lighting up and a set of long hooked 
arms, like claws, were slowly drifting out over the flat empty space 
in the middle. 
Hastily, Fish turned the switch 
back to “Av.” The lights went out; 
the arms, looking disappointed, he 
thought, drifted back into their 
enclosures. 
Vl^ELL, it worked, whatever it 
was, which was funny, because, come to think of it, he hadn’t 
plugged it in anywhere. Fish stared 
at the machine uneasily, rubbing 
his pudgy hands together. Batteries? In a machine that size? 
And those funny dials, the peculiar 
expression the whole thing had — 
and “Teckning Maskin,” not even 
English. There it sat, all eight or 
nine pieces of it, filling up his living room — one crate, he saw with 
annoyance, blocked off his view 
of the TV. Suppose it was all 
some kind of joke? 
The instant he thought of it, he 
saw the whole thing in a flash. The 
crates sitting here, and then in a 
few days the bill would come in 
the mail — maybe they wouldn’t 
even take the things away until 
he’d paid the shipping — and all 
the time the joker would be laughing himself sick, laughing, who
THING OF BEAUTY 
ever it was that had ordered the 
machines in Fish’s name — some 
old enemy, or it could even be 
someone he thought of as a 
friend — 
With tears of rage in his eyes, 
he rushed to the door again, flung 
it open and stood panting, staring 
around the courtyard. But there 
was nobody there. He slammed 
the door and stood looking helplessly at the crates. If they would 
fight fair — How was he going to 
watch Dragnet, and, good heaven, 
where was he going to talk to 
clients, in the kitchen? 
“Oh!” said Fish, and he kicked 
another crate hard. Slats gave and 
something fell out, a little yellow 
booklet. Fish glimpsed more blackenameled machinery inside. He 
bent wildly to pick up the booklet 
and tried to tear it across, but it 
hurt his hands. He threw it across 
the room, shouting, “Well, then!” 
He danced from one crate to another, kicking. Slats littered the 
floor. Gleaming machines stood up 
from the mess, some with dials, 
some without. Fish stopp>ed, out 
of breath, and stared at them with 
a new bewilderment 
A trick, no, it couldn’t be; big 
industrial machines like that, it 
wasn’t like ordering something 
from a department store. But then 
what? A mistake. 
Fish sat down on the arm of a 
chair and frowned, scrubbing his 
beard with his fingers. In the first 
place, now, he hadn’t signed anything. Even if they came back tomorrow, if he could manage to 
get rid of say one piece, he could 
always claim there had been seven 
instead of eight. Or suppose he 
even got rid of all of it, discreetly, 
of course, then when they came 
back he could simply deny the 
whole thing. Say he never heard 
of any machinery. 
Fish’s nerves began to twitch. 
He jumped up, looked around, sat 
down. Speed, speed, that was the 
thing. Get it over with. But what 
kind of machinery was it? 
Fish frowned, squirmed, got up 
and sat down again. Finally he 
went to the phone, looked up a 
number and dialed. He smoothed 
down his vest, cleared his throat 
musically. “Ben? This is Gordon 
Fish, Ben . Just fine. Now, 
Ben—” his voice dropped confidentially — “I happen to have a 
client who wants to dispose of a 
Teckning Maskin. Eight — What? 
Teckning Maskin. It’s machinery, 
Ben. T,E,C,K,N,I,N,G-No? Well, 
that’s the name they gave me; I 
have it written down right here. 
You never—? Well, that’s funny. 
Probably some mistake. I tell you, 
Ben, I’ll check back and see — 
Yes, thanks a lot. Thanks, Ben, 
bye-bye.” 
jLFE hung up, chewing his whiskers in vexation. If Ben Abrams 
had never heard of it, then there 
couldn’t be any market for it, not 
in this part of the country anyhow . , . Something funny. He was 
beginning to have a hunch about 
this thing now. Something — 
He prowled around the machines, looking at them this way 
and that. Here was another en; graved white plate; it said ‘‘teckNING MASKIN," and under that 
BANK 1, and then two columns 
of numbers and words ... “3 Folk, 
4 Djur, 5 Byggnader,” and so on,' 
lot more. Crazy words, it didn’t 
€:ven look like any language he’d 
ever heard of - and then those 
rianiacs in the purple uniforms. 
\V^ait a minute — 
Fish snapped his fingers, 
s -Opped, and stood in a pose of 
tliought. Now what was it that 
fiillow had said just as he was 
having? It had made him mad. 
Fish remembered-something like, 
“]3oy, are you a dvich.” Made him' 
nr. ad as a hornet, it sounded insulting, but what did it mean? 
And then that kind of earthquake just before they got here — 
WDke him up out of a sound sleep, 
left him feeling all funny — and 
then another one after they left, 
orily not an earthquake, because 
he remembered distinctly that the 
palm trees didn’t even tremble. 
Fish ran his finger delicately 
over the shining curved edge of 
th <2 nearest machine. His heart was 
thumping; his tongue came out to 
lick his lips. He had a feeling — 
THING OF BEAUTY 
no, really he knew — nobody would 
be coming back for the machines. 
They were his. Yes, and there 
was money in them somewhere; 
he could smell it. But how? What 
did they do? 
He opened all the crates carefully. In one of them, instead of 
a machine, there was a metal box 
full of creamy-thick sheets of 
paper. They were big rectangular 
sheets, and they looked as if one 
would just about fit onto the flat 
center space on the biggest machine. Fish tried one, and it did. 
Well, what could go wrong? 
Fish rubbed his fingers nervously, 
then turned the switch on. The 
dials lighted and the hooked arms 
drifted out, as before, but nothing 
else happened. Fish leaned nearer 
again and looked at the other controls. There was a pointer and a 
series of marks labeled “Av,” 
Bank 1, Bank 2,” and so on down 
to Bank 6.” He moved the pointer 
cautiously to “Bank 1.’^ The arms 
moved a little, slowly, and stopped. 
What else? Three red buttons 
marked “Utplana,” “Torka,” and 
“Avsla.” He pushed one, but 
nothing happened. Then a series 
of white buttons, like on an adding 
machine, all numbered. He pressed 
one down at random, then another, 
and was about to press a third 
when he leaped back in alarm. 
The hooked arms were moving, 
rapidly and purposefully. Where 
they passed over the paper, thin 
dark-gray lines were growing. 
Fish leaned closer with his 
mouth open and his eyes bulging. The little points undei] the 
ends of the arms were riding 
smoothly over the paper, leaving 
graceful lines behind them. The 
arms moved, contracted on their 
little pivots and springs, swept this 
way and that; lifted slightly, 
dropped again and moved on. Why, 
the machine was drawing — drawing a picture while he watched! 
T here was a face forming under the arm over on the right, 
then a neck and shoulder — kind 
of a sappy-looking man, it was, 
like a Greek statue. Then over 
here on the left, at the same time, 
another arm was drawing a bull’s 
head, with some kind of flowers 
between the horns. Now the man’s 
body — he was wearing one of 
those Greek togas or whatever 
you call them — and the back of 
the bull curving around up on top 
— and now the man’s arm, and 
the bull’s tail, and now the other 
arm, and the bull’s hind legsThere it was. A picture of a 
man throwing flowers at this bull, 
who was kind of leaping and looking at the man over his shoulder. 
The arms of the machine stopped 
moving and then pulled back out 
of sight. The lights went out and 
the switch clicked by itself back 
to ‘‘Av.” 
Fish took the paper and looked 
it over, excited but a little disappointed. He didn’t know anything about art, of course, but he 
knew this was no good all flatlooking and kind of simple, like 
a kid would draw. And that bull, 
who ever saw a bull dancing like 
that? With flowers between its 
horns? 
Still, if the machine would draw 
this, maybe it would draw something better; he couldn’t quite see 
the angle — where would you sell 
drawings, even good ones? — but 
it was there somewhere. Exhibit 
the machine, like in a fair of science and industry? No, his mind 
hurriedly buried the thought — too 
exposed, too many questions. If 
Vera found out he was still alive, 
or if the police in Scranton— 
Drawings. A machine that made 
drawings. Fish looked at it, all 
eight lumpy black-enameled massive pieces of it scattered around 
his living room. It seemed like a 
lot of machinery just to make 
drawings. He admitted it, he was 
disappointed; he had expected — 
well, metal stampings or something like that, something real. 
Crash, bang, the big metal jaw 
comes down, and tink, the bright 
shaped piece falls out into the 
basket. There was machinery for 
you; but this — 
Fish sat back and pondered, 
twitching the paper disapprovingly between his fingers. Things 
were always letting him down like 
this. Really, his best line was marriage — he had been married five 
times and always made a little 
profit out of it — he smoothed the 
vest down over his suety front; 
between times, he turned to whatever was handy. Marital Counselling some years, or gave Life 
Readings if he could get enough 
clients; or Naturopathy, it all depended, but somehow every time 
it looked as if he had a real gold 
mine, it slipped out from under 
his hand. 
He reddened with discomfort as 
he thought of the one winter he had 
been forced to go to work in a shoe 
store. 
Having this house had softened 
him up, too. He had been getting 
lazy, just a client or two a week 
for Life Readings. He ought to be 
getting busy, working up new contacts before his money ran out. 
The thought of poverty, as it 
always did, made him ravenously 
hungry. He kneaded his stomach. 
Time for lunch. He got his jacket 
hurriedly, and as an afterthought 
rolled up the drawing — it would 
not fold — and tucked it under 
his arm. 
XXE drove to the barbecue place 
three blocks down the boulevard where he had been eating a 
lot of his meals lately, to save 
funds. The counterman was a 
young fellow named Dave, lean 
and pale, with a lock of straight 
THING OF BEAUTY 
dark hair falling over his forehead. 
Fish had got into friendly conversation with him and knew he was 
going to art school nights, over in 
Pasadena. Fish had tried to get 
him over for a Life Reading, but 
the youngster had said frankly 
that he “didn^t believe in it,” in 
such an honest and friendly way 
that Fish bore him no ill will. 
“Bowl of chile, Dave,” he said 
cheerfully, hoisting himself up on 
a stool with the rolled drawing 
precariously on his lap. His feet 
dangled; the paper was squeezed 
tight between vest and counter. 
“Hello, Doc. Coming up.” Fish 
hunched forward over the bowl, 
loosening his collar. The one other 
customer paid and left. 
“Say, Dave,”' said Fish indistinctly, munching, “like to get your 
opinion of something. Unh.” He 
managed to get the rolled paper 
free and opened it on the counter. 
“What do you think — is it any 
good?” 
“Say,” said Dave, coming nearer. “Where’d you get that?** 
“Mm. Nephew of mine,” Fish 
answered readily. “He wants me 
to advise him, you know, if he 
should go on with it, because — ” 
Go on with it! W^ell, say — 
Whereas he been studying, anyhow?” 
“Oh, just by himself, you know 
- back home.” Fish took another 
mouthful. “Ver’ bright boy, you 
understand, but—” 
«Well — gee, if he learned to 
draw like that by himself — why, 
he must be a world-beater.” 
Fish forgot to chew. “You really 
mean it?” j \ 
“Why, sure. Listen, are you sure 
he drew this himself. Doc?” 
“Oh, certainly.” Fish waved the 
imputation of dishonesty away. 
“Ver’ honest boy, I know’m well. 
No, ’f he tells me he drew it, 
why—” he swallowed— “he drew it. 
But now don’t fool me, is it — 
do you really think it’s as ^ood— ” 
“Well, I tell you the truth, when 
I first saw it, I thought Picasso. 
You know, his classical period. Of 
course I see now it’s different, but, 
my gosh, it’s good. I mean, if you 
want my opinion, why—” 
Fish was nodding to indicate 
that this only confirmed his own 
diagnosis. “M-hm. M-hm. Well, 
I’m glad to hear you say it, son. 
You know, being a relative of the 
boy, I thought - Of course, I’m 
very impressed. Very impressed. I 
thought of Picasso, too, same as 
you. Of course, now from the 
money end of it — ” he wagged his 
head dolefully - “you know and 
I know—” 
D ave scratched his head under the white cap. “Oh— well 
— he ought to be able to get commissions, all right. I mean, if I had 
a line like that-” He traced in air 
the strong outline of the man’s 
lifted arm. 
“Now when you say commith 
sions-” Fish said, squirming with 
eagerness. 
“Oh, well, for portraits, or industrial designs, or you know, 
whatever he wants to go in for.” 
Dave shook his head in admiration, staring at the drawing. If 
this was only in color—” 
“How’s that, Dave?” 
“Why, I was just thinking— see, 
there’s a competition up in San 
Gabriel for a civic center mural. 
Ten-thousand-dollar prize. Now I 
don’t know, it might not win, but 
why don’t you have him render 
this in color and send it in?” 
“Color,” said Fish blankly. 
The machine wouldn’t color 
anvthing, he was sure. He could 
get a box of water color paints, 
but — 
“Well, now, the fact is,” he said, 
hastily revolving ideas, “you know, 
the boy is laid up. Hurt his hand— 
oh, not serious,” he said reassuringly (Dave’s mouth had fallen 
into a circle of sympathy), “but 
won’t be able to draw any more 
pictures for a while. It’s a shame, 
he could use the money, you know, 
for doctor bills—” He chewed and 
swallowed. “Tell you, this is just 
a wild idea now, but— why couldn’t 
you color it up and send it in, 
Dave? Course, if it doesn’t win, I 
couldn’t pay you, but—” 
“Well, gee, I don’t know how 
he’d like that. Doc. I mean, suppose he’d have something else in 
mind, like, some other color 
scheme altogether. You know, I 
wouldn’t like to—” 
‘‘I’ll take full responsibility,” 
said Fish firmly. “Don’t you worry about that, and— if we win, why, 
I’ll see that you’re paid handsomely, Dave. Now, there, how’s that?” 
“Well, sure, then. Doc. I mean 
sure,” said Dave, nodding and 
blushing. “I’ll do it tonight and 
tomorrow, and get it right off in 
the mail, okay? Then — oh, uh, 
one thing, what’s your nephew’s 
name?” 
“George Wilmington,” said Fish 
at random. He pushed the cleaned 
chile bowl away. “And, uh, Dave, 
I believe I’ll have an order of 
ribs, with french fries on the side.” 
Fish went home with a vastly 
increased respect for the machine. 
The mural competition, he was 
positive, was in the bag. Ten thousand dollars! For one drawing! 
Why, there was millions in it! 
He closed and locked the front 
door carefully behind him, and 
pulled down the Venetian blinds to 
darken the gloomy little living 
room still further. He turned on 
the lights. There the machine still 
was, all eight gleaming pieces of 
of it, scattered around on the floor, 
the furniture, everywhere. He 
moved excitedly from one piece 
to another, caressing the slick 
black surfaces with his palm. All 
that expensive machinery — all 
his! 
Might as well put it through its 
paces again, just to see. Fish got 
another sheet of creamy paper 
from the stack, put it in position, 
and turned the switch to “Pa.” He 
watched with pleasure as the dials 
lighted, the hooked arms drifted 
out and began to move. Lines 
grew on the paper : first some 
wavy ones at the top, could be 
anything. And farther down, a pair 
of long up-curved lines, kind of 
handlebar-shaped. It was like a 
puzzle, trying to figure out what it 
was going to be. 
TJNDER the wavy lines, which 
^ Fish now perceived to be 
hair, the pointer drew eyes and a 
nose. Meanwhile, the other one 
was gliding around the outline of 
what, it became clear in a moment, 
was a bull’s head. Now here came 
the rest of the girl’s face, and her 
arm and one leg — not bad, but 
kind of beefy — and now the bull’s 
legs, sticking out all different ways, 
and then, whoops, it wasn’t a bull: 
there was the whatyoumaycallum 
— a cow. So, a girl riding on a 
cow, with flowers between the 
horns like before. 
Fish looked at the drawing in 
disappointment. People and cows 
— was that all the thing could do? 
He scrubbed his beard in vexation. Why, for heaven’s sake, suppose somebody wanted a picture 
of something besides cows and 
people? It was ridiculous — eight 
THING OF BEAUTY 
big pieces of machinery — 
Wait a minute. “Don’t go off 
half-cocked, Gordon,” he told himself aloud. That was what Florence, his second, always used to 
say; except she always called him 
“Fishy.” He winced with discomfort at the memory. Well, anyway, 
he noticed now that the same buttons he had pressed down before 
were still down. That must have 
something to do with it. 
Struck by another thought, he 
trotted over and looked at the machine marked “Bank 1.” Now this 
list here, number 3 was “Folk,” 
and number 4 was “Djur.” Those 
were the numbers he had pressed 
on the big machine, so — maybe 
“folk” meant people, and “djur,” 
why, that might be some crazy 
word for cattle. Then if he pressed 
a different set of buttons, why, the 
machine would have to draw 
something else. 
In fifteen minutes, he verified 
that this was the case. Pressing 
down the first two buttons, “Land” 
and “Planta,” gave him drawings 
of outdoors scenes, just hills and 
trees. “Folk” was people and 
“Djur” seemed to be animals; 
now he got goats or dogs instead 
of cows. “Byggnader” was buildings. Then it got more complicated. 
A button marked “Arbete” gave 
him pictures of people at work; 
one labeled “Karlek” produced 
scenes of couples kissing — all in 
the same kind of Greek-looking 
clothes, and the landscapes and 
buildings were sort of vague and 
dreamy. Then there was a whole 
row of buttons under the heading 
“Plats,” and another headed “Tid,” 
that seemed to control where and 
when the pictures were about. For 
instance, when he pressed “Egyptisk” and “Gammal,” along with 
“Folk,” “Byggnader,” and on a 
hunch, “Religion,” he got a picture 
of some priests in Egyptian headdresses, bowing in front of a big 
statue. Now there was something! 
T he next day he nailed up the 
crates again, leaving the tops 
loose so that he could remove 
them whenever he wanted to use 
the machines. In the process, he 
came across the little yellow booklet he had thrown away. There 
were diagrams in it, some of 
which made sense and some didn’t, 
but the printing was all in the 
same unfamiliar language. Fish 
put the booklet away in a bureau 
drawer, under an untidy heap of 
clothes, and forgot about it. 
Gnmting and sweating, he managed to push the smaller crates 
into corners, and rearranged the 
furniture so there was room to 
put the big one against the wall. 
It still looked terrible, but at least 
he could get around, and have 
clients in, and he could see the TV 
again. 
Every day he ate lunch at the 
barbecue place, or at least stopped 
in, and every day, when Dave 
saw him come in, he shook his 
head. Then all afternoon he would 
sit with a glass of beer, or maybe 
a plate of nuts or fudge, watching 
the machine draw. He used up all 
the papers in the stack and started 
turning them over to use the other 
sides. 
But where was the money to 
come from? After some thought. 
Fish built a simple magic-writing 
box and used it with his Egyptian 
drawings ~ he had a dozen, all of 
different gods, but after the first 
one the machine didn’t draw any 
priests to show clients what they 
had been up to in previous incarnations. He began to get a little 
more business, and once or twice 
his instinct told him he could raise 
the fee on account of the drawiugs, but that was only pocket 
money. He knew there was millions in it, he could almost taste 
it, but where? 
Once it occurred to him that 
maybe he could take out a patent 
on the machine and sell it. Trouble 
with that was he didn’t have any 
idea how the thing worked. It 
seemed like the little machines 
must have pictures inside, or 
pieces of pictures, and the big ma^^^ue put them together — how? 
Fuming with impatience, Fish 
took the big crate apart again, 
moved furniture out of the way, 
and fumbled at the smooth black 
THING OF BEAUTY 
side of the machine to see if there 
was any way of opening it up. 
After a moment, his fingers 
found two shallow depressions in 
the metal; he pushed experimentally, then pressed upward -- and 
the side plate of the machine came 
off in his hands. 
It weighed almost nothing. Fish 
put it aside, staring doubtfully into 
the interior of the machine. It was 
all dark in there, nothing but a 
few very tiny specks of light, like 
mica dust hanging motionless. No 
wires, nothing. Fish got a sheet of 
paper and put it in position, and 
turned the machine on. Then he 
squatted down. The tiny specks of 
light seemed to be moving, circling 
slowly around one another in time 
to the motion of the drawing arms. 
It was darker in there, and looked 
farther away somehow, than it had 
any right to. 
Holding the front of the machine, Fish touched another shallow depression, and without really 
meaning to, he pushed upward. 
The whole front of the machine 
fell off, and the other side with it. 
He sprawled backward frantically to get out of the way: but 
the top of the machine didn’t fall. 
It stayed there, rock-steady, al^ough there was nothing holding 
it up but the back panel. 
And underneath, nothing. No 
framework, just the thick darkness, 
with the little stars going slowly 
around as the machine drew. 
Fidi hastily picked up the front 
and side panels and put them 
back. They slid easily and perfectly into place, and fitted so closely that he couldn’t see any line 
between them. 
After that, he put the crate back 
together and never tried to look 
inside the machines again, 
D ave hurried around thcj end 
of the counter to him. “Doc! 
Where have you been?” He was 
drying his hands on his apron and 
grinning nervously, with a sort of 
pole-axed expression around his 
eyes. A customer around the other 
side of the counter looked up, 
then went on chewing with his 
I 
mouth open. i 
“Well, I had quite a lot of things 
to do,” Fish began automatically. 
Then he began to feel 
“Say! You don’t mean-” ||y 
Dave fished a long white envelops out of his back pocket. 
“Came yesterday! Look here!” The 
envelope crackled in his nervous 
fingers. He pulled out a folded letter and Fish seized it Dave looked 
over his shoulder, breathing .heavily, as he read. 
Dear Mr. Wilmington: ^ 
It is my very great pleasure to 
inform you that your design has 
been awarded the First Prize in 
the San Gabriel Civic Center 
Mural Competition. In the opinion of the judges, the class'c sim
plicity of your entry, together 
with its technical mastery, made 
it far superior to anything else 
submitted. 
Enclosed please find our check 
for three thousand dollars 
($ 3 , 000 . 00 ) . 
“Where?” cried Fish, looking up. 
“Right here,” said Dave, with a 
grin that looked painful. He held 
up a salmon-colored strip of paper. 
The red-printed lettering read: 
“EXACTLY 3,000.<>^**** dollars*****.” 
Fish hugged Dave, who hugged 
him back, and then looked at the 
letter again. 
the remainder to be paid when 
the design is executed to the satisfaction of the Committee. 
“Executed?” said Fish, with a 
sinking feeling. “What’s that mean? 
Dave, what’s it mean here, where 
it says—” 
“When he paints the mural on 
the wall. Gee, Doc, I just can t 
tell you—” 
“Who?” 
“Your nephew. George Wilmington. See, when he paints the 
mural—” 
“Oh,” said Fish. ‘‘Oh. Well, you 
see, Dave, the fact is—” 
Dave’s long face grew solemn. 
“Oh, gosh, I never thought. You 
mean he’s not well enough to draw 
yet?” 
Fish shook his head, mournfully. No, sir. It’s a terrible shame, 
Dave, but-” He folded the check 
absently and slipped it into his 
pocket. 
“I thought. you said, I mean, 
it wasn’t serious or an3dhing— ” 
Fish continued to shake his 
head. Turned out there was more 
to it than they thought. It looks 
like now they just don’t know 
when he’ll ever be able to draw 
again.” 
Dh, Doc,” said Dave, stricken. 
“That’s the way it is. These 
things — the doctors don’t know as 
much about ’em as they’d like you 
to think, Dave/^ 
IC^ ISH went on staring fiercely at 
the letter, barely listening to 
the sound of his own voice. To he 
paid when the design is executed . 
Look here,” he said, interrupting Dave^s murmurs of commisertion. It don’t say who has to 
execute it, now does it? Notice 
right there? Says *when the design 
is executed’—” 
How about a glassa water over 
here?” called the customer. 
“Coming right up, sir. Look, 
Doc, I think you got an idea.” 
Dave retired sidewise toward the 
counter, still talking. “You know, 
anybody could scale that up and 
tbe actual painting — any competent artist, I mean. Gee, I’d do 
it myself, I mean if George didn’t 
mind. And if it was all right with 
THING OF BEAUTY 
the committee, why, you know, it 
would be an opportunity for me.” 
He gave the customer his water, 
mopped the counter blindly and 
came back. 
Fish leaned over the counter, 
beard in hand, frowning. “Wilmington” was just a name — Dave 
could take the part just as well 
as not, and it would be a lot better 
in one way, because then Fish himself could stay out of sight 
But, whoops, if they did that^ 
then Dave would be Wilmington, 
and he might want to take off on 
his own . 
W^ell, Dave,” he said, “are you 
a good artist?” 
Dave looked embarrassed. “Gee, 
Doc, you put me on the spot, but 
—well, anyway, they liked how I 
rendered the design, didn’t they? 
See, I used a color scheme of deep 
aqua and a kind of buff, with accents of rose — you know, to make 
it cheerful? And, gee, if I did it 
on. the paper, I could do it on a 
wall—” 
“Sold!” said Fish heartily, and 
clapped Dave on the shoulder. 
“George don’t know it yet, but he 
just got himself an assistant!” 
A SLIM female figure popped 
up at him suddenly from beside a potted palm. “Mr. Wilmington? If I could just have a moment—” 
^ Fish paused, one hand going to 
his chin in the old gesture, al
though he had shaved off the 
beard over a year ago. He felt exposed without it and his features 
tended to twitch when he was 
startled like this. “Why, yes, uh. 
Miss-” 
“My name is Norma Johnson. 
You don’t know me, but I have 
some drawings here—” 
She was carrying a big black 
portfolio, fastened with tapes. Fish 
sat down beside her and looked at 
the drawings. They looked all right 
to him, but skimpy, like the kind 
of thing he turned out mostly himself. What he liked was pictures 
with some meat to them, like Norman Rockwell, but the one time he 
had set the machine to draw something like that, his agent-the first 
one, Connolly, that crook! — | had 
told him there was no market for 
“genre stuff.” I 
The girl’s fingers were trembling. She was very neat and pale, 
with black hair and big expressive 
eyes. She turned over the last 
drawing. “Are they any good?” she 
asked. 
‘Well, now, there’s a good deal 
of spirit there,” said Fish ' comfortably. “And a very fine sense of 
design.” ^ ^ 
“Could I ever be successful at 
it?” j* , 
“Well-” % [: 
“See, the thing is,” she ‘ said 
rapidly, “my Aunt Marie .wants 
me to stay here in San Francisco 
and come out next season. But I 
don’t want to. So she agreed, if 
you said I had real talent, that 
she would send me abroad to 
study. But if you didn’t, I’d give 
up.” 
Fish looked at her intently. Her 
fingernails were short but looked 
cared for. She was wearii^ a 
simple white blouse and a little 
blue jacket and skirt; there was a 
whiff of woodsy perfume. Fish 
smelled money. 
He said, “Well, my dear, let 
me put it this way. Now you 
could go to Europe and spend a 
lot of money— ten thousand, twenty thousand dollars—” She watched 
him without blinking. “Fifty thousand-” said Fish delicately. “But 
what would be the point of it? 
Those fellows over there don’t 
know as much as they’d like you 
to think.” 
She fumbled blindly for her 
purse and gloves. “I see. She 
started to get up. 
Fish put a pudgy hand on her 
arm. “Now what I would suggest,” 
he said, “why don’t you come and 
study with me for a year instead? 
Her pale face lengthened. “Oh, 
Mr. Wilmington — would you?” 
“Well, anybody with as much 
talent as these drawings—” Fish 
patted the portfolio on her knee— 
“why, we have to do something, 
because—” 
She stood up excitedly. ‘Will 
you come tell diat to Aunt 
Marie?” 
Fish smoothed down the front 
of his pink shirt. “Why, gladly, 
my dear, gladly ” 
“She^s right here in the lounge.” 
ITE followed her and met Aunt 
Marie, who was a handsome 
woman of about fifty, plump but 
beautifully tailored in brown linen. 
They agreed that Norma would 
take a studio near Mr. W^ilmington’s home in Santa Monica, and 
that Mr. Wilmington would look 
in several times a week and give 
her the full benefit of his great 
experience, in return for ten thousand dollars per annum. It was, as 
Fish pointed out to them, less than 
half the amount he usually got 
now for major commissions; but 
never mind, every little bit helped. 
lM[urals, institutional advertising, 
textile designs, private sales to collectors — God, how it was rolling 
in! 
The only thing that really worried him was the machine itself. 
He kept it now in a locked inner 
room of the house he was renting 
--twenty rooms, furnished, terrific 
view of the Pacific Ocean, lots of 
room for parties-and up to a point 
he could work it like a kiddy-car. 
One time or another, he had figured out and memorized every one 
of the dozens of labeled buttons 
on the “Bank” machines, and just 
by combining the right ones, he 
could get any kind of a drawing 
he wanted. For instance, that com
THING OF BEAUTY 
mission for stained glass for a 
church - “Religion,” “People,” 
“Palestine,” “Ancient,” and there 
you were. 
The trouble was the machine 
wouldn’t draw the same thing 
twice in a row. On that church 
window job, he got one picture of 
Christ and then couldn’t get another, no matter how long he tried, 
so he had to fill out with saints 
and martyrs. The church put up 
a beef, too. 
Then sometimes at night, for 
his own amusement, he used to put 
the machine through its paces — 
such as setting it for “Historical 
figures” and “Romantisk,” which 
seemed to be the machine’s name 
for the present era, and then push 
the button marked “Overdriva,” 
and watch the famous faces come 
out with big cartoony noses, and 
teeth like picket fences. 
Or he would set it for “Love,” 
and then various interesting times 
and places — ancient Rome gave 
him some spicy ones, and Samoa 
was even better. 
But every time he did this, the 
machine turned out fewer drawings; and finally it wouldn’t do any 
more like that at all. 
Was there some kind of censor 
built into the thing? Did it disapprove of him? 
He kept thinking of the funny 
way those men in purple uniforms 
had delivered the thing. They had 
the right address, but the wrong 
— time? Whatever it was, he knew 
the machine wasn’t intended for 
him. But whom was it meant for? 
What was a “dvich”? 
T here were eight pieces - six 
banks, the master machine, and 
one which he had discovered would 
enlarge any detail of a drawing to 
almost full size. He could handle 
all that. He could manage the controls that governed the complexity 
or simplicity of a drawing, gave it 
more or less depth, changed its 
style and mood. 
The only buttons he wasn’t sure 
of were the three red ones marked 
“Utplana,” “Tdrka,” and “Avsla.” 
None of them seemed to do anything. He had tried all three both 
ways, and they didn t seem to 
make any difference. In the end, 
he left them the way they had 
been, “Torka” down, the other two 
up, for lack of any better idea. 
But, big and red like that, they 
must be important. 
He found them mentioned in 
the booklet, too: ^'Utplana en teckning, press knappen 'Utplana' 
Avlagsna ett monster Iran en hank 
efter anvandning, press knappen 
'Torka! Avsla en teckning innan 
slutsatsen, press knappen 'Avsla!" 
Press knappen, press knappen, 
that must be “push button ” But 
when? And that business about 
“monster,’’ that made him a little 
nervous. He had been pretty lucky 
so far, figuring out how to work 
the whole machine without any 
accidents. Supposing there was 
still something that could go wrong 
—suppose the booklet was a warn
ing? ' 
He prowled restlessly around 
the empty house — empty, and untidy, because he wouldn’t have any 
servants in the place. You never 
knew who was going to spy on 
you. A woman came in two days 
a week to clean the place up, all 
but the locked room, and once in 
a while he’d bring a couple of 
girls up for a party, but he always 
threw them out the next morning. 
He was busy all right, seeing a lot 
of people, traveling around, but 
he’d had to drop all his' old friends 
when he decided to become Wilmington, and he didn’t dare make 
any new ones for fear of giving 
himself away. Besides, everybody 
was out for something. 
The fact was, dammit, he wasn’t 
happy. What good was all the 
money he was making, all the 
things he’d bought, if they didn’t 
make him happy? Anyhow, pretty 
soon now, that oil stock would 
start paying off— -the salesman had 
assured him that the drillers were 
down within a few hundred feet 
of oil right now — and then he’d 
be a millionaire; he could retire, 
move to Florida or someplace 
He paused in front of his desk 
in the library. The booklet was 
still there, lying open. The thing 
was, even suppose that was some 
THING OF BEAUTY 
\ 
TtV 
language anybody had ever heard 
of, whom would he dare show it 
to? Whom could he trust? 
An idea occurred to him and he 
leaned over, staring at the yellow 
pages with their incomprehensible 
text. After all, he could already 
figure out some of the words; he 
didn’t have to show anybody the 
whole boolc, or even a whole sentence. Then there was that information business that came with his 
deluxe set of the Encyclopaedia 
Bntanmca — he ought to have it 
right here somewhere — 
Fish hunted in the file drawers 
and finally came up with a folder 
and a sheet of gummed yellow 
stamps. Ji 
Grunting, he sat down at the 
desk, and after much cigar-chewing, scribbling and crossing out. 
he typed the following: Jr; 
I 
Dear sirs: 
Kindly inform me as to what 
language the enclosed words are, 
and also what they mean. Kindly 
give this matter your best attention, as I am in a hurry. 
Then he addressed an envelope, 
stuck one of the yellow stamps to 
his letter, and mailed the thing off 
before he could regret it. 
On a separate sheet, he wrote 
all the doubtful words from the 
paragraph about the red buttons, 
cannily mixing them up so no 
one could guess what or^i^hey 
came in. 
Feeling a little foolish, he carefully drew in all the tiny strange 
dots. * 
f f H/l Y rhetorical question is,” 
said Fish craftily to the 
young physicist, shouting over the 
hum of cocktail-party conversation, ‘‘purely in interests of science, 
could you make a machine that 
would draw?” He beamed over 
his glasses at the horn-rimmed 
blur of the young man’s face. He 
had had three martinis, and whew! 
he was floating. But fully in command of senses, of course. 
“Well, draw what? If you mean 
charts and graphs, sure, or something like a pantograph, to enlarge—” 
“No, no. Draw beatiful pictures.” The last word sprayed a 
little. Fish rocked forward and 
back again. “Purely rhetorical 
question.” He put his glass down 
with precision on a passing tray 
and took another one which spilled 
icy liquid down his wrist. He 
gulped to save it. 
“Oh. Well, in that case, no. I 
would say not. I assume you mean 
it would originate the drawings, 
not just put out what was programmed into it. Well, that would 
mean, in the first place, you’d have 
to have an incredibly big memory 
bank. Say if you wanted the machine to draw a horse, it would 
have to know what a horse looks 
fk 
I 
like from every angle and in every 
position. Then it would have to 
select the best one for the purpose out of say ten or twenty 
billion — and then draw it in proportion with whatever else is in 
the drawing, 'and so on. Then, 
for God’s sake, if you wanted 
beauty too, I suppose it would 
have to consider the relation of 
every part to every other part, on 
some kind of esthetic principle. 
I wouldn’t know how to go about 
it.” 
Fish, thick-fingered, probed for 
his olive. “Say it’s impossible, 
hey?” he asked. 
“Well, with present techniques, 
anyhow. I guess we’ll be staying 
out of the art business for another 
century or two.” The blur smiled 
and lifted its highball glass. 
“Ah,” said Fish, putting a hand 
on the young man’s lapel to support himself and keep the other 
from moving out of the corner. 
“Now suppose you had machine 
like that. Now—suppose that machine kept forgetting things. What 
would be reason for that?” 
“Forgetting things?” 
“What I said.” With a disastrous 
sense that he was talking too 
much. Fish was about to go on, 
but a sudden hand on his arm forestalled him. It was one of the 
bright young men, beautiful suit, 
beautiful teeth, beautiful handkerchief in pocket. “Mr. Wilmington, 
I just wanted to say what an ab
solutely marvelous piece of work 
that new mural is. One enormous 
foot. I don’t know what the significance is, but the draughtsmanship is marvelous. We must get 
you on File Seven some afternoon 
and have you explain it.” 
“Never go on television,” said 
Fish, frowning. He had been fending off invitations like this one 
for almost a year. 
**Too bad. Nice to have met 
you. Oh, by the way, somebody 
asked me to tell you there’s a 
phone call for you over there.” 
He waved his arm and drifted 
away. 
jpiSH excused himself and set 
an adventurous course across 
the room. The phone was lying on 
one of the side tables, giving him 
a black look. He picked it up 
jauntily. “Hello-o.” 
“Dr. Fish?” 
Fish’s heart began to knock. He 
put the martini glass down. “Who’s 
that?” he demanded blankly. 
“This is Dave Finney, Doc.” 
Fish felt a wave of relief. “Oh, 
Dave. I thought you were in Boston. Or I suppose you are, but the 
connection—” 
“I’m right here in Santa Monica. 
Look, Doc, something’s come up 
that—” 
“What? What’re you doing 
here? Now I hope you haven’t 
quit school, because—” 
“This is summer vacation. Doc. 
THING OF BEAUTY 
Look, the fact is Fm here in 
Norma Johnson’s studio.” 
Fish stood with the sweaty black 
phone in his hand and said nothing. Silence hummed in the ydres. 
“Doc? Mrs. Prentice is here too. 
^Ve’ve been kind of talking things 
over and we think you ought to 
come over and explain a few 
things.” 
Fish swallowed, with difficulty. 
“Doc, you hear me? I think 
you ought to come over. They’re 
talking about calling the police, 
but I wanted to give you a chance 
first, so—” 
“I’ll be right over,” said Fish 
hoarsely. ^ B 
He hung up the phone and 
stood bemused, with his hand to 
his flushed forehead. Oh, Lord, 
three, no four martinis and this 
had to happen! 
He felt dizzy. Everybody 
seemed to be standing at a slight 
angle on the kelly-green carpet, 
all the bright young men in glossy 
summer jackets and the pastel 
women in cocktail dresses with 
bright phony smiles on their faces. 
What did they care if all he could 
get out of the machine any; more 
was parts of bodies? His last one a 
big clenched fist, and now a foot, 
and don’t you think the committee didn’t beef, they beefed plenty 
but they had to take it, because 
they already announced the commission. Now this morning his 
agent called up, some church group 
in Indiana, they wanted sample 
sketches. 
So it was all going down the 
drain while he watched, and now 
this. Dave, good God, you’d think 
at least he would stay stuck off 
in Boston, and how the hell had 
he ever run into Norma? 
One of the newspaper reporters 
turned away from the free lunch 
and planted himself in Fish’s path 
as he lurched toward the door. 
“Mr. Wilmington, what would you 
say was the real significance of 
that foot?” 
“Gow my way,” said Fish, staggering around him. 
H e took a cab home, told the 
driver to wait, ducked in for 
a quick shower and a cup of black 
coffee, and came out again, shaky 
but not as drunk as before. Those 
damn cocktails . He used to 
never get like this when he just 
drank beer. Things were better 
back on Platt Terrace. How did 
he ever get mixed up in this crazy 
art game? 
His stomach felt hollow. He 
hadn’t eaten any lunch, he remembered. Well, too late now. He 
braced himself together and rang 
the bell. 
Dave opened the door. Fish 
greeted him with cries of pleasure, 
shaking his limp hand. “Dave, boy! 
Good to see you! How long has 
it been, an3rway?” 
Without waiting for a reply, he 
bustled on into the room. It was a 
gray^ windowlcss plac6 that always 
made him feel trapped. Instead of 
a roof, there was one big slanting 
skylight, high overhead; the light 
filtered down cool and colorless 
through the translucent panes. 
There was an easel in one corner, 
and some drawings pinned up on 
the otherwise bare walls. Down at 
the far end, Norma and her aunt 
were sitting on the red-padded 
bench. 
“Norma, how are you, honey? 
And Mrs. Prentice — now this is 
a real pleasure!” 
That wasn^t hard to say — she 
really did look good in that new 
dark-blue suit — he could tell he 
was projecting the old charm, and 
he thought he saw her eyes glint 
with pleasure. But it was only for 
an instant, and then her expression 
hardened. “What’s this I hear 
about your not even coming to 
see Norma?” she demanded. 
Fish registered deep surprise. 
“Why - why, Norma, didn’t 
you explain to your aunt? Excuse 
me a minute.” He darted over to 
the drawings on the wall. “Well. 
Now these are really excellent, 
Norma. There’s a good deal of 
improvement here. The symmetry, 
dont you see, and the dynamic 
flow—” 
Norrria said, “Those are three 
months old.” She was wearing a 
man s shirt and dungarees, and 
looked as if she might have been 
crying recently, but her face was 
carefully made up. 
“Well, honey, I wanted to come 
back, even after what you said. I 
did come around, twice, you know, 
but you didn’t answer your bell.” 
“That’s not so.” 
“Well, I suppose you might 
have been out,” said Fish cheerfully. He turned to Mrs. Prentice. 
Norma was upset.” His voice 
dropped. “About a month after 
we started, she told me to get out 
and not come back.” 
Dave had drifted back across 
the room. He sat down beside 
Norma, without comment. 
“The idea of taking the poor 
child’s money for nothing” said 
Mrs. Prentice vehemently. ‘Why 
didn’t you give it back?” 
ISH pulled up a folding chair 
and sat down close to her. 
“Mrs. Prentice,” he said quietly, “I 
didn’t want Norma to make a mistake. I told her, now, if you’ll live 
up to your agreement and study 
with me for a year, I said, and then 
if you’re not satisfied, why. I’ll 
gladly refund every cent.” 
“You weren’t doing me any 
good” said Norma, with a hysterical note in her voice. 
Fish gave here a look of sorrowful patience. 
“He’d just come in and look at 
my work and say something like, 
‘This has a good feeling,’ or ‘The 
symmetry is good,’ or some mean
thing of beauty 
in^less thing like that. I was getting so nervous, I couldn’t even 
draw. That’s when I wrote you, 
Aunt Marie, but you were in 
Europe. My golly, I had to do 
something, didn’t I?” Her hands 
were clenched white in her lap. 
“There, dear,” Mrs. Prentice 
murmured, and gave her arm a 
little squeeze. 
“I’ve been going to day classes 
at the Art Center,” Norma said 
between her teeth. ‘‘It was all I 
could afford.” 
Mrs. Prentice’s eyes sparkled 
with indignation. “Mr. Wilniibgton, I don’t think we have to discuss this much longer. I want you 
to return the money I paid you. I 
think it’s disgraceful, a well-known 
artist like you stooping—” 
“Mrs. Prentice,” said Fish, pitching his voice lower again, “if it 
wasn’t for my faith in Norma’s 
great future as an artist, why, I 
would hand you over ev-ry cent. 
But, as it is, she would be making 
a great mistake, so Ij suggest 
again—” 
“Doc,” said Dave rudely,' “you 
give her back that money now, 
and pretty damn quick.” He leaned 
forward to speak to the . older 
woman. “You want to know what 
his real name is? It’s Fish» Anyhow, it was when I met him. This 
whole thing is just a joke. Why, 
he’s no artist. The real George 
Wilmington is his nephew; he’s an 
invalid out in Wisconsin — and 
Doc here has just been fronting for 
him, because he’s too sick to stand 
the publicity and all. Now that’s 
the truth. Or as much of it as I 
know.” 
Fish said sorrowfully, “Dave, is 
this the thanks I get for putting 
you through art school?” 
“You got me the scholarship, 
but it didn’t cost you anything. I 
found that out from the director. 
I guess you just wanted to put me 
out of the way, so I wouldn’t talk 
too much. Well, gee. Doc, that was 
all right. But when I met Norma 
over at your place yesterday — 
“What? When was that?” 
“About ten o’clock.” Fish 
winced; he had been in bed with a 
bad head and hadn’t answered the 
bell. If he’d only known! “You 
weren’t home, so we got to talking 
and — well, pretending to be your 
nephew, that’s one thing, but when 
you promise to teach somebody — 
when you can’t even draw a line 
yourself!” 
G ordon fish raised a hand. 
“Now, Dave, there’s a thing 
or two you don’t know. You say 
my real name is Fish. Now did 
you ever see my birth certificate, 
or did you know anybody that 
knew me as a child? How do you 
know my name is Fish?” 
“Well, you told me.” 
“That’s right, Dave, I did. And 
you say the real George Wilmington is an invalid out in Wisconsin. 
You ever see him, Dave? You 
ever been in Wisconsin?” 
“Well, no, but — ” 
“Neither have I. No, Dave 
he lowered his voice solemnly -“every single thing I told you 
about tliat was just a lie. And I 
admit it. Now here was the place 
for a tear. Fish turned his mind to 
the creditors, the trouble with the 
machine, the oil stock salesman 
who had gone south with his 
money, the lawyers who were 
robbing him blind trying to get it 
back, the ungratefulness of everybody. A warm trickle crept out 
onto his cheek, and lowering his 
head, he knuckled it away. 
Well, what — said Dave, bewildered. 
Fish said with an effort, “I had 
reasons. Certain reasons. You 
know it’s — it’s hard for me to talk 
about ’em. Mrs. Prentice — I wonder if I could see you alone.” 
She was leaning forward a little, 
looking at him with concern. It 
never failed — a woman like that 
couldn’t stand to see a man cry. 
“Well, it’s certainly all right with 
me,” said Norma, getting up. She 
walked awajr and Dave followed 
her. After a moment, the door 
closed behind them. 
Fish blew his nose, dabbed unobtrusively at his eyes, straightened 
up bravely and put his handkerchief away. “Mrs. Prentice, I don’t 
s’pose you know that I’m a widower.” Her eyes widened a little. 
It’s true I losst my dear wife — 
I don’t usually talk about it, as a 
matter of fact, but somehow — I 
don t know if you’ve been bereaved 
yourself, Mrs. Prentice — ” 
She said nervously, “Didn’t 
Norma tell you? I’m a widow, Mr. 
Wilmington.” 
“No!” said Fish. “Isn’t that 
strange? I felt something — you 
know, a vibration. Well, Mrs. Prentice - can I call you Marie? you know, after my loss — ” time 
for another tear now; once started, 
they came easily — “I just went 
to pieces. I couldn’t touch a pencil 
for a year. And even to this day, 
I can t draw a line if there’s anybody watching me. Now — there’s 
the reason for this whole mixup. 
That business about my nephew 
and all, that was just a story I 
made up to make things a little 
easier. That’s what I thought. I 
dont know, I’m so clumsy where 
it takes a little tact, I’m just like 
a bull in a china closet, Marie. And 
that’s the whole story.” 
He sat back, blew his nose vigorously again. 
lyrRS. PRENTICE’S eyes 
were moist, but her handsome 
face had a wary expression. “I 
honestly don’t know what to think, 
Mr. Wilmington. You say you can’t 
draw in public — ” 
“Call me George. You see, it’s 
what psychologists call a truma — ” 
“Well, how would this be? I’ll 
THING OF BEAUTY 
step outside for a few minutes and 
you draw a picture. Now I think 
that would be — ” 
Fish was shaking his head sadly. 
“Ifs worse than I told you. I can’t 
draw anywhere except in one room 
in my house - IVe got it fixed up 
with her picture, and some mementoes — ” He gulped hard, but decided against a third tear. ‘‘I’m 
sorry, I’d do it for you if I could, 
but — ” 
She sat quietly in thought for a 
moment “Then let’s sa. ' this. You 
SO Mr. Wilmington, and 
something - a sketch of me, 
"Iny face, from memory. I believe 
any competent artist could do 
that?” 
Fish hesitated, not liking to say 
yes or no. 
“Now, you see, that will settle 
it You couldn’t get a snapshot of 
me and send it off to Wisconsin — 
there wouldn’t be time. I’ll give 
you, oh, half an hour.” 
“Half an - ” 
“That should be enough, shouldn’t it? So that when I come to call 
on you, in half an hour from now, 
if you have a sketch of me -- a 
likeness — why, then. I’ll know 
that you’re telling the truth. If 
not — ” 
Boxed in, Fish made the best 
of it. He got to his feet with a confident smile. 
“Well, now, that’s fair enough. 
One thing, I know I could never 
forget your face. And I want to 
b 
THING OF BEAUTY 
tell you how relieved I am that we 
had this little talk, incidentally, 
and — Well, I better go and get 
that drawing started. Til expect 
you in half an hour, Marie!’^ 
He paused at the door. 
“I’ll be there — George,” she 
said. 
G runting and twitching. Fish 
stormed into the house, banging doors behind him. Place was a 
mess — sofa cushions and newspapers all over the living room — 
but never mind, she might marry 
him to clean up his house. Thing 
was — he unlocked the private 
room, feverishly swept the cover 
off the big machine, and began 
pushing buttons on one of the 
banks — thing was, get that sketch 
made. One chance in — how many? 
But better than no chance at all. 
He switched on the machine, 
watched in helpless impatience 
while the arms drifted out and 
hung motionless. 
A face — and a likeness! Only 
hope he had was to put it together 
from bits and pieces. Nothing left 
now that would work in the whole 
machine but some useless items, 
mechanical drawings and architecture, and a few scraps of anatomy. 
Let there be enough for one more 
face — and let it be something like 
Marie’s face! 
The machine clicked suddenly 
and began to trace a line. Fish 
stood over it in hand-wringing anx
iety, watching how the combined 
motion of the two revolving pivots 
translated the straight push of the 
arm into a subtle line. Pretty thing 
to watch, even if he never could 
like what it made. Now here it 
came curving around — now the 
arm was lifting, going back — 
A nose! It was drawing a nose! 
It was a kind of Greek statue 
nose, shapely but thick, not much 
like Marie’s fine curved nose, but 
never mind, he could talk her into 
it — give him the raw material, he 
could always sell — let there be 
any kind of female face, so long as 
it wasn’t ugly — 
Come on now, an eye! 
But the arms stopped and hung 
motionless again. The machine 
hummed quietly; the dials were lit; 
nothing happened. 
Eaten by impatience. Fish looked 
at his watch, clapped his palm over 
it, swore, wandered rapidly out of 
the room. Sometimes, lately, the 
machine would just sit like that 
for minutes at a time, as if it were 
trying and trying to work, but 
somehow not succeeding, and then 
click, away it would go again. He 
hurried back, looked — still nothing 
— and went off, pacing the empty 
rooms, looking for something to do. 
There was some mail in the basket under the letter drop, he 
noticed for the first time. Mostly 
bills — he threw them behind the 
sofa — but one was a long, bulky 
brown envelope with “Encyclo
paedia Britannica Library Research Service** in the corner. 
It had been so long ago, it took 
him a moment to remember. A 
couple of weeks after he sent in his 
letter, there had been a polite 
printed postcard acknowledging it, 
then nothing for months. Somewhere along the line he had decided he wasn’t going to get an 
answer; there wasn’t any such 
language . 
Well, let’s see. He picked the 
end of the envelope open. 
His restless eye was caught by 
the dining room clock. Look at the 
timel Clutching the envelope forgetfully, he rushed into the private 
room again. The machine was still 
sitting motionless, humming, lit. 
' There was nothing on the paper 
but a nose. 
Fish pounded on the side of 
the big machine, with no result 
except to his fist, and then on the 
bank that was in use. Nothing. He 
turned away, noticed he was still 
holding the envelope, and irritably 
plucked out the papers inside. 
T^HERK was a stiff orange 
folder, stapled at the top. 
When he lifted the cover, there 
was a single sheet of paper inside. 
At the top, the Britannica letterhead, and ‘‘V. A. Sternback, Director.” Then, in the middle, 
“SWEDISH WORDS.” 
His eyes ran down the list, 
startled. There were all the words 
he had copied off, and, opposite 
each one, a word in English. 
Teckning . drawing. Monster . 
pattern. Utplana ... to erase. Anvandning . application, use. 
Fish looked up. Then that was 
why nothing had happened when 
he pressed the “Utplana” button — 
he’d always tried it before the 
machine made a drawing, never 
while there was a finished one on 
the board. Now why hadn’t he 
thought of that? Yes, and here was 
Avsla ... to reject. And slutsatsen 
. completion. “To reject a drawing before completion, press . .” 
He’d never done that, either. 
What about the middle button? 
Torka ... to wip>e. To wipe? Let’s 
see, there was another word — Avlagsna, that was it — sometimes 
the p irase **Avlagsna ett monster^* 
woula be running through his head 
when he was half awake, like a 
whispered warning. Here it was. 
Avlagsna ... to remove. 
His hands were shaking. “To remove a pattern from bank after 
use, press button ‘Wipe.’ ” 
He let the foider fall. All this 
time, not knowing, he’d been systematically using up the precious 
patterns in the machine, throwing 
them away one by one, until now 
there was nothing left — just eight 
big hunks of useless machinery, 
made for somebody somewhere 
who spoke Swedish . 
The machine clicked softly and 
the other arm began to move. It 
THING OF BEAUTY 
traced a graceful upright line, 
some distance in front of the nose. 
It looped over and came back 
down again, then up . 
Somewhere distant, the doorbell rang imperiously. 
Fish stared mesmerized at the 
paper. The moving point traced 
another graceful open loop, then 
another, like a squeezed-together 
roller coaster. Then another one, 
moving inexorably and without 
hurry: now there were four. With
out pausing, it extended the last 
line downward and then brought it 
across. The line met the tip of the 
nose and curved back. 
The four open loops were fingers. The fifth one was a thumb. 
The machine, humming quietly, 
withdrew its arms into their re-* 
cesses. After a moment, the lights 
went dark and the hum stopped. 
Outside, the doorbell rang again, 
and went on ringing. 
—DAMON KNIGHT 
★ ★ ★ ★ ★ 
FORECAST 
Next month's is the 8th anniversary issue of Galaxy, a large event 
indeed, and one to be properly celebrated with a suitably impressive present 
for our readers. 
Said present is at hand — a monumental successor to the mighty serials 
you have read in these pages — TIME KILLER, Robert Sheckley's first booklength story, and a heroic saga it is, as you have every reason to expect 
from this splendidly imaginative, resourceful writer. 
TIME KILLER, like all of Sheckley's work, contains surprise upon twist 
upon trick, and you really wouldn't want a brief summary of it in advance; 
that would ground the very first shock. 
Let's say instead: 
It stands to reason that the last thing a man can bungle is his own death. 
But not Blaine. He has some finished business left to unfinish! 
Novelets and short stories and our regular features, of course, with 
a neighborly suggestion not to miss Willy Ley's discussion of "X-Rays in 
Space." There's more to cosmic radiation than meets the Earth, as our 
orbiting instrumentation far, far above the atmosphere constantly warns the 
experts — and Ley points out the mysteries fhat have unexpectedly appeared, 
as well as those that were anticipated in theory — and if you don't know how 
well along we are in solving those mysteries, you may find some of your 
strongest convictions as outdated as antiphlogiston. We wouldn't want that 
to happen, would we? 
Why We Make This Amazingly Generous Offer 
•“-Continued from Back Cover 
And if you DO go back, will you ever be able 
to return to your 21st century paradise? In 
short, can you actually live your life twice? 
Bead this Whole Amazing Story— Yours for Only 10( 
Science-fiction fans, get set for a real challenge to 
your wits! THE DOOR INTO SUMMER by Robert 
Heinlein — one of today’s topnotch science-fiction writGrs is a thriller crammed with new turns and new 
twists. You’ll find your everyday thought processes 
turned topsy-turvy by it. It’s selling everywhere right 
now for $2.95. But as a new member of the ScienceFiction Book Club, you caniget this new book for only 
one dime! Read, below why the Club is making this 
amazing offer — then rush in the coupon (with only 
10<^) at once ! 
l^HY DO we offer you this brand-new, full
y ^ length Science-Fiction thriller for only 10^ ? 
Simply to introduce you to the Science-Fiction 
Book Club, a wonderful idea in bringing you the 
best of the new scienc^fiction books — at 
a mere fraction of their usual cost! 
Each month the Club brings you only the 
finest, brand-new, full-length books fok 
ONLY $1 EACH (plus a few cents shipping 
charge)— even though they cost $2.50, 
$3.00 and up in the original publisher’s 
editions. 
^ Each month’s selection is described 
in advance in the Club’s free bulletin. 
You take only those books you want — as 
few as 4 a year. No money in advance. 
No membership fees. You may cancel 
nriembership at any time. Recent selections have included such books as The 
End of Eternity by Isaac Asimov, The 
Isotove Man and Earthman, Come Home. 
The Club also brings members the best 
in factual scientific books, such as Satellite!, The Report on Unidentified Flying 
Objects and Exploring Mars. 
Mail Coupon with only lOt 
a few cents shipping. If not delighted return 
Doth books, owe nothing, and membership will be 
cancelled. Rush coupon with 10(f to: SCIENCE-FICTION BOOK CLUB, Dept. 8-GX-9, Garden City, N.Y. 
SCIENCE-FICTION BOOK CLUB 
Dept. 8-GX-9, Garden City, N. Y. 
“y of DOOR 
seli>Hnn Robert Heinlein. toKether with the current 
selection of the Club for which you may bill me only $1.00 plus a 
tJip ® member. Every month semi 
I ^ ® describing coming selections. For each 
book I accept. I will pay only $1. plus shipping. I need take only 4 
books during each year I am a member and may resign at any time 
thereafter. 
NO-RISK GUARANTEE: If not delighted with the books. I may return them in 7 days, pay nothing, and membership will be cancelled. 
Name 
(Please Print Clearly) 
Address 
Simply mail the coupon with only a dime. 
Your copy of the door into summer will 
be sent at once, together with the current 
selection, for which you will be billed only 
— Zone State^ 
Same offer in CANADA. Address 105 Rond Street, Toronto 
(Offer good only in U. S. A. and Canada.) 
...AMD WAKING UP 30 YKARS YOUNGER 
THAN YOUK SWIITHIART! 
J UST put yourself in Daniel Davis’ 
place. It’s the year 1970. You’re a 
young engineer, about to sell a milliondollar invention. You’re sitting pretty— 
until your passionate' friend^ Belle Darkin, upsets your apple ^rt. First she 
steals your invention. -Th® she slips you 
a hypo; puts you in a ne\^kind of deep 
freeze called ‘‘The Long Slteep.:’.^ 
You wake up SO YEARS LATER, in 
the year 2000— and you’re stilLoUly 29 
years old! But time has passedV 
while you were in *‘coJd storage,” ^ 
and Belle, your ea;-s^etheart, is ^ 
now 30 years older than you are ! ’ 
Well, you’ve lost interest in her 
anyway, after the way she twotimed and future-timed you. 
The Fascinating World of 2000 A.D. 
But there are other attractions 
in that world of 2000 : its women 
in “sticktite” clothes they just 
throw away after wearing ... its 
honeymoon trips to the" moon... 
its remarkable new conveniences 
...its brand new words of love 
and ways to live. No*more menial 
labor. Robots take care of all that. 
Soon you’re enjoying life as never 
before! You’re glad to be out of 
that miserably backward world 
of the 20th century. 
But unfortunately you must get 
back to the year 1970, to take 
care of one last urgent mission. 
You only hope that you can come 
back to the 21st century by taking “The Long Sleep” again. The 
big question is: Can it be done? 
Vburt 
FOR ONLY 
^-Continued on other side 
io« 
WITH MEMBERSHIP 
This Spine-Tingling 
Science-Fiction Novel 
"THE DOOR INTO SUMMER'' 
by Robert Heinlein 
X 
SEPTEMBER 1958 GALAXY