galaxy 
SCIENCE FICTION 
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION 
By 
WILLY 
LEY 
o 
£ NEVER COME 
* MIDNIGHT 
■< By 
CHRISTOPHER 
GRIMM 
BRIDLE 
SHOWER 
By 
g. LLOYD 
2 BIGGLE, JR. 
5 - THE IRON 
= CHANCELLOR 
By 
ROBERT 
i- «-»»<rt>prn/» 
MAY 1958 
Anyone For Doomsday? 
Not You! 
Not Us ! 
But it COULD happen, for anything is possible. And anything that is possible — and can make a good story — goes 
into the pages of GALAXY Science Fiction. 
Doomsday is only one possible future out of many: 
The conquest of other planets . 
Invasions of Earth . 
Other dimensions . 
Immortality . 
Strange and exciting future civilizations that 
have their roots right in the present . 
You’ll find all these and a lot more in GALAXY, the 
magazine of ideas brought vividly to life! 
For 12 convincing issues, send $3.50 
or $6.00 for 24 issues, 
TO 
GALAXY Publishing Corp. 
421 Hudson Street • New York 14, N. Y. 
— the science-fiction anthology 
you've been waiting for. Order now 
to get your copy of the first edition 
specially inscribed for you alonel 
THE THIRD 
GALAXY 
Edited by H. L. Gold 
superb permanent addition to any 
science fiction library, here are choice 
stories that have appeared in Galaxy 
during the past several years — including some of the liveliest brain 
children of Asimov, del Rey, Simak, 
Pohl, Leiber, and many other top 
writers. Cost is only $3.75. Place your 
order now to insure early delivery. 
GALAXY PUBLISHING CORP. 
421 Hudson Street, New York 14, N.Y. 
Please send me copies of 
THE THIRD GALAXY READER as 
soon as copies come off the press. I 
enclose □ check □ cash □ money order 
in the amount of S 
NAME 
ADDRESS 
MESSAGE 
Note: this coupon is for your convenience only; if you prefer to keep your 
magazine intact, please send in your 
order on a sheet of paper. 
ALL ORIGINAL 
STORIES 
galaxy 
SCIENCE FICTION 
MAY, 1958 
VOL 16, NO. 1 
CONTENTS 
NOVELLA 
NEVER COME MIDNIGHT fay Christopher Grimm 
NOVELETS 
BRIDLE SHOWER by Lloyd Biggie, Jr. 
THE IRON CHANCELLOR fay Robert Silverberg 
SHORT STORIES 
OR ALL THE SEAS WITH OYSTERS 
by Avram Davidson 
PICK A CRIME fay Richard R. Smith 
THE VOICE OF THE DIAPHRAGM by Richard Wilson 
SCIENCE DEPARTMENT 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION by Willy Ley 
Remnants of the Sarmatian Sea 
FEATURES 
EDITOR'S PAGE by H.L. Gold 
FORECAST 
GALAXY'S FIVE STAR SHELF by Floyd C. Gale 
6 
84 
49 
69 
59 ^ 
4 ^ 
115 
Cover by PEDERSON Showing Interplanetary vessels approaching Mars. Because they 
are assembled at the space station above Earth, and have only the highly rarefied Martian 
atmosphere to contend with, they need not be srteamlined; thin-hulled auxiliary fuel tanks are 
clustered outside the ships. Orbiting in, they are using their rocket blasts as brakes, will 
circle the red planet for days before reducing to landing speed. Deimos in background 
(apparent size exaggerated by nearness to ships); Phobos, on opposite side of planet, is not 
visible in picture. 
ROBERT M. GUINN, Publisher H. L. GOLD, Editor 
WILLY LEY, Science Editor W. I. VAN DER POEL, Art Director 
JOAN J. De MARIO, Production Manager SONDRA GRESEN, Asst, to the Editor 
GALAXY Science Fiction is published monthly by Galaxy Publishing Corporation. Main offices: 
421 Hudson Street, New York 14, N. Y. 35c per copy. Subscription: (12 copies) $3.50 per 
year in the United States, Canada, Mexico, South and Central America and U. S. Possessions. 
Elsewhere S4.50. Entered as second-class matter at the Post Office, New York, N. Y. Copyright, 
New York 1958, by Galaxy Publishing Corporation, Robert M. Guinn, president. All rights, including translations reserved. All material submitted must be accompanied by self-addressed stamped 
envelopes. The publisher assumes no responsibility for unsolicited material. All stories printed in 
this magazine are fiction, and any similarity between characters and actual persons is coincidental. 
Printed in the U.S.A. by The Guinn Co., Inc., N. Y. Title Reg. U.S. Pat. Off. 
i 
OPTICAL BARGAINS 
See the Stars, Moon, Planets Close Up! 
3” Astronomical Reflecting Telescope 
Famous Mt. Palomar Type! 
60 & 120 Power — An Unusual Buy! 
photographersT 
Adapt yuur camera to this 
Scope for excellent Telephoto 
shots an«l fascinating photos 
of moon! 
Assembled — Ready to Use l 
You'll see the Rings of Saturn, 
the fascinating planet Mara, 
huge craters on the Moon, Star 
Clusters, Moons of Jupiter in detail. Galaxies! Equatorial mount 
with lock on both axes. Aluminized and overcoated 3" diameter 
highspeed f/10 mirror. Telescope comes equipped with a 
60X eyepiece and a mounted Barlow Lens, giving you 
6a and 120 power. An Optical Finder Telescope, always so essential, is also included. Sturdy, hardwood, 
portable tripod. 
Free with scope: Valuable STAR CHART and 
272-P*fl» "Astronomy Book.” 
Stock No. 85.050* f 529.50 f.o. b. 
(Shipping wt. 10 lbs. ) Barrington, N. J. 
90X, 120X and 270X 
AVa A8TR0N0MICAL 
TELESCOPE 
Mt. Palomar type. Up to 270 
power. A fine Reflector Telescope 
complete with real Equatorial 
Mount and Tripod and 0X Finder. 
Aluminum tube. 4*4" dia. mirror, 
rack and pinion focusing eyepiece holder. 2 eye-pieces and 
mounted Barlow Lens for 10X, 
. Shipping weight approx. 25 lbs. 
INFRARED SNIPERSCOPE 
TEIESCOPE & PARTS 
See in the dark — without being 
observed War Surplus Sniperscope M-2. Govt. cost about 
$1200. Instrument complete, 
ready to use. Includes Power 
Pack, infrared light source. Will 
operate from 6 V auto battery. 
Battery or transformer avuilublc. 
Stock No. 85,053-F 
$150.00 f.o.b. 
Save still more money! Build 
your own Snipvrseope! We will 
furnish Instructions — parts, including: Power Packs, 
1P23A Image tubes, light units, filters, etc. For details— request FREE Catalog "F” 
50X DIRECT MEASURING POCKET MICROSCOPE 
— Handy fountain pen size — glass etched reticle — 
measurements up to 1/10" by .001" divisions. 
Stock No. 30, 225- F $7.95 Postpaid 
BUILD A SOLAR ENERGY FU RNACE — Generates 
2000° to 3000° — use our Fresnal Lenses — 14 %" dla. 
— f.l. 14". 
Stock No. 70,130-F one Iona — $6.00 Postpaid 
STATIC ELECTRICITY G EN ERATOR — Does countless electrical tricks and experiments. Safe. Hand 
operated. 
Stock No. 70,070-F $10.95 Poatpaio 
SWIVL-CLAMP MAGNIFIER — Large 4" dla. — 
8" f.l. Clamps on any fixture — swivels. 
Stock No. 30, 249- F $4.15 Poatpaid 
Stock #85,00 6-F complete $74.50 f. o. b. 
Barrington, N. J. 
AMERICA NEEDS SCIENTISTS! 
Stimulatcyour son’s interest — request for him 
our FREE CATALOG-F featuring hundreds 
of scientific and astronomical items. No better time than in this GEOPHYSICAL YEAR! 
New! 2 in 1 Combination Pocket-Size 
50-Power MICROSCOPE and 
10-Power TELESCOPE 
ONLY $4.50 Postpaid 
Useful Telescope and Microscope combined in one amazing precision instrument. Imported! No larger than a 
fountain pen. Telescope Is 10-Power. 
Microscope magnifies 50 Times. Sharp 
focus at any range. Handy for sports, 
looking at small objects, just plain 
snooping. 
Send Check or M. O. 
Satisfaction Guaranteed 
Order Stock No. 30,059- F $4.50 Postpaid 
See The Satellites 
New, Low Price “Sateiliter” Telescoi 
Get ready for a terrific 
sky show as more Satellites are vaulted into 
space. See thrilling 
sights with our amazing 
Satellite Scope at un
heard of low cost. Also view comets — use as a Richfield Scope for viewing star clusters. 5 power -wide 12° 
field. Use of high quality war surplus optics makes 
possible this bargain. 
Stock No. 70,1 50-F $9.95 Postpaid 
We ure the manufacturers uf the Famous Moonwatch 
Satellite Telescope! 
GET FREE CATALOG — f 
America's No. 1 source of supply for 
experimenters, hobbyists. World's 
largest variety of Optical Items. Bargains galore. War SurplusImported — Domestic! Microscopes, 
Telescopes. Satellite Scopes, Infrared 
SniperscopeB and Parts, Prisms. 
Lenses, Reticles, Mirrors and dozens 
of other hard-to-get Optical Items. 
OKDI* BT STOCK NUMBIH .SIND CHICK OK MONlt OADfS . SAllSf ACTION GUAKANTllD! 
EDMUND SCIENTIFIC CO., BARRINGTON, N. J. 
FUN 4 1 6l ALL 
O N page 258 of The Family 
Book of Humor, edited by 
Helen Hoke and published by 
Hanover House, is an item called 
“Look Now”— two Galaxy editorials combined into one alarmingly 
funny article. You probably read 
it here, so I’m only incidentally 
pointing with pride. What I really 
want to do is exhibit some samples 
from this rich godown you might 
otherwise not get around to exploring. 
“Doctor Doll” by Inez Robb 
unwraps a porcelain patient with 
removable viscera: “Once the 
tiny tykes have scrubbed up and 
sterilized their hands and instruments, they put this doll or cadaver on the operating table, administer an anaesthetic and open 
up the torso by removing laces that 
look like sutures. 
“One peek inside the yawning 
cavity gives the in-training Florence Nightingale a lovely look at 
the small and large intestines, liver, 
heart, kidneys, appendix, stomach 
and lungs, but not necessarily in 
that order . 
“Dolly’s vital organs are made 
of plastic and are suspended on 
pegs for easy removal and return. 
Squeamish as I am, I must confess that this is an improvement 
over the original model, and Na
ture could do worse than take 
note ...” 
“The Flea Position” by John 
Crosby reveals that Billy Rayner, 
British flea impresario, advertised 
unsuccessfully for 12 fleas and 
gave this glum interview to the 
Daily Telegraph: 
“Since the war the flea position 
has been getting steadily worse. I 
blame the vacuum cleaners and 
these newfangled disinfectants. The 
average flea lives only for about 
three months, and they do not 
breed in captivity. Toward the 
end of three months they become 
stiff- jointed, just like humans in 
their old age. And then they cannot ride the cycles, pull chariots 
or do sword fighting. All the old 
fleas can manage is an occasional 
dance. The public won’t pay to 
see that. It is just what they expect from fleas, anyway.” 
Mr. Rayner then offers a springboard for an extrapolation that has 
unaccountably been overlooked by 
science fiction writers: “We usually find that the more educated 
people are, the more interest they 
take in our fleas. At Oxford we 
bring the house down.” 
Cartoon on page 127, doctor informing patient: “Your allergy 
tests suggest that you may have 
( Continued on page 144) 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
ANNOUNCING 
A Complete Restyling Of 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION NOVELS 
Streamlined pocket-size format — handsomest in design, 
handiest for reading and carrying. 
Outstanding titles by outstanding authors. 
A gigantic increase of 50% more pages. 
Clear, compact type — more wordage yet greater reading ease. 
All this at no increase in price — a hard-headed bet 
that upgrading pays off in these days of less and less 
for more and more. 
□ Count me in! Here's my $2.00 for six titles, during the 
year, each different, each full-length — half a dozen 
cheek choice novels at less than the original cost of any one. 
H#r# 
NAME 
ADDRESS 
CITY STATE 
Publisher's Note: If you don't want to mutilate this issue 
send your order on any sheet of paper. 
COME MIDNIGHT 
by CHRISTOPHER GRIMM 
Across the void came a man who could not ever 
have been born — from a world that could never 
have been conceived — to demand his birthright 
of an Earth that would have to die to pay it! 
Illustrated by DILLON 
I 
J AN SHORTMIRE smiled. 
“You didn’t know I had a 
son, did you, Peter? Well, 
neither did I— until quite recently.” 
“I see.” However, Peter Hubbard knew that Jan Shortmire had 
never married in all of his hundred 
and fifty-five years. In that day and 
age, unmarried people did not have 
children; science, the law, and public sophistication had combined to 
make the historical “accident” almost impossible. Yet, if some woman of one of the more innocent 
planets had deliberately conceived 
in order to trap Shortmire, surely 
he would have learned of his son’s 
existence long before. 
“I’m glad it turns out that I 
have an heir,” Shortmire went on. 
“Otherwise, the government might 
get its fists on what little I have— 
and it’s taken enough from me.” 
Although the old man’s estate 
was a considerable one, it did seem 
meager in terms of the money he 
must have made. What had become of the golden tide that had 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
NEVER COME MIDNIGHT 
poured in upon the golden youth, 
Hubbard wondered. Could anyone 
have squandered such prodigious 
sums upon the usual mundane dissipations? For, by the time the 
esoteric pleasures of the other 
planets had reached Earth — the 
byproduct of Shortmire’s own 
achievement — he must have already been too old to enjoy them. 
At Hubbard’s continued silence, 
Shortmire said defensively, “If 
they’d let me sell my patents to 
private industry, as Dyall was able 
to do, I’d be leaving a real fortune!” His voice grew thick with 
anger. “When I think how much 
money Dyall made from those 
factory machines of his . ” 
But when you added the priceless extra fifty years of life to the 
money Shortmire had made, it 
seemed to Hubbard that Shortmire 
had been amply rewarded. Although, of course, he had heard 
that Nicholas Dyall had been 
given the same reward. No point 
telling Shortmire, if he did not 
know already. Hubbard could 
never understand why Shortmire 
hated Dyall so; it could not be 
merely the money— and as for reputation, he had a shade the advantage. 
“That toymaker!” Shortmire 
spat. 
TTUBBARD tactfully changed 
the subject. “What’s your boy 
like, Jan?” But of course Jan 
Shortmire’s son could hardly be a 
boy; in fact, he was probably almost as old as Hubbard was. 
Such old age as Shortmire’s was 
almost incredible. Sitting there in 
the antique splendor of Hubbard’s 
office, he looked like a splendid 
antique himself. Who could 
imagine that passion had ever convulsed that thin white face, that 
those frail white fingers had ever 
curved in love and in hate? Age 
beyond the reach of most men had 
blanched this once-passionate man 
to a chill, ivory shadow. 
For once, Hubbard felt glad — 
almost — that he himself was ineligible for the longevity treatment. 
The alloted five score and ten was 
enough for any except the very 
selfish— or selfless— man. 
But Shortmire was answering 
his question. “I have no idea what 
the boy is like; I’ve never seen 
him.” Then he added, “I suppose 
you’ve been wondering why I finally decided to make a will?” 
“A lawyer never wonders when 
people do make wills, Jan,” Hubbard said mildly. “He wonders 
when they don’t.” 
“I’m going on a trip to Morethis. 
Only one of the colonized planets 
I’ve never visited.” Shortmire’s 
smile did not reach his amber-hard 
eyes. “Civilized planets, I should 
have said. It isn’t official government policy to colonize planets 
that have intelligent native liveforms.” 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
Not even the most besotted 
idealist could ever have described 
Jan Shortmire as altruistic. And 
for him to be concerned about 
Morethis, of all planets— Morethis, 
where the indigenous life-forms 
were such as to justify a ruthless 
colonization policy ... it was 
outrageous! True, the terrestrial 
government had been more generous toward the Morethans than 
toward any of the seven other intelligent life-forms they had found. 
But this tolerance was based 
wholly on fear — fear of these remnants of an old, old civilization, 
eking out their existence around a 
dying star, yet with terrible glories 
to remember in their twilight— and 
traces of these glories to protect 
them. 
How was it that Shortmire, who 
had been everywhere, seen everything, had never been to Morethis? Hubbard looked keenly at his 
client. “What is all this, Jan?” 
The old man shrugged. “Merely that the Foreign Office has suggested it would be wise for travelers to make a will before going 
there. Being a dutiful citizen of 
Earth, I comply.” He smiled balefully. 
“The Foreign Office has suggested that it would be wiser not 
to go at all,” Hubbard said. “There 
are people who say Morethis ought 
to be fumigated completely.” 
“Ah, but it has rare and precious 
metals on which our industries de
pend. There are herbs which have 
multiplied the miracles of modern medicine, jewels and furs unmatched anywhere. We need the 
native miners and farmers and 
trappers to get these things for us.” 
“We could get them for ourselves. We do on the other planets.” 
Shortmire grinned. “On Morethis, somehow, our people can’t 
seem to find these things themselves. Or, if they do, we can’t find 
our people afterward. Which is 
why there is peace and friendship 
between Morethis and Earth.” 
“Friendship! Everyone knows 
the Morethans hate terrestrials. 
They tolerate us only because 
we’re stronger!” 
“Stronger physically.” Shortmire’s smile was fading. “Even 
technology is a kind of physical 
strength.” 
TVT EW apprehension took shape 
” in Hubbard. “You’re not going metaphysical in your old age, 
are you, Jan? And even if you 
are,” he said quickly, while he 
was still innocent of knowledge, 
hence could not be consciously offending the other man’s beliefs, 
“what a cult to choose! Blood, terror and torture!” 
Shortmire grinned again. “You’ve 
been watching vidicasts, Peter. 
They’ve laid it on so thick, I’ll 
probably find Morethis deadly dull 
rather than just . deadly.” 
Certainly, all Hubbard knew of 
NEVER COME MIDNIGHT 
Morethis was based on hearsay 
evidence, but this was not a court 
of law. “Jan you’re a fool! A third 
of the terrestrials who go to Morethis never come back, and mostly 
they’re young men, strong men.” 
“Then they’re the fools.” Shortmire’s voice was low and tired. 
“Because they’re risking a whole 
lifetime, whereas all I’ll be risking is a few years of a very boring 
existence.” 
Hubbard said no more. Even 
though the law still did not condone it, a man had the right to dispose of his own life as he saw fit. 
Shortmire stood up. Barely 
stooped by age, he looked, with his 
great height and extreme emaciation, almost like a fasting saint — 
a ludicrous simile. “My wine palate 
is gone, Peter,” he said, clapping 
the younger old man’s shoulder, 
“women and I seem to have lost 
our mutual attraction, and I never 
did have much of a singing voice. 
At least this is one experience I’m 
not too old to savor.” 
“Death, do you mean?” Hubbard asked bluntly. “Or Morethis?” 
Shortmire smiled. “Perhaps 
both.” 
So Peter Hubbard was not surprised when, a few months later, 
he got word that Jan Shortmire 
had died on Morethis. The surprising thing was the extraordinarily prosaic manner of his death : 
he had simply fallen into a river 
and drowned. No traveler on 
Morethis had been known to die 
by undisputed accident before; as 
a result, the vidicasts devoted more 
attention to the event than they 
might have otherwise. But the news 
died down, as other news took its 
place. In so large a universe, something was always happening; the 
dog days were forever gone from 
journalism. 
Going through the old man’s 
papers in his capacity as executor, 
Hubbard came across an old passport. He was startled to discover 
that this trip had not been Shortmire’s first to Morethis. Why had 
he lied about it? But that was a 
question that no one alive could 
answer — or so Hubbard thought. 
Almost two years went by before the will was finally probated 
on all the planets where Shortmire had owned property. Then 
the search for Emrys Shortmire 
began. Messages were dispatched 
to all the civilized planets, and 
Peter Hubbard settled back for a 
long wait. 
T^IVE years after Jan Shortmire’s death, the intercom on 
Peter Hubbard’s desk buzzed and 
his secretary’s voice — his was one 
of the few legal offices wealthy 
enough to afford human help — 
said, “Mr. Emrys Shortmire to 
see you, sir.” 
How could a man come from so 
many light-years’ distance without 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
radioing on ahead, or at least telecalling from his hotel? Dignity demanded that Hubbard tell his secretary to inform Shortmire that he 
never saw anyone without an appointment. Curiosity won. “Ask 
him to come in,” he said. 
The door slid open. Hubbard 
started to rise, with the old-fashioned courtesy of a family lawyer. 
But he never made it He sat, 
frozen with shock, staring at the 
man in the doorway. Because Emrys Shortmire wasn’t a man; he 
was a boy. He might have been a 
stripling of thirty, except for his 
eyes. Copper-bright and copperhard they were, too hard for a 
boy’s. Give him forty, even fortyfive, that would still have made Jan 
Shortmire a father when he was 
nearly a hundred and twenty. The 
longevity treatment produced remarkable results, but none that fantastic. Though health and strength 
could be restored, fertility, like 
youth, once vanished was gone forever. 
Yet the boy looked too sophisticated to have made a stupid mistake like that, if he were an imposter. More important, he looked 
like Jan Shortmire— not the Shortmire whom Hubbard had known, 
but the broad-shouldered youth of 
the early pictures, golden of hair 
and skin and eyes, almost classical 
in feature and build. Plastic surgery could have converted a fleeting resemblance to a precise one, 
yet, somehow, Hubbard felt that 
this was flesh and blood of the old 
man’s. 
“You’re very like your father,” 
he said, inaccurately: Emrys was 
less like his father than he should 
have been, given that startling 
identity of physique. 
“Am I?” The boy smiled. “I 
never knew him. Of course, I 
know I look like the pictures, but 
pictures never tell much, do they?” 
He had many papers to give 
Peter Hubbard. Too many; no 
honest man had his life so well in 
order. But then Emrys’ honesty 
was not the issue, only his identity. 
The birth certificate said he had 
been born on Clergal fifty-five 
years before, so he was ten years 
older than Hubbard’s wildest estimate. A young man, but not a 
boy — a man of full maturity, but 
still too young to be, normally, Jan 
Shortmire’s son. Then Hubbard 
opened Emrys Shortmire’s passport and received another shock. 
He tried to sound calm. “I see 
you were on Morethis the same 
time your father was!” 
Emrys’ smile widened. “Curious 
coincidence, wasn’t it?” 
A surge of almost physical dislike filled the lawyer. “Is that all 
it was — a coincidence?” 
“Are you suggesting that I 
pushed my father into the Ekkan?” 
Emrys asked pleasantly. 
“Certainly not!” Hubbard was 
indignant at the thought that he, 
NEVER COME MIDNIGHT 
as a lawyer, would have voiced 
such a suspicion, even if it had 
occurred to him. “I thought you 
two might have arranged to meet 
on Morethis.” 
“I told you I’d never seen my 
father,” Emrys reminded him. “As 
for what I was doing on Morethis 
— that’s my business.” 
“All I’m concerned with is 
whether or not you are Emrys 
Shortmire.” Distaste was almost 
tangible on Hubbard’s tongue. “It 
does seem surprising that, since 
you were on Morethis at the time 
your father died, you should not 
have come to claim your inheritance sooner.” 
“I had affairs of my own to 
wind up,” Emrys said flatly. 
TTUBBARD tapped the papers. 
“You understand that these 
must be checked before you receive your father’s estate?” 
“I understand perfectly.” Emrys’ 
voice was soft as a Si-yllan catman’s, and even more insulting. 
“They will be gone over thoroughly for any possible error, any tiny 
imperfection, anything that could 
invalidate my claim. But you will 
find them entirely in order.” 
“I’m sure of that.” And Hubbard knew, if the papers were forgeries, they would be works of 
art 
“You’ll probably want me to 
undergo an equally thorough physical examination for signs of — ah 
— surgical tampering. Yes, I see 
I’m right.” 
Ungenerous hope leaped inside 
Hubbard. “You would object?” 
“On the contrary, I’d be delighted. Haven’t had a thorough 
medical checkup for years.” On this 
cooperative note, Emrys Shortmire bowed and left. 
Hubbard sighed back against the 
velvet cushions of his chair — real 
silk, for he was a very rich old 
man. Unfortunately, he could not 
doubt that this was Jan Shortmire’s progeny. But — and Hubbard sat upright — no matter how 
much Emrys resembled his father, 
that was only one parent. Who 
had the young man’s mother been? 
Quickly, Hubbard searched 
through the papers for the birth 
certificate. The name was Iloa 
Tasqi. The nationality: Morethan. 
No wonder the affair had been 
kept so secret. No wonder Emrys 
seemed so strange and that Jan had 
lied about his previous visit to the 
dark planet. Small wonder, too, 
that he’d had a son he was not 
aware of. Who would have believed that human and Morethan 
could breed together? For the 
Morethans, although humanoid, 
were not at all human. 
So Emrys Shortmire was only 
half human. The other half was — 
well, the vidicasts called it monster, 
and, now that he had met the 
young man, Peter Hubbard was 
inclined to agree. 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
II 
UTS IDE the office building, 
Emrys Shortmire paused and 
inhaled deeply. Say what you 
would about the atmospheres of 
some of the other planets’ being 
fresher and purer, the air of Earth, 
being the ah' in which Man had 
evolved, was the ah that felt best 
in his nostrils and filled his lungs 
to greatest satisfaction. And, after 
the fetid atmosphere of Morethis, 
this was pure heaven. Gray sky 
and violet dying sun against blue 
sky and radiant golden sun. No 
wonder the Morethans were what 
they were, and Earthmen were 
what they were. 
Well, the golden sun of Earth 
would set somewhat sooner than 
the physicists — or the sociologists 
— had prognosticated. But all that 
would be long after he himself had 
died. It was no concern of his, 
anyway. He was Emrys Shortmire, 
born out of Jan Shortmire and 
no mortal woman; and nothing 
else on Earth, or in the Universe, 
mattered. 
Disdaining the importunate helicabs that besieged him with plaintive mechanical offers of transportation, he walked down the street, 
enjoying the pull of the planet 
upon the youth and strength of his 
body, delighting in the clarity of 
his vision and the keenness of his 
nostrils. He was so absorbed in 
his thoughts and so unaccustomed 
NEVER COME MIDNIGHT 
still to Earth’s traffic that he did 
not look where he was going. The 
groundcar was upon him before he 
knew it. Of course something like 
this would happen, he thought bitterly, as darkness descended upon 
him and he waited for the crushing impact. It was always like that 
in the old stories, always some 
drawback to spoil the magic gift 
But then it was light again. The 
car had passed over him and he 
was unharmed, to the amazement 
— and disappointment — of the 
avid crowd that had gathered. 
“Pedestrians should look where 
they’re going,” the voice of the car 
observed petulantly. “Repairs cost 
money.” 
Being part human, Emrys was 
shaken by the experience. His eye 
caught the brilliant sign of a bar. 
Here, he thought, would be syrup 
to soothe his nerves. And he went 
inside, eager to try the taste of 
ancient vintages of Earth — unobtainable on the other planets, since 
fine wines and liquors could not 
endure the journey through space. 
TTE sipped a whisky and soda, 
trying not to feel disappointed at the savor. As he drank, 
he felt eyes upon him — the bartender’s. Yet the long Qesharakan 
reflecting glass above the bar 
showed him nothing unusual about 
his appearance. Did the bartender 
know who he was? How could he? 
Then Emrys noticed that the 
man glanced from him to someone 
else — a girl sitting at the other 
end of the bar. As she met Emrys’ 
eye, she smiled at him. Absently, 
with remote appreciation of her 
good looks, he smiled back, then 
returned to the contemplation of 
his drink. The bartender’s expression deepened to amused contempt. 
Emrys realized what was wrong 
and he could hardly keep from 
laughing. So intent had he been 
on the pursuit of his goal that he 
had almost lost sight of the goal 
itself. Deliberately, he turned his 
head and smiled at the girl. She 
promptly smiled back. 
He sat down at her side. Now 
that he was close, her aquamarine 
hair showed dark at the roots, and, 
through the thick golden maquillage, the pores stood out on her 
nose. Also, she was not so very 
young. He laughed then, and, when 
she asked why, bought her a drink. 
After he had bought her several 
more, they went to her apartment 
— a luxurious one in a good section 
of town. She was not going to be 
cheap, but, he thought with rising 
anticipation, he could afford her. 
However, the night was curiously unsatisfactory. For him — apparently not for the girl, because 
the next morning she indignantly 
refused his money. Evidently the 
experience had been something out 
of the ordinary for her. He could 
not feel it was her fault that it had 
been nothing for him; the lack was 
in him, he thought, some almostfelt emotion he could not recapture. 
Promising to call her, he left, 
went back to his hotel room and 
flung himself upon the resilient 
burim-moss couch. 
His body wasn’t tired, but his 
head ached wearily. The liquor, 
naturally, on an empty stomach . 
after all those years of Morethan 
qumesht. And then the trip. Even 
with the Shortmire engines— standard equipment now, of course — it 
had taken a long, tiring time, for 
Morethis was the most distant of 
all the civilized planets. Anyone 
would be exhausted after such a 
trip. Added to all this, the accident 
There were no bruises on his body 
yet, but later, he knew, they would 
be visible. 
A T last he slept, or seemed to, 
and dreamed he was on Morethis again — or Morethis was there 
with him. The air thickened about 
him into the tangible atmosphere 
of the dark planet — the swirling 
aniline fog that never cleared. And 
in the midst stood Uvrei, the high 
priest, robed in amethyst and sable. 
The term high priest was vulgar 
as applied to him, but the nearest 
terrestrial equivalent to what he 
was. 
The lips in the shockingly beautiful face parted. “How goes it, son 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
of my spirit?” the familiar greeting 
rolled out, in the familiar voice, 
deep yet sweet, like dulcet thunder. 
“My head hurts, father of my 
soul.” Emrys knew his voice was a 
petulant child’s, yet he could not 
stop himself. “I was promised—” 
“You have not taken care,” the 
ancient one said. 
How ancient he was, Emrys did 
not know. The priests of Morethis were, they said, immortal. And 
they did live for a long, long 
time, far longer than the common 
people, whom they resembled only 
vaguely. Terrestrial scholars said 
the ruling class was a variant of 
the Morethan race, inbred to preserve its identity, probably closer 
to the original world-shaking Morethans than their debased followers. 
The members of this group seemed 
young, as coin faces seem young, 
also old, like coins themselves. 
“I warned you it takes time for 
the final adjustments to be made. 
Wait, my son; haste means nothing 
to you.” 
“But I’ve waited so long,” Emrys complained. 
“Wait a little longer, then. You 
have all the time in the world.” 
The fog swirled shut about him, 
and Emrys sank into his personal 
miasma of sleep. When he woke 
up, late that afternoon, he knew 
from the dank odor clinging to the 
bedclothes that it had not been 
a dream, that the priests, the 
“gods,” the “immortals” of More
this could, as they professed — and 
even he had not believed them in 
this — project their minds far 
through space . though, fortunately, not their bodies, or they 
would not have needed him. He 
remembered then the vial of tiny 
golden pellets Uvrei had given him 
before he left Morethis, and took 
one. Perhaps that was what the 
ancient one had meant. At any 
rate, Emrys thought he felt better 
afterward. 
He examined his body in the 
mirror to see if bruises had come, 
but the tawny, muscle-rippled flesh 
was unmarked. At length he put 
on his clothes and, leaving the 
hotel, went to a jeweler, where he 
bought a costly bracelet to be sent 
to the girl of the night before. Such 
a grandiose gesture relieved him — 
he had always felt — of all further 
obligation. 
He did not wish to repeat his experience with the liquor, so he did 
not go to a bar. He had no friends 
on Earth — nor could he have 
acknowledged them if he had. He 
did not wish to repeat his disappointment of the previous night, 
so he did not seek female companionship — although it was obvious from the eyes of the women 
he passed that he would have no 
difficulty whenever he changed his 
mind. But what should he do? 
What did young men do with their 
leisure, he tried to remember, when 
they had nothing but leisure? 
NEVER COME MIDNIGHT 
TTE dined alone, finally, on a 
variety of rare terrestrial 
foods that did not taste quite as he 
expected, and went to the theater. 
The play was one he had seen a 
hundred times before under a hundred different names on many different planets. He went then to 
a nightclub, but it was crowded 
and noisy, and the girls did not 
excite him. Going back to the 
hotel, he found that sleep, at least, 
came easily. 
But I did not, he thought, do 
what I did merely tor the sake of 
a good night’s rest. 
The third day, he wandered into 
a museum. He found himself less 
bored than he had expected. Perhaps culture would be most therapeutic for him until he reached his 
ultimate adjustments. Accordingly, he went from the museum to a 
revival of a nineteenth-century 
opera. He didn’t like it; in fact, it 
disturbed him so much that he left 
before the final curtain and walked 
through the streets for hours, until 
he ran into a girl who was also 
walking the streets, and went home 
with her. 
The experience with the drab, as 
with the courtesan, was mechanically satisfactory, emotionally inadequate. He paid her — knowing 
she, too, would have given herself 
for nothing, had she known how— 
and went to his hotel limp with 
the same not-physical weakness he 
had felt before. The effects of the 
trip or the accident were lingering. 
He half expected Uvrei to appear 
that night, but the old one did not 
come. Why should he? This talk 
of spirit-son and soul-father was 
sophistry; there had been a bargain and each had kept his part. 
The afternoon of the fourth day, 
a vidicast reporter called to ask 
whether Emrys Shortmire was any 
relation to the Jan Shortmire who 
had invented the space-warp engines. Emrys could not deny his 
identity without jeopardizing his 
inheritance; however, he refused to 
be interviewed personally or let 
his picture be used. He did not, he 
said, want to be dwarfed by his 
father’s reputation. Nonetheless, his 
arrival was mentioned on the newscasts and panic rose up in him 
when he heard his name spoken 
publicly. 
The next day a letter came for 
him. People rarely wrote letters 
any more, except to the distant 
planets, yet this one had an Earth 
postmark. Cold with panic again, 
he tore it open and read: 
My dear Mr. Shortmire: 
This evening’s vidicast informed 
me that you were on Earth. You 
will not, I am sure, know my name. 
However, I was a friend of your 
father’s, when we were both young 
men, and it would give me great 
pleasure to make your acquaintance. 
NICHOLAS DYALL 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
"C 1 MRYS crumpled up the letter 
■“ and hurled it across the room. 
He knew Dyall for an old— associate of Jan Shortmire’s, but he 
had not thought him to be alive. 
What had Dyall done to warrant 
the longevity treatment? He was 
nothing but a glorified machinist, a 
technician. And now he might 
wreck all of Emrys’ plans. But if 
the young man made no reply, perhaps the old one would take the 
hint. And so it turned out; there 
was no further word from Nicholas 
Dyall. 
Finally, two weeks after Emrys 
had first come to Earth, he got 
a telecall from Peter Hubbard. His 
documents were all in order and he 
could receive his inheritance as 
soon as he passed the physical 
examination. 
Emrys went to the doctor’s offices feeling a cold touch of apprehension again. But all Dr. Jameson 
said when the examination was 
finished was, “You have the 
physique of a man fifteen years 
your junior, Mr. Shortmire.” 
Emrys fastened his tunic with 
fingers that shook from relief. 
“Guess I’m lucky,” he muttered. 
The doctor cleared his throat. 
“Peter Hubbard was telling me 
about your mother, that she 
was . .” 
Hubbard, that old fool! And 
Emrys had been so sure of his 
discretion. “My mother was Morethan, yes.” Then he realized it was 
possible that Hubbard, too, had 
felt there might be something notquite-human manifest in his body 
and had tried to prepare the doctor. Emrys made his tone more 
conciliatory. “On both Morethis 
and Earth, the child takes citizenship from the father, so—” 
“I wasn’t worrying about any 
legal problems; I was merely thinking that medical science would be 
interested.” 
“I do not wish the fact of my— 
of my birth publicized in any way 
— until after my death,” Emrys 
added placatorily. “Surely you 
can understand what hell life 
would become if people knew I 
was half Morethan?” 
The doctor sighed. “Yes, I know. 
I can’t blame you.” 
“Tell me, Doctor,” Emrys asked 
tensely, “is there anything about 
me that doesn’t seem . quite 
human?” 
The doctor shook his head. 
“Only that you’re so young for 
your age. Mr. Shortmire, was your 
mother one of the caste they call 
the ‘immortals’?” Then he flushed. 
“Forgive me. I didn’t mean to violate-” 
Emrys laughed sourly. “Don’t 
worry; I don’t hold to the Morethan beliefs. She was one of the 
so-called gods, yes. They do live 
somewhat longer than either the 
common people or terrestrials; I 
guess that’s why the legend arose, 
probably why I look so young, 
NEVER COME MIDNIGHT 
too. I should be glad I didn’t in- “You should, indeed,” the docherit a — less pleasant trait.” tor said somberly. 
Ill 
f f ¥ LOVE you, Emrys,” the woman said, and died agonizedly 
in his arms. He looked down at 
the contorted, leaden face, ravaged 
by sickness, and thought: Even 
when she was beautiful, I could 
not love her. He could not even 
feel sorry for her, except in a remote, intellectual way. He could 
not even feel sorry for himself and 
his own inability to feel. 
Since none of the servants was 
left in the house — those who were 
still alive had fled to the country, 
where there was less chance of 
contagion — he took her body to 
the crematorium himself. Other 
people were there, consigning their 
grisly burdens to the automatic 
fires — thin, sickly creatures they 
were, who would soon be carrion for the firebirds themselves. 
Whereas he — if he had an emotion 
left, it would be shame — shame 
for the radiant youth and health 
that he saw mirrored in their dully 
wondering eyes. 
Outside, the street was clamorous with the taped importunities 
of the empty vehicles — so many 
machines, because there were so 
few people left. But he chose to 
walk. 
The air was sweet and clean, 
because the Dyall machines came 
and took away the bodies of those 
who fell in the street, and then 
cleaned those streets as carefully and tenderly as they had done 
when the walks and gutters had 
abounded with the vibrant slovenliness of the living. Emrys could, 
of course, have thrown the woman’s body out into the gutter, and 
the machines would have carried 
her in their steel maws to the crematorium. But some remembered 
emotion had kept him from doing 
such a thing, and had made him 
give her to the flames with what 
small ceremony he could muster. 
She had been the last mistress 
remaining to him, and probably, 
he thought, to any man in the city. 
Perhaps, out in the country, there 
might be women with life and lust 
in them still, but such women as 
were left here could no longer be 
considered women. This last one 
had not been even human for the 
past week; yet he had tended her 
— why, he could not say, except 
that he had nothing better to do. 
For one thing, she had been quieter 
when he was near her, and he 
could not bear her cries. 
He was glad when she did die, 
because playing the good Samaritan had grown tedious as, in their 
turn, all other roles had palled. 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
Even though he knew there would 
be no more women for him, he 
was glad. During the first few 
weeks of the plague, when everyone who had been alive had known 
that soon they would be dead, all 
the people on Earth had rushed to 
squander the life which suddenly 
seemed to fill them to bursting. 
Then a man could have had all 
the women he wanted, all of anything he wanted, for the asking, except the one thing he really wanted 
— the assurance of life. 
TVT OT everyone had plunged into 
' an orgy of joyless pleasure. 
There were some who took refuge 
in prayer — addressed either to the 
traditional Deity or to the recent 
importations from the other planets. 
But, in the end, it was the same for 
all, prayerful and profligate alike. 
The only exceptions were the 
lucky few who seemed to be immune, like Emrys Shortmire, and 
those who escaped from the cities 
—to the country or, if they were 
rich, the other planets. So, even if 
Emrys had craved women before, 
he would have had enough of them 
by now. 
As he passed through the streets, 
he heard a man who walked alone 
and talked to himself curse the 
name of Jan Shortmire. They 
would tear me to pieces if they 
knew I was his flesh and blood, 
Emrys thought, and smiled to think 
how once he had feared to be en
gulfed by Jan Shortmire’s reputation, and now he feared to be destroyed by it. 
For it had been a starship 
equipped, like all starships, with 
the Shortmire engines that had 
brought back the plague — a starship probing the distant corners 
of the Galaxy which were all that 
Man’s insatiable curiosity had left 
undiscovered. 
Far out, even beyond Morethis 
— outermost of the discovered 
planets — in the middle of the 
dead and dying stars that were all 
there was in this chill, cold sector 
of space, the ship had come upon 
three dead planets, dark and lifeless. But when it returned to Earth 
to report the end of Man’s ambitions for further conquest, it 
turned out that one planet had 
not been quite as lifeless as they 
had fancied. And the ship had 
brought back its life — a virus 
against which terrestrial medicine 
was powerless. 
Emrys could have fled the city; 
he could have fled the planet. But 
somehow, after three years on 
Earth, he had not wanted to. He 
had spent those years fulfilling the 
dreams that all young men dream 
in the murky part of their souls but 
seldom have the chance to gratify. 
As soon as the inheritance was 
his, he had bought the most lavish 
mansion that was available at the 
instant of his desire, furnished it 
extravagantly, and prepared to en
NEVER COME MIDNIGHT 
joy himself. His pleasures were 
many and, some of them, strange. 
At first his mistresses were human, 
then non-human. Females of all 
the intelligent species, save the 
Morethan, were to be found on 
Earth, and although consorting 
with extraterrestrials was illegal, 
still a wealthy man had never been 
too much troubled by laws. 
But women — females — represented only a fraction of his pleasures, as did the terrestrial vices. 
He indulged heavily in rrilla, 
zbokth, mburrje, and all the other 
outworld pursuits that had been 
imported from the planets where 
the native life had been intelligent 
enough for decadence. 
TTOWEVER, though he pushed 
his body a thousand times beyond what should have been the 
limits of his endurance, the distress he had suffered during the 
first hours of his landing on Earth 
did not recur. He remained as clear 
of eye and trim of form as ever; 
each physical excess seemed only 
to improve his splendid health. 
Oddly, he did not seem to enjoy 
these pleasures as much as he had 
anticipated. Something seemed 
lacking. It was always like this 
when you dreamed too long about 
something, he told himself; no result ever equaled its expectation. 
And he took another one of the 
sparkling pills from Morethis. 
They provided the only satisfac
tion he seemed able to get. 
Emrys had been wrong about 
Uvrei’s indifference. He apparently did consider Emrys his responsibility, over and above the material 
details of the bargain. The Morethans regarded all those of alien 
species as enemies, and all those 
outside the clan as unfriends. 
Therefore, Emrys began to realize 
the ceremonies of adoption he had 
gone through were more than merely honorific or ritual — they had 
been genuine. It was an uncomfortable conclusion. 
“Well, son of my spirit,” Uvrei 
would keep asking, “is this what 
you wanted?” 
“This is what I wanted, father 
of my soul,” Emrys would agree. 
And it was what he had asked, 
what he had thought he wanted. 
The ancient one would smile 
and say, “Then I am content,” and 
recombine into fog. And Emrys 
would wonder whether the Morethans had not known before they 
granted him his heart’s desire that 
it would turn to dust and ashes 
when he had it. Then he would 
dismiss the thought, telling himself maybe he’d been too impatient 
for pleasure. After all, how could 
he, sprung full-blown into a quasialien society, hope to become an 
integral part of it all at once? 
So he had waited . one year, 
two years, three years. At the end 
of the fourth, the plague had struck. 
And he had stayed on Earth, be
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
cause going to another planet 
somehow did not seem worthwhile. 
He was able to take care of his 
house alone, since the servants had 
been primarily for show, and the 
great Dyall machine — which was 
all the house, essentially, was — 
could run itself. Whenever a part 
of it broke down, he repaired it 
himself, glad of the opportunity to 
have something to do with his 
hands. 
Finally he realized that he must 
be immune; hence a lifetime waited 
ahead of him. So he turned to 
learning, for the vast libraries of 
tapes and books remained changeless amid the disaster. He read and 
he learned a great deal, and if he 
could not derive pleasure from 
this, at least there was a deep intellectual appreciation that almost 
took its place. 
The doctors on Ndrikull, the 
most advanced of the other planets, 
at last managed to find a serum 
that would kill the plague — that 
is, they maintained it was their 
serum that had killed it. Some suggested that the virus had died because Earth’s environment had 
eventually proved hostile to it. But 
Earth did not die, even though 
most of its people had, because 
the great machines that took care 
of it — the Dyall machines — had 
kept functioning. 
Gradually, most of the people 
who had fled to the other planets 
came back, and those who had 
survived in the country returned 
to the cities. Earth was restored 
to its former splendor as the social and political capital of the Galaxy, though Ndrikull now was the 
financial center and rivaled Earth 
for artistic honors. But still Emrys 
stuck to his books. Once in a while, 
he would sink himself for a week 
or a month in what would be, for 
other men, physical pleasure, just 
to see if his reactions had changed, 
but they had grown even more impersonal. 
V¥/’HEN Emrys Shortmire had 
been ten years on Earth, he 
eventually ran into Nicholas Dyall, 
at the opening of a scientific exposition. As soon as he saw Dyall in 
the crowd, he turned to go, but 
Dyall had seen him at the same 
time, and hurriedly limped across 
the room. 
“You must be Emrys Shortmire,” he declared, in a voice of 
surprising resonance for so old a 
man. “You look so much like Jan, 
I couldn’t be mistaken.” Grasping 
his stick with one hand for support, he extended the other to Emrys, who could not refuse it. “But 
you are so young . .” 
“I’m older than I look,” Emrys 
said uncomfortably; then remembered to add, “You were a friend 
of my father’s, sir?” 
“A hundred years ago, yes. My 
name is Nicholas Dyall.” 
“I’ve heard of you; you’re the 
NEVER COME MIDNIGHT 
man who — who invented all those 
machines,” Emrys said, trying not 
to sound too ingenuous. “I’ve heard 
people say you revolutionized our 
technology as much as—” 
“As much as your father revolutionized our civilization? Yes, 
both of us are responsible for a 
great deal. Luckily, your father is 
dead.” 
“Luckily?” Emrys echoed. 
“Luckily for him, I mean.” The 
old man sighed. “But you are too 
young to understand.” Then his 
dark face relaxed into a smile. “I 
won’t ask if you received the letter I sent when you first arrived 
on Earth. I can understand that a 
young man would wish the society 
of other — young people.” 
Emrys avoided Dyall’s eye, and, 
so doing, met the gaze of the girl 
standing next to the old man, and 
stopped, transfixed. She was very 
young, less than forty, he judged, 
perhaps even less than thirty. 
It was long since he had seen a 
woman like her. Her hair was a 
soft yellow, the only natural color 
among all the women in the room. 
Her face was painted pink and 
white, not the blues fashionable 
that year. Instead of being twisted 
and bedizened with cloth into fantastic shapes and protuberances, 
her pretty body was clad in a 
simple translucent slip. Yet, in 
spite of her almost deliberate dowdiness, she was beautiful — not the 
most beautiful woman he had ever 
seen, but the most ... no, striking 
was not it, either. What was the 
word he wanted? He could not 
dredge it out of the pool in which 
so many of his memories had been 
submerged for want of room. 
“This is my great-great-granddaughter Megan,” Dyall introduced her. The girl nodded and 
smiled. After a moment, Emrys 
forced himself to do the same. 
“I won’t press you to come 
visit us, Mr. Shortmire,” Dyall said 
to Emrys as he and his descendant 
finally turned to leave, “but I hope 
that you will.” 
“We should be so glad to see 
you,” the girl said, with a shy 
smile. 
“Perhaps— perhaps I will come,” 
he found himself saying. “One 
day.” The two men shook hands, 
and Nicholas Dyall and his greatgreat-granddaughter moved away. 
Emrys stared after them for a 
minute; then, without paying any 
attention to the exhibits, he went 
back to his house and spent the 
rest of the evening staring at the 
falling flakes in his snowplace. 
For years, he had thought he’d 
lost any capacity to feel. Now he 
knew that was not true . because he had been moved by 
Megan Dyall. How, he could not 
say — not even whether it was love 
or hate he felt toward her — but 
he felt. That was the important 
thing, and, because of that, he had 
to take the risk and call on them. 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
TTE waited a week, then went 
to the Dyall house — a mansion, less ostentatious than his, but 
probably more expensive. Dyall 
greeted him warmly. “I’m glad you 
decided to come. Your father and 
I were not close friends, but he 
was the only one left of my generation whom I knew. It was a shock 
to hear of his passing, even though 
I hadn’t seen him for a century 
or so.” 
“You’ve lived for such a long 
time, Grandpa,” Megan said in 
her high, sweet voice, “it’s hard to 
imagine. But why doesn’t everybody get the longevity treatment, 
so we can all live a long time?” 
“Because it’s difficult and expensive,” her ancestor said, smiling over her golden head at Emrys. “Because the old must make 
way for the young. It is only given 
to those whose lives, the government feels, should be prolonged, 
either because of the contributions 
they can still make, or whose contributions have already been so 
great that this is the only fitting 
reward.” 
The girl stared at him with large 
blue eyes. “Does that mean you 
will live forever, Grandpa?” 
“No,” the old man told her. “All 
our science can give is an extra 
half century. I don’t know how 
long my life span would have been, 
but I’m past the average and the 
extra half century, and so I’m living on borrowed time.” 
The blue eyes filled with tears. 
“I don’t want you to die, Grandpa. 
I don’t want to grow old and die, 
either.” 
Dyall looked down at her, and 
there was, Emrys thought, an odd 
perplexity in his gaze. Didn’t he 
find it natural for a young girl not 
to like the idea of old age, of 
death? 
“But I shall want to die when 
my time comes, Megan,” Dyall 
said. “We all will.” Gently, he 
touched her cheek. “Perhaps, by 
the time you make your contribution to society, scientists will know 
how to give youth as well as extra 
years. More years are not really 
much of a gift to the old.” 
“But I can’t do anything, Grandpa,” she sobbed. “I have nothing 
to contribute.” 
It was an outrage, Emrys 
thought, that this woman, by being the essence of femininity, 
should be denied the ultimate reward society had to offer. Motherhood alone should entitle her . 
He was, of course, already envisioning himself as the father of her 
children. But could he be a father? 
Old Dyall was saying, “Perhaps, 
Megan, by the time you are old 
enough, our government will be 
wise enough to realize that beauty, 
of itself, deserves the greatest reward Man can give.” He turned to 
Emrys. “Forgive me for getting so 
sentimental, but Megan looks as 
uncannily like her great-great
NEVER COME MIDNIGHT 
grandmother — my wife — as . 
you look like your father. I can’t 
bear to think she must die, too. It’s 
a pity there is no way she can 
stay young and beautiful for all 
time.” 
Emrys found his fists clenching. 
The fingers were cold. 
“Alissa’s portrait was painted 
just before I married her,” the 
old man said. “She was just about 
Megan’s age then. Come, I’d like 
you to see it.” 
No! something inside Emrys 
cried out, but he could not courteously — or any other way — refuse to follow the old man. 
They went into another room. 
Hanging over the mantelpiece was 
the painting of a girl in old-fashioned clothes. Anyone, not knowing, would have taken her to be 
Megan. But Emrys knew she was 
not, and suddenly he let himself 
remember what it was that Megan 
meant to him . and why he hated 
Nicholas Dyall with such coruscating fury. 
IV 
?C"V7" OU should have sent for me 
to come to you, Mr. Hubbard,” Nicholas Dyall said, with a 
gentle pity that infuriated the old 
lawyer, who knew that he himself 
was young enough to be Dyall’s 
grandson. Hubbard was jealous— he 
would not conceal it from himself 
— bitterly jealous. It had not been 
hard for him to rationalize Jan 
Shortmire’s gift of years as a 
worthless one; that old man’s bitterness and disillusionment had 
not inspired envy. But this hale 
and rosy old man seemed to be 
enjoying his years. 
I may not have made any signal 
contribution to human welfare, 
Hubbard thought resentfully, but 1 
have done my best. Why must I 
die at an age fifty years short of 
the age which this man is allowed 
to reach? 
“I am perfectly able to get 
about, Mr. Dyall,” he said in icy 
tones, “since I am in excellent 
health.” 
Which he was, the doctor had 
told him, adding, however, “for 
your age.” 
“What is more,” Hubbard continued, “since I was on Ndrikull, 
it might have seemed rather presumptuous for me to send for you; 
whereas I had always been planning to return to Earth one day. 
I left at the time of the plague.” 
“You were wise. I merely retired to the country. I escaped the 
virus, but the rest of my family 
was less fortunate. I have but one 
remaining — my great-great-granddaughter.” 
“Yes,” Hubbard said, “I know. 
It’s because of her I’ve come to 
see you.” 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
He had not really planned ever 
to return to Earth. Ndrikull had 
been comfortable and a man of his 
age did not risk a trip through 
space unless the need was urgent. 
The memory of Emrys Shortmire 
had disturbed him from time to 
time, but, he thought, probably 
the young man had died of the 
plague. Even if he had not, what 
good would it do for Peter Hubbard to be present on Earth? He 
could not counteract the presence 
of an evil force without knowing 
the quality of that evil. 
Then, picking up the kind of 
journal he did not usually read, 
he had seen mentioned the fact 
that Jan Shortmire’s son was 
“courting” Nicholas Dy all’s greatgreat-granddaughter. And he had 
known the need was now urgent. 
He must go back to Earth and 
warn someone; it was his duty. A 
letter could not convey the hatred 
and fear with which the young 
man had inspired him. Obviously, 
old Dyall had been the person to 
warn. Yet he did not seem right. 
I do not like this man, Hubbard 
thought. And then: This is the 
second man I have taken such an 
instant dislike to. Can it be senility rather than perceptiveness, and 
have I been foolish to come all 
this way? 
“You’ve come because of Megan?” Dyall raised eyebrows that 
were still thick and black. “Have 
you met her? Do you know her?” 
His voice sharpened. “She has 
never spoken of you.” 
“I have never met her,” Hubbard said, and saw Dyall relax. 
Hubbard waited, but the other 
man said nothing, so he went on, 
“I wanted to talk to you about 
the man she’s been seeing, this 
Emrys Shortmire.” Leaning forward, Hubbard spoke slowly, as if, 
by giving weight to each word, he 
could make them sound less fantastic. “He’s a monster. Literally, 
I mean. His mother was a Morethan. Or is. For all I know, she 
may still be alive.” 
XJUBBARD had not thought of 
this before, and it shook him. 
Yet, if Iloa Tasqi was alive, then 
Emrys Shortmire must be considered to be, to all intents and purposes, Morethan entirely, working 
only for the interests of that planet. 
After all, his mother had been the 
only parent the boy had known. 
Even on Clergal, he must have 
been brought up under a strong 
Morethan influence. Now, if the 
female was still alive, then the influence would be alive, too. Since 
Morethans were not permitted on 
Earth, there would be an obvious 
advantage for them in having 
someone here. 
Dyall was holding back a smile, 
not too well. “I didn’t know a human and a Morethan could — ah — 
breed together.” 
And, obviously, he didn’t be
NEVER COME MIDNIGHT 
lieve it. There was no way Hubbard could prove it, unless he 
asked Emrys to produce his birth 
certificate again. “It isn’t generally known that the two species can 
reproduce together,” he finally said, 
“nor should it be.” 
Then he looked directly in Dyad's black eyes — impossible that 
eyes so keen should be so deliberately blind, that any aware human 
being should not have sensed 
something of that dark aura. 
“Haven’t you felt something 
strange about young Shortmire?” 
he asked. 
“Can’t say I have,” Dyall 
chuckled. “He seems an agreeable 
enough young fellow.” 
“He’s sixty-five years old.” 
“Really? I should have taken 
him to be younger. But youth lasts 
longer these days. And there’s—” 
Dyall gave a little laugh — “no 
crime in being old, or you and I 
would be in prison, wouldn’t we?” 
Hubbard would not let himself 
be distracted. “He looked less than 
forty when he came to Earth, and 
he hasn’t, I understand, changed 
in the past ten years.” 
“Ten years is not so long.” 
Dyall’s swarthy hands began playing with the ornaments on his desk. 
Clearly, he was impatient to be 
rid of his tedious caller, and Hubbard struggled with the instinctive 
good breeding that told him to 
get up and leave. This was not a 
social call, so it did not matter that 
he was boring his host, however. 
On the other hand, he was not 
getting anywhere. Perhaps he 
could blast the other out of his 
smugness. “Look, Dyall, I know 
this is an outrageous thing for a 
man of my profession to say. I 
haven’t a shred of proof, not a suspicion — but I’m morally sure he 
killed his father.” 
Instead of showing shock or anger or even thought, Dyall merely 
gave him a tolerant smile. “You’re 
an old man, Mr. Hubbard. We’re 
both old men,” he amended graciously, “so we’re apt to — jump at 
shadows.” 
I’m an old man, Hubbard 
thought angrily, and you’re an old 
fool! 
“There doesn’t seem to be anything wrong with the young man,” 
Dyall continued, “or not-so-young 
man, if you prefer. He appears to 
be very fond of Megan, and if he 
should choose to marry her, it 
would ease my mind considerably. 
I’ve exceeded my life span myself, 
you know.” 
Since Peter Hubbard had done 
the same, and his span was considerably shorter, he had no sympathy. “You’d — let the strain continue?” 
“Perhaps it’s a good strain. I 
understand the Morethans are said 
to be immortal. If so, the genes 
might be a desirable addition to 
our own.” 
He was laughing openly now. 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
Hubbard almost wept with helplessness. There must be something 
he could do. But what? He could 
not take the trip to Morethis; he 
would certainly die on the way. 
And what could he do there? There 
was no guarantee that, if there was 
anything to be found, he would 
find it, or even if he reached the 
planet alive, that he would go back 
alive. 
“Won’t you stay and dine with 
us tonight, Mr. Hubbard?” Dyall 
asked. 
“No — no, thank you,” Hubbard 
said, feeling no necessity for making an excuse. The offer had represented only the barest kind of 
courtesy. 
Dyall got up. “Perhaps another 
night then?” 
“Perhaps.” Hubbard rose to his 
feet also, trying to appear brisk 
and alert and young. At least he 
could walk without aid, he thought, 
staring pointedly at the stick leaning against the wall. “I would 
rather you didn’t tell Shortmire I 
had come to see you about him.” 
“Of course not, if you wish.” 
But Hubbard knew Dyall would 
not keep the stranger’s visit from 
his friend. Odd that Dyall and 
young Shortmire should be friends. 
Not so odd either, though; young 
Shortmire had no reason to love 
his father. Besides, although Jan 
Shortmire had hated Nicholas 
Dyall, that did not mean Nicholas 
Dyall had hated Jan Shortmire, 
or even knew of the other man’s 
animosity. 
i S he was riding back to his 
hotel, Hubbard let his tired 
old body indulge the aches and 
pains that were its rightful heritage. 
As his body relaxed, his mind relaxed, and he began to think more 
clearly. Perhaps Dyall would not 
listen to him — perhaps Dyall had 
some reason for not listening — but 
the government might. 
What young Shortmire might 
have done as a human, they would 
consider a matter for local law — 
but the fact that human and Morethan had begotten offspring would 
interest them. The fact that the 
Morethans might have managed at 
last to get a spy on Earth would interest them. If Emrys would not 
surrender his birth certificate, they 
could get another from Clergal. 
Only, would the government’s 
representative believe Hubbard 
enough to get that birth certificate? 
Or would they, like Dyall, dismiss 
him as a doddering old fool? 
The private humiliation had 
been hard enough; he hated to 
risk a public one. But it was his 
duty to tell officialdom of his suspicions, he knew miserably. Never 
again could he think with pride of 
himself as a worthy citizen if he 
didn’t at least make the attempt. 
Never again could he let himself 
feel a justifiable jealousy of those 
with endowments superior to his, if 
NEVER COME MIDNIGHT 
he did not prove himself worthy 
of what he had. 
Well, there was no hurry; he 
would sleep on it He was mistaken. In the morning, before he 
had even started to decide upon 
any course of action, the front desk 
called to announce that a Mr. 
Shortmire wished to see him. 
“Very well,” the old lawyer said 
wearily into the machine, to the 
machine, for it was the Dyall itself 
speaking. “Send him up.” 
A short while later, there was a 
rap on the door. “Come in,” Hubbard called. 
The door slid open. A man entered, a tawny golden youth with 
eyes like burnished metal. “Do 
you know who I am, Peter?” 
“Of course,” Hubbard said, faintly disgusted, since he considered 
melodrama vulgar. “You’re Emrys 
Shortmire.” 
“You’re wrong,” the man said. 
“I’m Jan Shortmire.” 
V 
MRYS Shortmire had gone 
home the night Dyall had 
shown him the portrait of his 
long-dead wife, and Emrys had 
dreamed, not of Megan Dyall, but 
of Alissa Embel, Megan’s greatgreat-grandmother, whom he had 
wanted a hundred years before, 
and who had married Nicholas 
Dyall. Consciously, he had forgotten her, but at the back of his 
mind, she had, for over a century, 
walked hand in hand with his 
hatred. 
That night he understood what 
he had not realized then. He had 
completed the engines with which 
he had been tinkering for years 
with a real vengeance. He had 
taken the first starship out into 
space himself — when no one had 
faith in his engines, least of all 
himself — merely “to show her” 
what a great man he was, even if 
he died in the showing. In his 
spite, he had opened up the stars 
for mankind. 
And when he returned, years 
later, he found that Dyall, too, had 
stopped tinkering and had changed 
the pattern of his gadgets to one 
more acceptable to the public taste. 
Before, they had operated quite 
satisfyingly, but they had not been 
salable in the shape he had given 
them, and no manufacturer had 
been interested in leasing the 
patents. Now that he had yielded, 
manufacturers were falling all over 
themselves to get the right to produce his machines. 
Dyall’s was not as soul-stirring 
a success as Shortmire’s — he did 
not inspire cheering crowds and 
parades — but a more enduringly 
popular one. The Shortmire engines carried humanity to the stars, 
but it was the Dyall machines that 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
cooked humanity’s dinners and 
kept its houses clean. So humanity 
respected Jan Shortmire and took 
Nicholas Dyall to its collective 
heart. 
Emrys awakened, remembering 
all this and rigid with loathing for 
Nicholas Dyall, and for the world 
which had allowed Nicholas Dyall 
to take from him something he 
had wanted. Something which had, 
as soon as he’d known for sure he’d 
lost it forever, become what he 
wanted most. And also he hated 
the world which had given Alissa 
Embel to Dyall and had then proceeded to heap on him in addition 
every honor Jan Shortmire himself 
had won in an effort to make up 
for what he’d lost. Jan Shortmire 
had risked his life in space; Nicholas Dyall had sat comfortably in 
his chair — and both were equally 
honored. 
Then Emrys — as Emrys — 
caught hold of himself. It was true 
that originally there had been injustice. But it had been righted 
and so there was no more reason 
to hate Dyall. 1 have a second 
chance, but he will have none. I 
will live out another full lifetime, 
and I will have Megan, too, and 
he’ll die in a few years. And as 
for the world, I have already revenged myself on it in advance. 
He got up and pulled a spunmetal robe about him, amethyst 
and sable — a gift from Morethis. 
There was always a costly gift on 
NEVER COME MIDNIGHT 
his birthday, either out of kindness 
or cruelty, together with a vial of 
the golden capsules. 
What a pity, he thought, as he 
went downstairs, that Dyall and 
the world both would never know 
the truth: that Jan Shortmire had 
no son, that Emrys and Jan Shortmire were one. 
r | ’HE Morethans first came to 
Jan Shortmire when, approaching his natural old age, he had traveled as a visitor to their planet— 
largely because old men did not 
go to Morethis — and they had 
made him their offer. He had 
laughed in their dark and exquisite 
faces. 
“My own government will give 
me fifty years more of life,” he 
said, for he had heard, during the 
voyage out, that he would be on 
the next honors list. “What need 
do I have of you?” 
“We can give you far more than 
fifty years,” they’d told him. “And 
youth, besides.” 
At that, he had stopped laughing, but still he had not accepted 
their offer, for many reasons . 
doubt and fear, perhaps some 
shreds of honor, and certainly, 
since he was a man of science, 
skepticism. 
Then, when Shortmire was nearing the end of those fifty extra 
years which had, indeed, been 
granted him by a grateful Earth 
government — together with a 
plaque, suitably inscribed — he 
had received a gift. It was one of 
those great crystalline prisms from 
Morethis that were so fashionable 
on Earth as lighting fixtures, not 
because they saved fuel — for one 
such prism would cost ten lifetimes of fuel — but because they 
gave a light no Earthborn device 
could give, making the old look 
young, the stupid wise, and, most 
important of all, the ugly beautiful. 
Shortmire looked into the lambent depths, wondering who had 
sent him so costly and so useless a 
gift. Suddenly the flame vitrified 
into a face that flashed up at him 
from the crystal — a face that was 
beautiful in its horror, and horrible in its beauty. He closed his 
eyes, but when he opened them, 
the iridescent eyes were still there, 
mocking him for his cowardice. 
“I am Uvrei,” a deep voice of 
tingling sweetness said, “god among 
gods and man among men. I bring 
you greetings from Morethis, Jan 
Shortmire.” 
Shortmire knew well enough 
what Uvrei must want, for the 
Morethans’ long-ago offer had risen 
of late to the top of his thoughts. 
They could not do what they 
claimed, he had tried to reassure 
himself, whenever the memory returned; it was a trick which he 
had been clever enough not to 
fall for. But part of his mind did 
not believe this, and that part was 
glad to see Uvrei. 
“What do you want of me?” he 
demanded. 
The Morethan smiled, and each 
glittering tooth was a fiery brilliant. “The same as before, on the 
same terms,” he said, offering no 
enticements. The man who would 
accept such an offer would provide his own. 
TF they were capable of doing 
this . thing with the crystal, 
then they might also have other 
powers. So Shortmire could no 
longer pretend that what they offered him was impossible. On the 
other hand, what they required of 
him in return was truly terrible. 
Could they really do what they 
said? 
After all, my world has not done 
overmuch for me. Others, like 
Nicholas Dyall, have wealth and 
power and . He would not let 
himself think of Alissa Dyall, since 
she must long be dead, of old age, 
if nothing else. The last he had 
heard of her was when she and 
Dyall had announced their wedding date. Then he had taken the 
ship fitted out with the engines 
everyone said would not work, and 
he had fled into space. When he 
had come back, no one had spoken 
of her, and gradually, in his newfound importance, he had to some 
degree forgotten her, though he 
never forgot Dyall. 
Pity to think of Alissa as having 
grown old. Even more of a pity to 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
think of himself as having grown 
old, for he could see that in every 
mirror he passed. 
“You’re sure you can give me 
youth as well as life?” he asked. 
“Not only youth, but perpetual 
youth,” Uvrei assured him. “Youth 
such as you did not know even 
when you were young.” 
But Shortmire was still suspicious. Even if the Morethans could 
do what they said, how did he 
know they would? An alien concept of honor might have no reference to the terrestrial one. “How 
do I know I can trust your word?” 
Uvrei’s face grew black, literally black, and the crystal shivered 
until, Emrys thought, it would 
split. And he shivered, too, knowing in the fine nerves and little 
muscles of his body what would 
happen to him at the final shivering. A fear filled him then that he 
had never known before, not even 
when he faced space for the first 
time, and in the midst of that fear 
came the thought that, if he truly 
hated Earth, this was the most artistically nasty revenge he could 
take. 
TP HE crystal trembled to stillness as Uvrei’s face paled to 
composure. “If you were not an 
Earthman, Jan Shortmire,” he said, 
“we would not have needed you, 
nor you us. And an Earthman 
could not be expected to know that 
the words you have just spoken are 
the insult that, on Morethis, is 
deadlier than death; for the word 
of an immortal — no matter to 
whom or what he gives it — is as 
sacred and enduring as he himself.” 
“I apologize,” Shortmire said 
quickly, “for my ignorance.” 
“And I forgive you,” Uvrei declared, as grandly as if he were a 
god, “because of that ignorance. 
Moreover, since you cannot help 
your racial deficiencies, I will make 
this bargain with you. Come to 
Morethis. There we will give you 
the life and youth we promised. 
Then, when you are satisfied that 
we have given you what you desire, you will give us what we desire.” 
Not having been too honorable 
a man in his own hundred and fifty-five years, Jan Shortmire still 
could not believe that the Morethans would act in all honor. However, even the remote possibility 
that they would play fair was 
strong temptation for an ardent 
man pushing death. So he had 
agreed. He had wound up his affairs and made his will in favor of 
“his son.” Then he had left Earth 
to go to Morethis, to die as Jan 
Shortmire and he resurrected as 
Emrys Shortmire. 
The Morethans had kept their 
word, though there were times 
when he wished they had not. For 
no phoenix casting itself into the 
fire to burn alive in agony, so 
that it might rise again, young and 
NEVER COME MIDNIGHT 
strong and purified, from the ashes 
of its own dead self, could have 
suffered the excruciating torment 
of both mind and body that he 
suffered as, little by little, he was 
made young again. 
Uvrei had warned him that this 
would happen. “To become one 
of us, you must be capable of allendurance.” So, for three years, he 
had lived on the miasmic planet, 
suffering unending, unbearable 
pain — not only his, but of the 
others whose lives went to make 
his new life. Slowly, agonizingly, 
these were stirred into the shrieking cauldrons of his body, until 
they blended and melted and 
coalesced to become his new shape. 
Then Uvrei had led him ceremoniously to a reflecting glass and 
shown him Emrys Shortmire — a 
boy far more handsome than the 
boy Jan Shortmire had been, 
though, at the same time, his twin. 
The only thing not quite human 
about Emrys Shortmire was his 
eyes, and how could they be human after what they had seen? 
But he would forget all that once 
he was back on Earth, forget the 
payment that had been exacted — 
and prepare to live his new life 
to the full. 
A LL this Emrys Shortmire told 
Peter Hubbard in the quiet 
of the expensive hotel room. It 
was pleasant to be able to unburden himself at last. For the past 
eleven years, there had been a 
secret side of him that must always walk apart, even from Megan. Now there was someone who 
could know the whole of him, and 
he was grateful to Hubbard for 
having come back to Earth. 
But Hubbard sat there staring 
with so fixed a gaze that, for a moment, Emrys thought he was dead. 
Then he realized that it was only 
shock; all this had been too much 
for so old a man. Selfishly, he had 
heaped his burden upon another, 
without asking whether that other 
was willing, or able, to share it. 
“Peter,” he began, “I’m sorry . .” 
not quite sure for what he was 
apologizing. He could not have 
trusted the old man at the beginning, just as he had to trust him 
now. But of course he was apologizing to Peter Hubbard, as the 
representative of humanity, for 
what he himself had done to Earth. 
He began to give unasked-for 
explanations. “I deliberately made 
you suspect I killed my father, because if you suspected one of us 
had done away with the other, 
why, then, you’d automatically 
have assumed there were two.” 
He looked down at the floor. “And 
I wanted you to hate me. We 
couldn’t be friends; otherwise, 
knowing me better than anyone 
else alive, you might have 
guessed . 
“I doubt it,” Hubbard said 
wearily. “Almost anything else 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
NEVER COME MIDNIGHT 
would have seemed more likely.” 
Presently he asked, “Weren’t you 
afraid I might investigate?” 
Emrys smiled. “What could you 
find out? After all, I hadn’t killed 
Jan Shortmire.” 
The smile became a little fixed. 
“I wouldn’t have cared even if 
you had told someone your suspicions then,” Emrys went on doggedly, “because I knew no one 
would believe you. But now—” he 
DETER Hubbard looked at his 
old friend with the young face 
and the young body and the eyes 
that were unhuman — but less so 
than before. This was a frightful 
thing that had been done, and by 
and by he would feel the full 
horror of it. Right now he was too 
numb to care. He felt, as Emrys 
Shortmire must have felt on coming back to Earth, detached and 
without interest. But I’ve felt this 
way before, he thought; ifs because 
I’m old. 
‘Were you really satisfied with 
your bargain, Jan?” he asked, almost casually. 
“Not at first,” the boy admitted, 
sinking down on the couch and 
clasping his hands around his 
knees. So young, so graceful, and 
so . unnatural. “It seemed to 
me then that the Morethans had 
given me youth and taken away 
humanity. Because, once I found I 
colored — “well, I don’t want you 
to tell Megan Dyall anything . 
bad about me. You see, I . love 
her.” 
“I gathered that impression,” 
Hubbard said. 
But why does he sound so unhappy about it? Emrys thought 
angrily. W hat’s wrong with me? 
Because he was in love, he could 
not appreciate the irony of that 
thought 
VI 
was physically capable, I found I 
didn’t really want the things I had 
craved so much before.” 
“So they did trick you?” When 
all was said and done, Hubbard 
thought, you could never trust an 
alien life-form, a foreigner. 
“No, no! You still don’t understand. The way I see it is that . 
certain elements in us may not 
mean anything to them. They don’t 
know they’re there, so they 
wouldn’t realize that anything got 
lost in . .the process.” 
“Do you think, Jan,” Hubbard 
asked slowly, “that the way you 
felt — or didn’t feel — might not 
have anything to do with the 
Morethans at all? That, for all 
your young body, you are an old 
man and feel like an old man?” 
“Nonsense! I know what it is to 
feel like an old man, and I know 
what it is to feel like a young man, 
and I — I felt like neither.” 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
“When a man has lived a certain number of years,” Hubbard 
said, knowing that envy gave the 
truth relish, “he is an old man. 
Age is in the mind and heart, not 
only in the body.” 
“That’s a lie!" Then Emrys said, 
more calmly, “If that’s so, why did 
everything change when I met 
Megan? Because I found then that 
my emotions had not been lost! 
I had a feeling for her that I’d 
never had for another woman — 
not even for Alissa, I think. I hadn’t 
imagined there could be a woman 
like Megan in the world, so sweet 
and amiable and completely feminine.” He looked angrily at Hubbard. “You think I’m sentimental, 
don’t you?” 
Hubbard tried to smile. “There’s 
nothing wrong with sentiment.” But 
sentimentality was characteristic 
of an old man’s love. 
Emrys laughed and hugged his 
knees. He was overdoing the ingenuousness. Of course he deliberately played the part of a boy 
young enough to be his own greatgreat-grandson, because he was 
wooing a woman young enough to 
be his own great-great-granddaughter. And Hubbard remembered 
how he himself had attempted to 
move briskly before Nicholas 
Dyall. Emrys Shortmire would not 
have the physical aches that he’d 
had as a result, but could there 
be psychical aches? Could an old 
man ever actually be young? 
MRYS’ face grew sober. “I’ve 
never touched her, Peter — 
really touched her, I mean. She’s 
not like other women, you know.” 
“I know,” Hubbard said, remembering back to the time when he, 
too, had been in love. Only the 
memory was not tender in him, because he had married the girl and 
lived with her for nearly seventy 
years. 
“Peter, you aren’t listening!” 
“I’m sorry,” the old man said, 
waking from his reverie. “What 
were you saying?” 
“I said, do you think Megan 
would be willing to marry me, if 
she knew I was older than her 
great-great-grandfather?” 
But there was a more important 
question that Hubbard could no 
longer refuse to face. “Jan, what 
did you give the Morethans in return for what they gave you?” 
“You haven’t answered my 
question.” 
“I can’t answer it, because I 
don’t know the girl. But you can 
answer mine, because you know 
what you gave the Morethans.” 
Emrys was silent for a moment; 
then he laughed. “I gave them my 
soul,” he said lightly. “Like that 
fellow in the opera.” 
“I know that. What I’m afraid 
of is that it wasn’t enough. In what 
form did you give it to them, 
Jan?” 
“You have no right to catechize 
me like that.” 
NEVER COME MIDNIGHT 
The old man’s voice was soft. “I 
think I have.” 
Emrys was a long time in answering. When he finally spoke, 
his voice was flat and dead. “All 
right, I gave them the blueprints 
for the space-warp engines. What 
else did I have to give them in 
exchange?” 
Hubbard expelled a long breath. 
He had answered this question for 
himself many minutes before. Still, 
the shock of confirmation was too 
great. All hope was gone now. “Perhaps you had a right to sell your 
own soul, Jan, but you had no 
right to sell humanity’s.” His good 
breeding held up all the way. This 
man had betrayed the whole of 
mankind, and so he, Peter Hubbard, reproached him gently for it. 
Though, come to think of it, what 
good would savage recrimination— 
or anything— do? 
“But you don’t have to worry 
about it, Peter!” Emrys cried. 
“Listen, the Morethan technology 
is so alien, so different from ours, 
because it’s based on mental rather 
than physical forces, that it’ll take 
centuries before they can acquire 
the techniques they’ll need to build 
the engines. And they’ll have 
trouble getting the materials. We’ll 
both have been long in our graves 
by the time they’ll reach Earth.” 
“And that makes it all right? 
It doesn’t matter to you what happens to your own home planet 
once you are dead?” 
* | 'HE young-looking face was 
flushed. “Why should it? Does 
Earth care what happens to me? 
During the plague, they cursed my 
name because I invented the starengines. That’s the only time Earth 
remembered me.” 
“During the plague, men were 
insane, Jan,” Hubbard said, knowing his own sweet reasonableness 
was ludicrous under the circumstances, “not responsible for what 
they said. They don’t curse your 
name any more.” 
“No, they’ve forgotten it.” Emrys looked at Hubbard with blazing, unhuman eyes. “Why should 
you expect me to put their welfare 
before my own?” 
“You must, if the race is to survive.” 
Hubbard expected Emrys to 
say, “Why should it survive?” but 
apparently there was a grain of 
emotion left here. “It will survive. 
The Morethans are not—” the word 
seemed to stick in Emrys’ throat 
—“monsters.” 
“Jan,” Hubbard said in a monotone, “eleven years ago, after you 
came to Earth for your inheritance, I became interested in Morethis — naturally enough, I suppose. 
I started scanning everything I 
could lay my hands on, and I 
learned a great deal about it — 
as much, I believe, as anyone off 
Morethis knows. Except, of course, 
you.” 
Emrys rose and began to pace 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
the floor. “Nobody really knows 
anything about Morethis. Most of 
what has been written is a— a pack 
of lies. One liar copied from another, and so they perpetuate the 
lie. Scandal has always sold better 
than truth!” 
Hubbard said, “There is a legend 
that the Morethans once had limited space travel, though no way 
of warping space to bring the distant stars closer, since they did 
not use engines. But there were 
many stars close to them, and they 
traveled from system to system, 
sucking each one dry. Then there 
were no living planets left in their 
sector of space, and their engineless ships could not bridge the gap 
to the next cluster, so they found 
themselves trapped on a dying 
planet that revolved around a dying star, and they, as a race, began 
to die themselves.” 
Emrys tried to laugh. “Looks 
like a fine case of poetic justice, 
but—” 
“Wait. I haven’t finished. The 
race did not die completely; it decayed. Certain among the people 
stayed alive through sucking the 
lives of the others; certain among 
them still kept some vestiges of the 
old traditions and knowledge; certain among them waited.” 
“Is that the end of your story?” 
Hubbard nodded. Emrys’ face 
was ashen. “Well, it’s an old wives’ 
tale,” he sputtered. “All the Morethans want is to be able to com
pete on an equal basis with Earth. 
They don’t want to be exploited, 
nor do they intend to . .” As his 
eyes caught Hubbard’s, his voice 
trailed off. “Anyhow, I’ll be dead,” 
he said. “I don’t give a damn what 
happens after I’m dead.” 
TTUBBARD didn’t believe it. He 
couldn’t. There is no man 
who has not some love for his own 
kind, be it ever so little, merely 
because they look like him. 
“You won’t tell anybody who I 
really am?” Emrys asked childishly. “You’re still my friend, aren’t 
you?” 
Hubbard sighed. Was he still 
this creature’s friend? He didn’t 
know. “Who would believe me?” 
he finally asked. “And even if they 
did, what’s the use? Nothing can 
be done. The only thing that’s ever 
protected us from the Morethans 
is distance. When they reach Earth, 
they will have already conquered 
us. Mental powers are always 
stronger than physical powers at 
close range.” 
“That’s right.” Emrys seemed to 
be relieved at the idea that the 
question was out of his hands. “Too 
late now to do anything about it.” 
Hubbard nodded. There was no 
way out that he could see. 
“But you do promise not to tell 
old Dyall that I’m my father instead of me?” Emrys asked anxiously. 
“Even if he believed me, he 
NEVER COME MIDNIGHT 
wouldn’t care. All he wants is a 
good match for that great-greatgranddaughter of his.” 
But was that all? As far as 
money went, Nicholas Dyall was 
reputed to be the richest man 
alive. And if he was truly fond of 
the girl, would he not at least have 
investigated the young man? 
“You’re hard!” Emrys complained, but without rancor. 
“I have a suspicious nature,” 
Hubbard said thoughtfully. “Perhaps it’s the legal mind. At any 
rate, I don’t care for Nicholas 
Dyall.” 
“Well, I don’t either, but I don’t 
really give a hang what kind of 
a great-great-grandfather-in-law I’m 
getting. All I care about is Megan. 
Do you think it’s wrong for me to 
ask her to marry me?” 
“Can’t you understand that, at 
this stage, the girl doesn’t matter?” 
“No,” Emrys said simply. “I 
cannot imagine her not mattering.” 
After he had gone, Hubbard 
still found himself thinking about 
Nicholas Dyall. In his whole lifetime, the old lawyer had personal
ly known only two men whom society had deemed worthy of its 
highest honor, the longevity treatment. And these were more than 
most men had met, for the longevity treatment was given to very 
few. Both of the two, Dyall and 
Shortmire, had some defect in their 
personalities that warped them— 
all but completely, in Shortmire’s 
case — away from the human virtues. 
Was that defect a part of the 
creative talent that had earned the 
individual his right to the treatment? Or did it arise as an effect 
of the treatment itself? Because, 
if that was the case, then Earth’s 
longevity treatment might be 
nothing more than a primitive 
form of the Morethan “process.” 
Since only straws remained to 
be grasped at, no one thing Hubbard did would be more futile than 
any other. And since he had nothing better to do, he might just as 
well investigate this new avenue. 
Jan Shortmire had hated Nicholas 
Dyall. Had Nicholas Dyall hated 
Jan Shortmire with equal venom? 
And, if so, had he done anything 
about it? 
VII 
A GONG sounded and a mechanical voice announced, 
“Mr. Peter Hubbard to see Mr. 
Dyall and Mr. Shortmire.” 
“Do you mean to say he has 
the gall to come see us, after the 
accusations he made against you, 
Emrys?” Dyall demanded incredulously. “I still can’t understand 
why you sent him an invitation to 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
the wedding, but that he should 
make a casual social call . .!” 
“We’ve come to terms.” Emrys 
smiled. “After all, at his age, he 
can’t be held accountable for everything he says.” 
“I’m at least fifty years older 
than he is!” the old engineer almost spat. “And you — do you 
mean that I am not responsible for 
what I say?” 
Knowing that he was the other 
man’s senior by some twenty years 
himself, Emrys was malevolently 
pleased. “Some people retain their 
faculties longer than others,” he observed. “And Hubbard was my 
father’s friend, as well as his lawyer, so he’s the closest thing to a 
relative that I have on Earth. Except you, of course; you were my 
father’s friend, too.” 
Dyall’s lips tightened. “How 
does Hubbard know you’re in this 
house right now? Do you think 
he’s having you followed?” 
It was possible, but Emrys 
didn’t care. For almost a year now, 
his life had been blameless, and, 
strangely, it suited him to live that 
way. “I’m here in this house most 
of the time. It wouldn’t be hard for 
him to figure out where he could 
find me.” 
The gong sounded again. Dyall 
looked undecided. 
“If I can forgive him, sir,” Emrys 
said gently, “surely you can.” 
“Show him in,” Dyall rasped 
to the machine. 
Megan rose to go, but Emrys 
kept hold of her small, cold hand. 
“I’d like you to meet Peter Hubbard, dear. He’s really a nice old 
fellow when you get to know him. 
Just a bit too much of a do-gooder, 
that’s all.” 
Dyall snorted. 
“I shall be glad to know any 
friend of yours, Emrys,” Megan 
said, sitting down again obediently. 
After a moment, Peter Hubbard 
came into the room. “Peter, this 
is my fiancee, Megan Dyall.” Smilingly, Emrys waited for the usual 
inane felicitations. He couldn’t expect a man of Hubbard’s age to 
be bowled over by this loveliness, 
but still surely no man, no matter 
how ancient, could be completely 
insensible to the girl’s charm. 
Hubbard stood still and stared 
at her. “Amazing . .” he murmured. “Amazing . .” Then he 
turned to Dyall. “You are to be 
congratulated, sir.” 
Emrys was annoyed. He knew 
Hubbard was too well-bred to 
make a remark like that unintentionally. However, he pretended to 
be amused and said, “You’re supposed to congratulate me, Peter.” 
But Hubbard continued his inexplicable rudeness by paying no 
attention to Emrys and, instead, 
staring at Nicholas Dyall. And finally Dyall said, with a strangled 
laugh, “I think perhaps in this instance Mr. Hubbard is right.” 
He threw himself into an easy 
NEVER COME MIDNIGHT 
chair with an attempt at nonchalance, but it was embarrassingly apparent that his stick was not 
enough to support him any more. 
His old body was trembling. And 
Emrys found that he himself was 
trembling, too. 
r 1 1 HERE was a painful silence. 
-®- Everyone seemed to be waiting. Even Megan glanced from one 
to the other with her usual expression of bright-eyed interest. 
“Unfortunately, Mr. Hubbard,” 
Dyall said at last, “you’ve reached 
your conclusions too late to do 
anything except perhaps hasten an 
end that is, you’ll concede, by now 
inevitable.” 
“Yes,” Hubbard agreed, “you’ve 
won your game.” He came a little 
further into the room, so that he 
was standing over the other old 
man. “I do believe that, of the 
two, you are the worse. He did 
what he did out of spite. You 
created that spite and kept it 
alive.” 
Dyall’s dark face flushed and 
his hands tightened on his cane. 
“But I had a right to do what I 
did. And I hurt only one person. 
Two, if you include me. Give me 
credit, at least, for the smallness 
of my scope.” 
Hubbard glanced at Megan. 
And Dyall broke into the shrill 
cackle of an old man. “But you 
know, you know, and still you 
think of her! How sentimental can 
you get? Don’t you realize—” 
“How much does she?” Hubbard 
said. “How much do you?” 
Emrys had become nearly frantic with frustration and bewilderment. He was the one who had 
secrets; nobody else. Nothing was 
to be kept hidden from him! “What 
are you two blabbering about?” 
he almost screamed. “It doesn’t 
make sense — any of it!” 
Hubbard turned toward him, his 
head and neck moving with the 
deliberate precision of a piece of 
clockwork. “It makes very good 
sense, Jan. I realized that I could 
find out nothing more from the 
stars, so I turned my researches 
back to Earth. I’ve been investigating Mr. Dyall.” 
“What did you find?” Emrys 
asked tensely. Why did Peter call 
him by his former name in front 
of his former enemy? Had the old 
fool forgotten his promise, or had 
he broken it on purpose? “What 
did you find out?” he repeated. 
Hubbard’s voice was filled with 
pity. “Just this: Nicholas Dyall 
never did marry Alissa Embel.” 
Emrys’ fear exploded into a 
scarlet rage. “Then Megan is—” He 
advanced on Dyall, his fists 
clenched. “If you took Alissa and 
then didn’t—” 
Hubbard caught his arm in a 
frail grip. “Don’t be so hasty, Emrys. Dyall did no wrong to Alissa 
Embel, whatever wrong he may 
have done to you.” 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
“Thank you,” Dyall murmured, 
“for granting me that. I gave her 
all I had, but it wasn’t what she 
wanted. She wanted—” his old eyes 
were filled with hate as he looked 
at Emrys— “you.” 
“Alissa Embel killed herself on 
the day before the wedding,” Hubbard told Emrys. “She, as we attorneys say, died without issue.” 
’C' MRYS was glad that, since he 
could not have had Alissa, 
Dyall had not, either. At the same 
time, he felt an overwhelmingly 
poignant sense of sorrow, that he 
should have had three full lifetimes, and the woman he had loved 
—insofar as Jan Shortmire had 
been capable of love — not even 
one. 
He raised dull eyes to the two 
old men. “Then who is Megan?” 
Hubbard hesitated. But what 
worse could there be to tell? And 
then the lawyer asked a ridiculous question, “Jan, do you know 
why Dyall’s machines didn’t meet 
popular favor until he changed 
them?” 
Emrys plunged back once again 
into the well of his memories. “Nobody wanted to buy machines that 
looked too much like people; it 
made them . uncomfortable. So 
Dyall stopped designing robots 
and made machines adapted to 
their separate functions and—” His 
voice became a cry of anguish. 
“Megan!” 
She turned her bland, smiling 
doll face toward him. “I’m sorry, 
Emrys,” the sweet voice said. 
Dyall’s eyes were squeezed shut 
and something glistened on the 
edge of them— something that Emrys would not admit were tears, 
because he himself could never 
cry. 
“When Alissa died,” Dyall said, 
“I knew I couldn’t love another 
woman. So I made a mechanical 
doll in her image. I made her the 
woman every man dreams of — 
lovely and sympathetic and undemanding. And I told myself she 
would be better than the original 
Alissa because she would be perfect, and Alissa wasn’t; she would 
stay young forever, while the real 
Alissa would have grown old . 
if she had lived. But it wasn’t the 
same for me.” 
Why was she the same for me, 
then? Emrys wondered bitterly. 
Was it because I didn’t know? Is 
that all love is — self-deception? 
“Perhaps,” Dyall went on, “Man 
cannot appreciate true perfection; 
perhaps he’s not good enough himself. Still, she was company of a 
sort and so I kept her by me. And 
then, when I read of Emrys Shortmire’s arrival on Earth, I sent him 
a note, but he didn’t answer; however, I contrived to get a look at 
him anyway. Then I knew for 
sure that he was Jan Shortmire 
himself; and then I knew what 
Megan’s destiny was . 
NEVER COME MIDNIGHT 
“How could you know he — I 
was Jan Shortmire?” Emrys demanded angrily. It was insupportable that old Dyall should have 
known all along; it spoiled the 
joke. “Where would you have — 
have gotten the concept?” 
The old man smiled, opening his 
eyes. “Because the Morethans 
made me the same offer they did 
you! Did you think you were the 
only one?” And, throwing back 
his head, he derisively began to 
laugh aloud. 
ORE than ever, Emrys hated 
the Morethans, not for what 
they would do to Earth’s pride, 
but for what they had done to 
his. Because now there was nothing that he had been offered that 
Dyall had not been offered also. 
And Dyall had not accepted the 
Morethans’ offer, thereby proving 
himself the better man. And Dyall 
had tricked him, thereby proving 
himself the cleverer man. And 
Dyall had hated him even more 
than he had hated Dyall, thereby 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
proving himself the more constant 
man. So there Emrys Shortmire, 
Jan Shortmire, was left . with 
nothing but a youthfulness of 
which, he had to admit to himself, 
he had grown rather tired. 
“I’m sorry, Emrys,” Megan said. 
“I‘m terribly sorry.” 
Dyall sprang from his chair. “I’m 
sick of that piping doll’s voice of 
yours! I’ve stood it for a century, 
and that’s long enough!” Raising 
his stick high in the air, he crashed 
it down upon the golden head, the 
pretty pink and white face. And, 
frozen in horror, Emrys could not 
move until it was too late. He had 
not conceived old Dyall capable of 
committing outright murder so 
wantonly. Probably he wasn’t; to 
him, Megan was and had been always a doll. 
And now she was a heap of 
broken wheels and gears on the 
thick rug. Still, out of the heap of 
twisted machinery, a tiny, tinny 
voice kept repeating “I’m sorry, 
Emrys. I’m terribly sorry.” 
NEVER COME MIDNIGHT 
Exhausted by his effort, Dyall 
sank back into his chair. And he 
laughed as Emrys, wanting desperately to weep, unable to, bent 
over the pieces, trying to fit them 
together again. 
“You’ll never do it, Jan,” he 
croaked maliciously. “Even a good 
engineer would never be able to 
repair it now. If I know how to 
create, I also know how to destroy!” 
And he went into another paroxysm 
of gleefully triumphant laughter. 
Emrys saw that Megan was indeed far beyond his powers, and 
probably old Dyall’s, to repair. 
Filled with fury — the one emotion, 
he saw now, that he had not given 
up — he turned to smash Nicholas 
Dyall as Dyall had smashed his 
doll. But the old, old man sat perfectly still in his chair. There was 
a broad grin on his face. 
He made a very cheerful corpse. 
VIII 
TC* MRYS Shortmire found that 
he did not want life any more. 
He went back to his mansion and 
he tried to hang himself. But the 
rope would not cut off his breath. 
He pointed a ray gun at his head, 
and although the heat became intolerable, it did not burn him. He 
swallowed poison and waited. 
Nothing happened. He threw himself off the roof and landed unhurt upon the pavement below. He 
went back inside and slashed his 
writst and saw the cuts close before his eyes. And as he stared at 
the unmarked skin, thick fog filled 
the room, and he heard Uvrei’s 
voice — and it was the greatest 
ignominy of all that the Morethan’s voice should dare to hold 
compassion. 
“Don’t you know, Emrys, that 
an immortal cannot die?” 
When Emrys forced himself to 
look at the ancient one, he saw 
that the beautiful eyes were filled 
with an unhallowed pity. “You 
are an immortal god, son of my 
spirit You can destroy anything 
except one of us — and you are 
one of us now.” 
“I’m not one of you. I’m not a 
god, nor are you. I’m not . .” 
Emrys looked down at his wrists, 
then back at Uvrei. “But I may 
be immortal,” he acknowledged. 
“It wasn’t just a figure of speech?” 
“You will never die, Emrys. 
You will exist forever, like us, a 
handful of changelessness in a 
changing universe.” 
“Then I won’t be dead when 
you come to Earth?” He had fancied himself out of it, but what 
exquisite punishment that not until 
he had tired of life had he found 
out he was cursed with unwanted 
life forever. He had not been a 
good man, but was any man evil 
enough to deserve this? 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
“When we come to Earth, you 
will be waiting for us. But you will 
look forward to our coming.” And 
Uvrei said once again, “You are 
one of us, Emrys.” 
“I’m not! I’m not!” 
“Of course you are. Like us, you 
do not breathe air—” 
“I do . .” And then Emrys remembered that the rope had not 
cut off his breath, and it might well 
have been because he had not been 
breathing. 
“Like us, you do not eat food.” 
“But I do!” And here Emrys was 
genuinely perplexed. 
“We left you your digestive system, because part of the pleasure 
you craved comes through that. 
But you could completely deny 
yourself the food that you thought 
sustained you and feel no ill effects 
— at least no physical ones. It’s 
the pills that feed you, Emrys.” 
“Well,” Emrys said slowly, 
“they’re food, then.” 
“Of a sort. But not the kind you 
mean. You cannot exist without us 
and our skills, Emrys. Each vial 
of pills consists of the mitogenetic 
force of ten tons of life.” 
‘What kind of life?” Emrys 
asked. 
“Does it really matter?” 
“You said I cannot exist without you,” Emrys pointed out 
shrewdly, “that I need the pills. 
So I could stop taking them, 
couldn’t I, and starve myself to 
death?” 
TVREI smiled. “Yes, you could 
^ do that. Only it would take, 
say, about fifteen hundred terrestrial years — perhaps, since we 
have given you a strong, young 
body, as much as two thousand. 
Do you think you are strong 
enough to starve yourself to death 
over a period of two thousand 
years?” 
Emrys knew he was not. In that 
first anguish, all he could think of 
to do was to humble himself before the Morethan. “I have served 
your purpose. Why not be merciful to me now?” he pleaded. “At 
least let me die.” 
“I could not, even if I would. So 
little of our old powers remain. We 
have kept the secret of perpetual 
life, but we have lost the secret of 
perpetual death.” 
“But that’s the greater secret!” 
“Of course it is!” For the first 
time, Emrys saw the Morethan 
high priest lose control. “Do you 
think I don’t know what it is to 
crave death?” 
After a silence, the voice, once 
more chillingly warm, said, “Come, 
my son, being one of us, you have 
nothing to fear from our arrival. 
You no longer have anything in 
common with these animals. You 
cannot even — what is your word? 
— love them. When you tried, you 
fixed upon a machine with the 
face of a memory.” 
“Would a human being have 
known she was a machine?” 
NEVER COME MIDNIGHT 
“A human being would have 
known.” 
“Then ... I am a machine, too? 
A machine created by mental, 
rather than physical processes, but 
a machine nonetheless?” 
“In a sense,” the alien said 
thoughtfully, “you could be called 
that — though to compare you, as 
an artistic creation, with that 
trumpery piece of gimcrack . ." 
“Don’t call her that!” Emrys 
shouted. “She’s dead!” 
Uvrei began to laugh quietly. 
After a little, Emrys began to 
laugh, too. “I’m being foolish,” he 
said. 
“Extremely foolish,” Uvrei 
agreed. “Resign yourself, my son, 
and accept your fate. That is what 
we immortals have all had to do, 
one by one.” 
Of course he could do that, Emrys thought After all, he wouldn’t 
be as badly off as the other Earth 
people when the Morethans came; 
whatever else happened, he, at 
least could not be turned into a 
component part of a little golden 
pill. Immortality was a dull future, 
but perhaps, after the Morethans 
arrived, it would become more interesting. 
“Good-by, son of my spirit” 
Uvrei said. “We shall meet again 
corporeally in a few centuries.” 
The fog thickened about him and 
disappeared, leaving its characteristic odor behind. 
And still Emrys could not resign himself. Dyall could have had 
this, too, if he had wanted it. This 
was what he was offered and what 
he was strong enough to refuse. 
If I accept my fate, then I will 
always know that I have come off 
second best to him. And this prospect, more than immortality, more 
than the knowledge of what would 
happen to Earth and its people, 
was the one that Emrys found intolerable. 
IX 
\%ITHY doesn’t he leave me alone? 
” Peter Hubbard thought as > 
wearily, he told the Dyall machine 
to let Emrys Shortmire up. 7 am 
a very old man and I will die 
soon. Can’t he leave me alone in 
the little time left? 
But he could not forget the obligations of courtesy. He was polite 
to Emrys Shortmire when the 
other man came in. Even if he 
hadn’t been, he saw, Emrys 
wouldn’t have noticed; he was too 
full of his own thoughts. 
“Peter,” he cried, almost before 
he was fully in the room, “did you 
know that, in dying, Nicholas 
Dyall won a final victory over 
me?” 
The old man muffled a yawn. 
“You mean you can’t die? Well, 
I was afraid of that. I am sorry 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
for you, Jan, but you brought this 
upon yourself.” 
“I know,” Emrys said, looking a 
little disappointed that the knowledge did not startle the lawyer. 
“I will be alive when they come,” 
he went on, more subdued. “I will 
be waiting, or so they think.” 
“I imagine that’s what they 
counted on,” Hubbard said indifferently. “You not only giving 
them the secret of the engines but 
acting as a — an outpost. They 
didn’t sell their wares cheap, did 
they?” 
Emrys’ eyes flashed copper fire. 
“But I will not be waiting to help 
them. I will be waiting to fight 
them.” 
“Brave words.” 
“You think I can’t fight them?” 
“Of course you can’t. They have 
powers far beyond yours. And why 
should you want to fight them? 
I know you hadn’t planned to be 
alive when they came, but it won’t 
be bad for you. You’re one of 
them now.” 
Emrys sat down on the couch. 
“Physically I am. That’s why I can 
fight them. Look, Peter, I have 
centuries ahead of me. By giving 
me immortality, they have also 
given me time.” 
“Splendid. Time to do what?” 
“I don’t know,” Emrys confessed. “But time is such a valuable commodity in itself. With it, 
I could learn how to turn their own 
powers against them.” 
“Easier said than done,” Hubbard observed. 
“Maybe I could — oh — invent 
a machine that will amplify my 
mind powers until it can overcome 
all of theirs . .” 
Hubbard said nothing. 
“Well, then, the engines I gave 
them can’t take them out of this 
galaxy any more than those same 
engines can take humanity out of 
it. But, given time, I can invent 
new engines, Peter — engines that 
can jump the gap from galaxy to 
galaxy. If I cannot give Man the 
weapons with which to fight, at 
least I can give him the means by 
which to flee! And, since I was 
the man who invented the one, I 
can be the man to invent the 
other!” 
r | 1 HAT was true, Hubbard 
thought, hope rising in him, 
despite all his efforts to hold it 
back. That was possible. But would 
Emrys do this? Right now, in the 
first flush of repentance, he might 
try to. But if the work grew tedious, might he not say to himself: 
Why bother? I’m bound to live 
forever, anyway. Why should I 
care what happens to the others 
of my kind? 
“Who knows, Peter,” Emrys 
cried, “I may be able to invent engines that can move the whole 
world — all our worlds — to another galaxy, where the Morethans 
will never be able to follow!” 
NEVER COME MIDNIGHT 
“What’s in it for you, Emrys?” 
Hubbard asked bluntly. 
“I want to save humanity . 
and, of course,” Emrys added, his 
eyes lighting exultantly, “by doing 
that, I will do more than Dyall 
ever did. My name will go down in 
history, and his—” 
“Do you hate him so much, 
Emrys, even though he’s dead?” 
Hubbard asked wonderingly, unable to conceive of such a thing. 
“Especially because he’s dead,” 
Emrys snarled. “Because now I’ll 
never have the pleasure of mocking 
him.” He looked anxiously at Hubbard. “Don’t you think I’m doing 
the right thing, Peter?” 
The right thing, but for the 
wrong reason. Only for the wrong 
reason, though, was Emrys sure to 
finish what he had set out to do. 
It was the one motive that would 
keep him working long after he 
grew bored with the work. It was 
humanity’s only chance, and so it 
did not matter why Emrys was 
doing this. 
“It’s a splendid thing you’re 
planning to do, Emrys,” Hubbard 
said warmly. “A splendid thing!” 
What if Emrys did go down in 
history? It would be thanks to 
him that history had continued at 
all. 
ES, he was a vicious man. And 
Dyall had been equally vicious. 
And Peter Hubbard was a good 
man — and it was he who had not 
been granted that fifty extra years 
of life. What was goodness? Was 
it inherently opposed to greatness? 
Did things get done only out of 
malevolent motives — anger and 
ruthlessness and spite? If, as it 
seemed, goodness was a passive 
force, and evil an active one, perhaps the world needed both. And 
if, as it seemed, evil could beget 
good, then evil could not be all 
bad. 
So, Peter Hubbard thought, 
there is hope for the Morethans as 
well as for humanity. 
— CHRISTOPHER GRIMM 
HISTORY OF MAN 
by L. Ron Hubbard 
A descriptive list of the principal incidents in Man's 
past for the last 70 trillion years. Now in hard cover. 
$3.00 
Distribution Center, Box 242 Sa 
Silver Spring, Maryland 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
or all flie 
seas with ousters 
By AVRAM DAVIDSON 
Was another explanation the 
right one — that he worried 
too much about the good of 
humanity for his own good? 
Illustrated by FRIEDMAN 
W HEN the man came in 
to the F & O Bike Shop, 
Oscar greeted him with 
a hearty “Hi, there!” Then, as he 
looked closer at the middle-aged 
visitor with the eyeglasses and business suit, his forehead creased and 
he began to snap his thick fingers. 
“Oh, say, I know you,” he muttered. “Mr. — um — name’s on the 
tip of my tongue, doggone it . .” 
Oscar was a barrel-chested fellow. 
He had orange hair. 
“Why, sure you do,” the man 
said. There was a Lion’s emblem 
in his lapel. “Remember, you sold 
me a girl’s bicycle with gears, for 
my daughter? We got to talking 
about that red French racing bike 
your partner was working on—” 
Oscar slapped his big hand down 
on the cash register. He raised his 
OR ALLTHE SEAS WITH OYSTERS 
head and rolled his eyes up. “Mr. 
Whatney!” Mr. Whatney beamed. 
“Oh, sure. Gee, how could I forget? 
And we went across the street afterward and had a couple a beers. 
Well, how you been, Mr. Whatney? I guess the bike— it was an 
English model, wasn’t it? Yeah. 
It must of given satisfaction or you 
would of been back, huh?” 
Mr. Whatney said the bicycle 
was fine, just fine. Then he said, 
“I understand there’s been a 
change, though. You’re all by yourself now. Your partner . .” 
Oscar looked down, pushed his 
lower lip out, nodded. “You heard, 
huh? Ee-up. I’m all by myself now. 
Over three months now.” 
r T , HE partnership had come to 
an end three months ago, but 
it had been faltering long before 
then. Ferd liked books, long-playing records and high-level conversation. Oscar liked beer, bowling 
and women. Any women. Any 
time. 
The shop was located near the 
park; it did a big trade in renting 
bicycles to picnickers. If a woman was barely old enough to be 
called a woman, and not quite old 
enough to be called an old woman, 
or if she was anywhere in between, 
and if she was alone, Oscar Would 
ask, “How does that machine feel 
to you? All right?” 
“Why ... I guess so.” 
Taking another bicycle, Oscar 
would say, “Well, I’ll just ride 
along a little bit with you, to make 
sure. Be right back, Ferd.” Ferd 
always nodded gloomily. He knew 
that Oscar would not be right 
back. Later, Oscar would say, 
“Hope you made out in the shop 
as good as I did in the park.” 
“Leaving me all alone here all 
that time,” Ferd grumbled. 
And Oscar usually flared up. 
“Okay, then, next time you go and 
leave me stay here. See if I begrudge you a little fun.” But he 
knew, of course, that Ferd — tall, 
thin, pop-eyed Ferd — would never 
go. “Do you good,” Oscar said, 
slapping his sternum. “Put hair on 
your chest.” 
Ferd muttered that he had all 
the hair on his chest that he 
needed. He would glance down 
covertly at his lower arms; they 
were thick with long black hair, 
though his upper arms were slick 
and white. It was already like that 
when he was in high school, and 
some of the others would laugh at 
him — call him “Ferdie the Birdie.” 
They knew it bothered him, but 
they did it anyway. How was it 
possible — he wondered then; he 
still did now — for people deliberately to hurt someone else who 
hadn’t hurt them? How was it 
possible? 
He worried over other things. 
All the time. 
“The Communists—” He shook 
his head over the newspaper. Os
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
car offered an advice about the 
Communists in two short words. 
Or it might be capital punishment. 
“Oh, what a terrible thing if an 
innocent man was to be executed,” 
Ferd moaned. Oscar said that was 
the guy’s tough luck. 
“Hand me that tire-iron,” Oscar 
said. 
And Ferd worried even about 
other people’s minor concerns. Like 
the time the couple came in with 
the tandem and the baby-basket 
on it. Free air was all they tookj 
then the woman decided to change 
the diaper and one of the safety 
pins broke. 
“Why are there never any safety pins?” the woman fretted, rummaging here and rummaging there. 
“There are never any safety pins.” 
Ferd made sympathetic noises, 
went to see if he had any; but, 
though he was sure there’d been 
some in the office, he couldn’t find 
them. So they drove off with one 
side of the diaper tied in a clumsy 
knot. 
A T lunch, Ferd said it was too 
bad about the safety pins. 
Oscar dug his teeth into a sandwich, tugged, tore, chewed, swallowed. Ferd liked to experiment 
with sandwich spreads — the one 
he liked most was cream-cheese, 
olives, anchovy and avocado, 
mashed up with a little mayonnaise — but Oscar always had the 
same pink luncheon-meat. 
“It must be difficult with a 
baby.” Ferd nibbled. “Not just 
traveling, but raising it.” 
Oscar said, “Jeez, there’s drugstores in every block, and if you 
can’t read, you can at least reckernize them.” 
“Drugstores? Oh, to buy safety 
pins, you mean.” 
“Yeah. Safety pins.” 
“But . you know . it’s 
true . there’s never any safety 
pins when you look.” 
Oscar uncapped his beer, rinsed 
the first mouthful around. “Aha! 
Always plenny of clothes hangers, 
though. Throw ’em out every 
month, next month same closet’s 
full of ’m again. Now whatcha 
wanna do in your spare time, you 
invent a device which it’ll make 
safety pins outa clothes hangers.” 
Ferd nodded abstractedly. “But 
in my spare time I’m working on 
the French racer . .” It was a 
beautiful machine, light, low-slung, 
swift, red and shining. You felt like 
a bird when you rode it. But, good 
as it was, Ferd knew he could 
make it better. He showed it to 
everybody who came in the place 
until his interest slackened. 
Nature was his latest hobby, 
or, rather, reading about Nature. 
Some kids had wandered by from 
the park one day with tin cans in 
which they had put salamanders 
and toads, and they proudly 
showed them to Ferd. After that, 
the work on the red racer slowed 
OR ALL THE SEAS WITH OYSTERS 
down and he spent his spare time 
on natural history books. 
“Mimicry!” he cried to Oscar. 
“A wonderful thing!” 
Oscar looked up interestedly 
from the bowling scores in the 
paper. “I seen Edie Adams on 
TV the other night, doing her imitation of Marilyn Monroe. Boy, 
oh, boy.” 
Ferd was irritated, shook his 
head. “Not that kind of mimicry. 
I mean how insects and arachnids 
will mimic the shapes of leaves and 
twigs and so on, to escape being 
eaten by birds or other insects and 
arachnids.” 
A scowl of disbelief passed over 
Oscar’s heavy face. “You mean 
they change their shapes? What 
you giving me?” 
“Oh, it’s true. Sometimes the 
mimicry is for aggressive purposes, 
though— like a South African turtle 
that looks like a rock and so the 
fish swim up to it and then it 
catches them. Or that spider in 
Sumatra. When it lies on its back, 
it looks like a bird dropping. 
Catches butterflies that way.” 
O SCAR laughed, a disgusted 
and incredulous noise. It died 
away as he turned back to the bowling scores. One hand groped at his 
pocket, came away, scratched absently at the orange thicket under 
the shirt, then went patting his 
hip pocket. 
“Where’s that pencil?” he mut
tered, got up, stomped into the office, pulled open drawers. His loud 
cry of “Hey!” brought Ferd into 
the tiny room. 
“What’s the matter?” Ferd 
asked. 
Oscar pointed to a drawer. “Remember that time you claimed 
there were no safety pins here? 
Look — whole gahdamn drawer is 
full of ’em.” 
Ferd stared, scratched his head, 
said feebly that he was certain he’d 
looked there before . 
A contralto voice from outside 
asked, “Anybody here?” 
Oscar at once forgot the desk 
and its contents, called, “Be right 
with you,” and was gone. Ferd followed him slowly. 
There was a young woman in 
the shop, a rather massively built 
young woman, with muscular 
calves and a deep chest. She was 
pointing out the seat of her bicycle to Oscar, who was saying 
“Uh-huh” and looking more at her 
than at anything else. “It’s just a 
little too far forward (“Uh-huh”), 
as you can see. A wrench is all I 
need (“Uh-huh”). It was silly of 
me to forget my tools.” 
Oscar repeated, “Uh-huh” automatically, then snapped to. “Fix 
it in a jiffy,” he said, and — despite 
her insistence that she could do it 
herself — he did fix it. Though not 
quite in a jiffy. He refused money. 
He prolonged the conversation as 
long as he could. 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
“Well, thank you,” the young 
woman said. “And now I’ve got to 
go.” 
“That machine feel all right to 
you now?” 
“Perfectly. Thanks—” 
“Tell you what, I’ll just ride 
along with you a little bit, just—” 
Pear-shaped notes of laughter 
lifted the young woman’s bosom. 
“Oh, you couldn’t keep up with 
me! My machine is a racer/” 
The moment he saw Oscar’s eye 
flit to the corner, Ferd knew what 
he had in mind. He stepped forward. His cry of “No” was 
drowned out by his partner’s loud, 
“Well, I guess this racer here can 
keep up with yours!” 
The young woman giggled richly, said, well, they would see about 
that, and was off. Oscar, ignoring 
Ferd’s outstretched hand, jumped 
on the French bike and was gone. 
Ferd stood in the doorway, watching the two figures, hunched over 
their handlebars, vanish down the 
road into the park. He went slowly back inside. 
TT was almost evening before 
Oscar returned, sweaty but 
smiling. Smiling broadly. “Hey, 
what a babe!” he cried. He wagged 
his head, he whistled, he made gestures, noises like escaping steam, 
“Boy, oh, boy, what an afternoon!” 
“Give me the bike,” Ferd demanded. 
Oscar said, yeah, sure; turned it 
over to him and went to wash. 
Ferd looked at the machine. The 
red enamel was covered with dust; 
there was mud spattered and dirt 
and bits of dried grass. It seemed 
soiled — degraded. He had felt 
like a swift bird when he rode it . 
Oscar came out wet and beaming. He gave a cry of dismay, ran 
over. 
“Stand away,” said Ferd, gesturing with the knife. He slashed the 
tires, the seat and seat cover, again 
and again. 
“You crazy?” Oscar yelled. “You 
outa your mind? Ferd, no, don’t, 
Ferd-” 
Ferd cut the spokes, bent them, 
twisted them. He took the heaviest 
hammer and pounded the frame 
into shapelessness, and then he 
kept on pounding till his breath 
was gasping. 
“You’re not only crazy,” Oscar 
said bitterly, “you’re rotten jealous. 
You can go to hell.” He stomped 
away. 
Ferd, feeling sick and stiff, 
locked up, went slowly home. He 
had no taste for reading, turned 
out the light and fell into bed. 
where he lay awake for hours, 
listening to the rustling noises of 
the night and thinking hot, twisted 
thoughts. 
They didn’t speak to each other 
for days after that, except for the 
necessities of the work. The wreckage of the French racer lay behind 
the shop. For about two weeks, 
OR ALL THE SEAS WITH OYSTERS 
neither wanted to go out back 
where he’d have to see it. 
One morning Ferd arrived to 
be greeted by his partner, who began to shake his head in astonishment even before he started speaking. “How did you do it, how did 
you do it, Ferd? Jeez, what a beautiful job — I gotta hand it to you 
— no more hard feelings, huh, 
Ferd?” 
Ferd took his hand. “Sure, sure. 
But what are you talking about?” 
Oscar led him out back. There 
was the red racer, all in one piece, 
not a mark or scratch on it, its 
enamel bright as ever. Ferd gaped. 
He squatted down and examined it. 
It was his machine. Every change, 
every improvement he had made, 
was there. 
He straightened up slowly. “Regeneration . 
“Huh? What say?” Oscar asked. 
Then, “Hey, kiddo, you’re all 
white. Whad you do, stay up all 
night and didn’t get no sleep? 
Come on in and siddown. But I 
still don’t see how you done it.” 
Inside, Ferd sat down. He wet 
his lips. He said, “Oscar— listen— ” 
“Yeah?” 
“Oscar. You know what regeneration is? No? Listen. Some kinds 
of lizards, you grab them by the 
tail, the tail breaks off and they 
grow a new one. If a lobster loses 
a claw, it regenerates another one. 
Some kinds of worms— and hydras 
and starfish — you cut them into 
pieces, each piece will grow back 
the missing parts. Salamanders can 
regenerate lost hands, and frogs 
can grow legs back.” 
“No kidding, Ferd. But, uh, I 
mean: Nature. Very interesting. 
But to get back to the bike now— 
how’d you manage to fix it so 
good?” 
“I never touched it. It regenerated. Like a newt. Or a lobster.” 
^"WSCAR considered this. He lowered his head, looked up at 
Ferd from under his eyebrows. 
“Well, now, Ferd . Look . 
How come all broke bikes don’t 
do that?” 
“This isn’t an ordinary bike. I 
mean it isn’t a real bike.” Catching 
Oscar’s look, he shouted, “Well, 
if s true!” 
The shout changed Oscar’s attitude from bafflement to incredulity. He got up. “So for the sake of 
argument, lefs say all that stuff 
about the bugs and the eels or 
whatever the hell you were talking 
about is true. But they’re alive. A 
bike ain’t.” He looked down triumphantly. 
Ferd shook his leg from side to 
side, looked at it. “A crystal isn’t, 
either, but a broken crystal can 
regenerate itself if the conditions 
are right. Oscar, go see if the safety pins are still in the desk. Please, 
Oscar?” 
He listened as Oscar, muttering, 
pulled the desk drawers out, rum
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
OR ALL THE SEAS WITH OYSTERS 
maged in them, slammed them 
shut, tramped back. 
“Naa,” he said. “All gone. Like 
that lady said that time, and you 
said, there never are any safety 
pins when you want ’em. They 
disap — Ferd? Whafre— ” 
Ferd jerked open the closet door, 
jumped back as a shoal of clothes 
hangers clattered out. 
“And like you say,” Ferd said 
with a twist of his mouth, “on the 
other hand, there are always plenty 
of clothes hangers. There weren’t 
any here before.” 
Oscar shrugged. “I don’t see 
what you’re getting at. But anybody could of got in here and 
took the pins and left the hangers. 
/ could of — but I didn’t. Or you 
could of. Maybe — ” He narrowed 
his eyes. “Maybe you walked in 
your sleep and done it. You better see a doctor. Jeez, you look 
rotten.” 
Ferd went back and sat down, 
put his head in his hands. “I feel 
rotten. I’m scared, Oscar. Scared 
of what?” He breathed noisily. 
“I’ll tell you. Like I explained before, about how things that live in 
the wild places, they mimic other 
things there. Twigs, leaves . 
toads that look like rocks. Well, 
suppose there are . things . 
that live in people places. Cities. 
Houses. These things could imitate 
—well, other kinds of things you 
find in people places—” 
“People places, for crise sake!” 
“Maybe they’re a different kind 
of life-form. Maybe they get their 
nourishment out of the elements in 
the air. You know what safety pins 
are — these other kinds of them? 
Oscar, the safety pins are the pupaforms and then they, like, hatch. 
Into the larval-forms. Which look 
just like coat hangers. They feel 
like them, even, but they’re not. 
Oscar, they’re not, not really, not 
really, not . .” 
He began to cry into his hands. 
Oscar looked at him. He shook 
his head. 
After a minute, Ferd controlled 
himself somewhat. He snuffled. 
“All these bicycles the cops find, 
and they hold them waiting for 
owners to show up, and then we 
buy them at the sale because no 
owners show up because there 
aren’t any, and the same with the 
ones the kids are always trying to 
sell us, and they say they just 
found them, and they really did 
because they were never made in 
a factory. They grew. They grow. 
You smash them and throw them 
away, they regenerate.” 
Oscar turned to someone who 
wasn’t there and waggled his head. 
“Hoo, boy,” he said. Then, to Ferd: 
“You mean one day there’s a safety pin and the next day instead 
there’s a coat hanger?” 
"P'ERD said, “One day there’s a 
*- cocoon; the next day there’s a 
moth. One day there’s an egg; the 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
next day there’s a chicken. But 
with . .these it doesn’t happen in 
the open daytime where you can 
see it. But at night, Oscar — at 
night you can hear it happening. 
All the little noises in the nighttime, Oscar—” 
Oscar said, “Then how come we 
ain’t up to our belly-button in 
bikes? If I had a bike for every 
coat hanger—” 
But Ferd had considered that, 
too. If every codfish egg, he ex-, 
plained, or every oyster spawn 
grew to maturity, a man could 
walk across the ocean on the backs 
of all the codfish or oysters there’d 
be. So many died, so many were 
eaten by predatory creatures, that 
Nature had to produce a maximum 
in order to allow a minimum to 
arrive at maturity. And Oscar’s 
question was: then who, uh, eats 
the, uh, coat hangers? 
Ferd’s eyes focused through wall, 
buildings, park, more buildings, to 
the horizon. “You got to get the 
picture. I’m not talking about real 
pins or hangers. I got a name for 
the others— ‘false friends,’ I call 
them. In high school French, we 
had to watch out for French words 
that looked like English words, 
but really were different. ‘Faux 
amis,’ they call them. False friends. 
Pseudo-pins. Pseudo-hangers . 
Who eats them? I don’t know for 
sure. Pseudo-vacuum cleaners, 
maybe?” 
His partner, with a loud groan, 
slapped his hands against his thighs. 
He said, “Ferd, Ferd, for crise 
sake. You know what’s the trouble 
with you? You talk about oysters, 
but you forgot what they’re good 
for. You forgot there’s two kinds of 
people in the world. Close up them 
books, them bug books and French 
books. Get out, mingle, meet people. Soak up some brew. You know 
what? The next time Norma — 
that’s this broad’s name with the 
racing bike — the next time she 
comes here, you take the red racer 
and you go out in the woods with 
her. I won’t mind. And I don’t 
think she will, either. Not too 
much.” 
But Ferd said no. “I never want 
to touch the red racer again. I’m 
afraid of it.” 
At this, Oscar pulled him to his 
feet, dragged him protestingly out 
to the back and forced him to get 
on the French machine. “Only 
way to conquer your fear of it!” 
Ferd started off, white-faced, 
wobbling. And in a moment was 
on the ground, rolling and thrashing, screaming. 
Oscar pulled him away from the 
machine. 
“It threw me!” Ferd yelled. “It 
tried to kill me! Look — blood!” 
His partner said it was a bump 
that threw him — it was his own 
fear. The blood? A broken spoke. 
Grazed his cheek. And he insisted 
Ferd get on the bicycle again, to 
conquer his fear. 
OR ALL THE SEAS WITH OYSTERS 
But Ferd had grown hysterical. 
He shouted that no man was safe— 
that mankind had to be warned. 
It took Oscar a long time to pacify 
him and to get him to go home and 
into bed. 
TTE didn’t tell all this to Mr. 
-I A Whatney, of course. He 
merely said that his partner had 
gotten fed up with the bicycle business. 
“It don’t pay to worry and try 
to change the world,” he pointed 
out. “I always say take things 
the way they are. If you can’t lick 
’em, join ’em.” 
Mr. Whatney said that was his 
philosophy, exactly. He asked how 
things were, since. 
“Well . not too bad. I’m engaged, you know. Name’s Norma. 
Crazy about bicycles. Everything 
considered, things aren’t bad at all. 
More work, yes, but I can do 
things all my own way, so . 
Mr. Whatney nodded. He 
glanced around the shop. “I see 
they’re still making drop-frame 
bikes,” he said, “though, with so 
many women wearing slacks, I 
wonder they bother.” 
Oscar said, “Well, I dunno. I 
kinda like it that way. Ever stop 
to think that bicycles are like people? I mean, of all the machines 
in the world, only bikes come male 
and female.” 
Mr. Whatney gave a little giggle, 
said that was right, he had never 
thought of it like that before. Then 
Oscar asked if Mr. Whatney had 
anything in particular in mind— 
not that he wasn’t always welcome. 
“Well, I wanted to look over 
what you’ve got. My boy’s birthday is coming up—” 
Oscar nodded sagely. “Now 
here’s a job,” he said, “which you 
can’t get it in any other place but 
here. Specialty of the house. Combines the best features of the 
French racer and the American 
standard, but it’s made right here, 
and it comes in three models — 
Junior, Intermediate and Regular. 
Beautiful, ain’t it?” 
Mr. Whatney observed that, say, 
that might be just the ticket. “By 
the way,” he asked, “what’s become 
of the French racer, the red one, 
used to be here?” 
Oscar’s face twitched. Then it 
grew bland and innocent and he 
leaned over and nudged his customer. “Oh, that one. Old Frenchy? 
Why, I put him out to stud!” 
And they laughed and they 
laughed, and after they told a few 
more stories they concluded the 
sale, and they had a few beers and 
they laughed some more. And then 
they said what a shame it was 
about poor Ferd, poor old Ferd, 
who had been found in his own 
closet with an unraveled coat hanger coiled tightly around his neck. 
— AVRAM DAVIDSON 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
for 
your 
information 
Remnants of the 
Sarmatian Sea 
BY WILLY LEY 
S INCE this piece is going to 
deal with a distant place as 
well as, intermittently, a distant past, it might as well begin in 
the past and with the description 
of a voyage. I cannot lay my hands 
on an authentic document for this 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
voyage— although it has been made 
repeatedly — and I therefore imagine a Roman traveler of about 
200 B.C. sitting on a terrace of his 
villa on a hilltop some distance 
from Rome. Shivering a little in an 
entirely unseasonal wind, he dictates to his scribe: 
“Cnossus on Creta was directly 
to the south of us when we shifted 
to a northern course to wend our 
way through the channels between 
the Cyclades into Aegaeum Mare. 
Turning east again when Lemnos 
came into sight, we entered the 
Hellespontus and, after traversing 
the Propontis, turned north into 
the narrow Bosporus Thracicus, 
where the opposing current is 
strong. Once we had gained the 
open waters of the Pontus Euxinus, 
we had a smooth if long voyage 
and finally found the entrance to 
Maeotis palus, which entrance 
some call the Bosporus cimmericus. Maeotis palus is not a swamp 
(palus) but again open water, if 
shallow. The climate was warm 
and pleasing as one might have it 
in Sicilia. 
“Then we found the mouth of 
the river Tanais and sailed upstream. But after a two-day journey on the Tanais, we had to leave 
our vessel and had to proceed 
overland to reach the mighty 
Oarus, which makes a big bend 
there. In a small village at the 
bend, we found a barbarian who 
could speak some Greek and who 
told us that the sea to the south 
of us could best be reached by 
building a raft such as Odysseus 
used when leaving Kalypso’s island, and by simply drifting down 
the Oarus until we reached its 
delta and through it, with luck, 
the Mare Caspium . .” 
r | 1 HE description is not at all 
strange. I have merely used 
the geographical names of the 
period. The Propontis is our Sea 
of Marmara, the Pontus Euxinus 
is the Black Sea, the Bosporus 
cimmericus is the Strait of 
Kertch, and the Maeotis palus the 
Sea of Azov. The Tanais is obviously the Don and the Oarus the 
Volga. The Mare Caspium is still 
the Caspian Sea in any language 
and it is, now as then, the largest 
land-locked body of water. It is 
also something that worries the 
Russians. The reason why it worries the Russians is far in the 
past, in a past far beyond Romans 
and Greeks and Scythians. It is 
in the geologic past. 
A fair number of millions of 
years ago, before the Alps formed, 
Europe was bounded in the south 
— and separated from Africa — 
by a large sea. 
The description sounds as if our 
current Mediterranean Sea were 
meant, but this was a far bigger 
sea. It covered the area now covered by the Mediterranean Sea, 
but in the north it covered land 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
even beyond the present-day Alps. 
In the east, it made a straight connection with the Indian Ocean. 
Geologists call it the Tethys Sea; 
it had been there much longer than 
even the oldest mammals. It had 
been there in the days of the 
Saurians; in fact, it had been a fixture on the face of the Earth for 
literally hundreds of millions of 
years. 
It probably was fairly shallow 
in great stretches of the area it 
covered. But it was there; we can 
read its former existence from the 
fossils of marine life it left behind. It formed an uninterrupted 
waterway from the Atlantic to the 
Indian Ocean until about the middle of the Tertiary Period, say 
twenty million years ago. 
The growing Alps at first formed 
just an island in the Tethys Sea, 
but in the east the connection to 
the Indian Ocean was broken. For 
a while, several million years, Africa and Asia were firmly connected by a land bridge 1200 miles 
wide, the land bridge we now call 
Arabia. Only at a later date did 
an enormous valley open in that 
land connection, the Great Rift 
Valley which in its northern portion forms the Valley of the Jordan, which farther south is flooded 
to form the Red Sea and which, 
still farther south, is the reason for 
Africa’s “long lakes” — Albert, Edward, Kivu, Tanganyika and 
Nyasa. 
In the north, the Tethys broke 
up into several big “seas.” One 
we now call the western Mediterranean. The eastern Mediterranean 
was a smaller and separate sea, 
and still farther to the east there 
was one which no longer exists as 
a unit. It was the Sarmatian Sea 
(Fig. 1) which unified the present Black Sea with the present 
Caspian Sea and the present Lake 
Aral over 200 miles to the east 
of the Caspian Sea. 
But the Sarmatian Sea extended 
much farther to the north than any 
of its three remnants of today. It 
also extended much farther to the 
west. There is evidence that the 
Hungarian plain was once covered 
by the waters of the Sarmatian 
Sea. But since much of it must 
have been shallow, there obviously were large-scale fluctuations in 
its extent. 
It must have been rather similar to the performance of present 
Lake Tchad in Africa — also the 
remnant of a former much larger 
“sea” — for which every survey 
gives a different area. All the surveys are, as far as one can tell, 
correct. It just depends on how 
wet the preceding seasons were. 
T T is not yet known — although 
Soviet geologists are probably 
busy trying to establish this fact 
— just how the Sarmatian Sea 
fared during the Ice Age. Actually, 
we don’t even know yet how far 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
south the glaciers of the Ice Age— 
or, better, the Ice Ages — reached 
in Russia. At any event, the area 
of the sea must have increased 
again at the end of the last glaciation, when a lot of the water that 
had been stored as ice and snow 
was put back into circulation. 
Much of the question on the 
area of the Sarmatian Sea depends 
on the time when its western component, the present Black Sea, finally succeeded in breaking 
through to the Mediterranean. 
It has to be mentioned in passing that the Mediterranean Sea is 
forever losing water. Being a large 
sea in a warm climate, the water 
losses of the Mediterranean Sea to 
evaporation are more than merely 
astonishing; they are estimated to 
amount to 5,420,000 million cubic 
yards per year. 
Rain over the Mediterranean replaces about 24 per cent of this 
loss. The rivers that empty themselves into the Mediterranean 
make up only about SV 2 per cent 
of this. The Atlantic Ocean contributes the main share of compensation for the evaporation losses, 
nearly 67 per cent. The rest, 
roughly 3Vi per cent, is contributed by the Black Sea. 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
The Sarmatian Sea, as a whole, 
probably disappeared when drainage into the thirsty Mediterranean 
was accomplished, leaving water 
in only the three deepest depressions of its area. 
Of these three depressions, the 
westernmost, the Black Sea, is 
doing relatively well, as can be 
seen from the fact that it still supplies water to the Mediterranean. 
The easternmost of the three, 
Lake Aral, is also in good shape. 
With an area of 26,200 square 
miles, it is slightly larger than Lake 
Victoria in Africa, which it resembles in shape. Its level is now 
158 feet above sea level and its 
maximum measured depth is 222 
feet. Its area seems to have been 
stable for centuries, its level having 
risen a little only during the last 
fifty years. 
Of course, if an earthquake 
opened a chasm in a westerly direction leading to the depression of 
the Caspian Sea, the lake that 
would be left would have little resemblance to “blue Lake Aral” 
of today. The figure of 222 feet 
which has been mentioned is the 
maximum measured depth. The 
average depth is somewhere between 55 and 65 feet; if a drainage to about sea level were opened, 
very little would be left of it. 
"O UT if one could say that the 
Black Sea is “doing well” and 
that Lake Aral is “getting along” 
no such statement can be made 
about the central depression of the 
old Sarmatian Sea, the Caspian 
Sea (Fig. 2). It is in a sorry shape 
and both Nature and Man are 
combining to make it sorrier still. 
Its level is by now 96 feet below 
sea level and still sinking. 
Even with these handicaps, it is 
still the largest “lake,” if you use 
that term to denote a body of 
water not connected with the 
oceans. If saltiness is the criterion 
used, the Caspian is a “sea”— the 
average figure for the whole Caspian reads 6.3 grams of salt per 
liter of water. (For the Atlantic 
Ocean, the figure is 35 grams per 
liter.) 
In reality, the “average” saltiness does not apply. In the north, 
say north of the 45th parallel, the 
water is drinkable. Logically it is 
more salty than the average in the 
south. And the bay of Kara-BogazGol is a very special case which 
needs separate description. 
The dimensions of the Caspian 
are impressive enough — from 
north to south, it stretches very 
nearly 800 miles; the widest part 
measures 275 miles across. The 
area is about 169,000 square 
miles; a more precise figure cannot be given, even aside from the 
perennial question of whether the 
area of islands in a lake should be 
counted as lake area or should be 
subtracted from it. 
About two-thirds of the area of 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
the Caspian Sea is deeper than 
600 feet, and two-thirds of the 
deep section lie in the southernmost part, to the south of the line 
from Baku to Krasnovodsk. The 
third city of noticeable size, in 
addition to the two just mentioned, 
is Astrakhan in the north, near the 
delta of the Volga. 
The water supply of the Caspian Sea comes from two major 
rivers, the Volga and the Ural, and 
five minor ones, Emba, Kuma, 
Terek, Kura and Araxel. Of the 
minor rivers, the Terek looks 
major in late spring, when it is 
swollen by the melting snows of 
the Caucasus. Altogether, they 
pour 175 cubic miles of water into 
the Caspian every year — the 
Volga is Europe’s largest river — 
but this makes up for the losses 
only in very wet years. 
The Caspian, like the Mediterranean, lies in a warm (most of 
the time) and dry (almost all of 
the time) climate. Dry winds come 
from Asia in the east and the 
evaporation rate is equal to the 
influx, even though the annual influx represents the volume of Lake 
Erie. 
i"kNE of the main reasons for the 
loss is the strange bay, the 
Kara-Bogaz-Gol. Its area is about 
7100 square miles — for comparison: the area of Lake Ontario is 
7540 square miles — with a maximum depth of 40 feet and an aver
age depth of about 5 feet 
The channel connecting the bay 
with the Caspian is roughly one 
mile in length and not much over 
400 feet wide on the average. 
Through this channel pass 22,000 
cubic feet of water per second, to 
be evaporated in this natural salt 
pan. 
Since the minerals carried into 
the bay return into the Caspian to 
the same extent as the water which 
carried them, namely not at all, the 
overall result is that the general 
salinity of the Caspian is kept 
rather low and that of the bay is 
fantastic. An estimated 1000 million tons of minerals, impure Epsom salts, to be specific, cover the 
bottom of the bay, in places to a 
depth of seven feet. 
If this does not sound quite 
credible, I can add another equally surprising fact: in the bay of 
Krasnovodsk, just south of the 
Epsom salts bay, the inhabitants 
often hunt seals! 
In the north, the fisheries are 
somewhat more on the conservative side. There the fishermen 
catch salmon, herring and sturgeon. 
The catch of the latter — 90 per 
cent of all sturgeon are caught in 
the Caspian — has a decisive bearing on the caviar trade. 
But it is just this caviar corner 
of the Caspian which is shrinking at a literally visible rate. Most 
of the small fishing towns are now 
miles from the shore. And even 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
Fig. 2: Caspian Sea. Dotted areas indicate depressions below sea level. Areas in black indicate 
land dried up during last decade. General shoreline going around outside of black areas 
is that of 1945 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
though each foot of recession produces nearly 100,000 acres of 
arable land, the overall picture results in a loss. The Soviets say that 
the Caspian Sea now costs them 
a billion rubles per year, and they 
have a truly capitalistic concern 
about losing money. 
Part of the shrinkage is due, 
strangely enough, to the main 
water supplier of the Caspian, the 
Volga. From more than two hundred mouths, the Volga pours 
about four times as much water 
into the Caspian Sea as all the 
other rivers taken together. But 
with the water come 55 million 
cubic feet of sediments annually; 
more, if the spring flood of the 
Volga was exceptionally high. This 
makes the northern section, the 
fishing grounds, more shallow. For 
many years, steamers were aware 
of the fact that they had to lighten 
cargo if they wished to pass the 
Volga delta at a distance closer 
than 40 miles. 
What makes the 55 million 
cubic feet of sediment even more 
deplorable to Russian economists 
is that a large percentage of it 
once was good topsoil along the 
river’s course. Whatever good land 
may be gained from the Caspian’s 
recession had simply been lost 
elsewhere at an earlier time. 
T^HAT this recession is to some 
-*• extent man-made is also no consolation. For quite a number of 
years, the Russians have been 
building dams along the Volga, 
partly for regulating the flow of 
the river itself, partly for the generation of electric current. They 
have created half a dozen large artificial lakes, all full of Volga 
water. The largest of them, the artificial lake near Kuibyshev, has an 
area of 1900 square miles and required all of the spring flood of 
1957 to fill it up. 
It must be added that the Volga 
itself, in its lower portion, loses a 
great deal of water to evaporation, 
and the artificial lakes, naturally, 
show evaporation losses too. Even 
if, when all the power-generating 
units finally are in operation, the 
Volga water will finally reach the 
Caspian Sea, it has to be less than 
would reach the sea in the time 
of our fictitious Roman traveler. 
The facts about the Caspian 
Sea are, then, as follows: 
Up to 1900, the rate of supply 
from the rivers, especially the 
Volga, was not quite enough to 
make up the evaporation losses. 
The oldest level of the Caspian 
Sea in historical times that could 
be established with reasonable certainty was during the fourteenth 
century; it was then roughly 50 
feet below sea level. This means 
that in past centuries the drop 
was 7-8 feet per century. 
But, since about 1900, the average temperature of that area has 
risen by about 2 degrees Fahren
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
heit. This not only meant higher 
evaporation losses the year round; 
it also meant less water supply. 
The Volga lost more water by 
evaporation before the sea was 
reached, and other rivers carried 
less water to begin with, especially 
the ones from the Caucasus, where 
the snow line moved up so that 
there was less snow and ice to 
melt in spring. Finally, during the 
last few years, the hydro-electric 
activities of the Russians have 
withheld Volga water. 
Naturally the Russians are asking themselves what they can do 
about it. They don’t like their annual billion-ruble deficit. One simple and obvious suggestion is, of 
course, to dam the outlet into the 
Kara-Bogaz-Gol. It would save 
5,184 million cubic feet of water 
per month. This sounds large, but 
would not make too much difference as far as the whole body of 
the Caspian Sea is concerned. In 
fact, if the inlet is ever dammed 
up, it would be not to save water, 
but to facilitate the exploitation of 
the mineral deposits at the bottom of the bay. 
A NOTHER suggestion, made 
by the oceanographer B. A. 
Apollov, is not so much concerned 
with the Caspian Sea as a whole 
as with the northern portion, which 
is of economic importance because 
of the fisheries. 
The distance from the mouth of 
the Kuma River to the island of 
Kulaly is 280 miles. If one built 
a dam across the Caspian Sea from 
the west shore to Kulaly Island, 
and from the island to a convenient 
point of the east shore, the valuable northern portion would be 
separated from the southern portion which is without fisheries of 
any consequence. The waters coming from the Volga, the Ural, the 
Emba and the Kuma would then 
all remain in the northern portion. 
This would tend to freshen the 
water of this section some more, 
but this would be unimportant in 
either direction since it is, for most 
practical purposes, fresh water 
right now. It would put the fishermen back into their normal occupation. It would avoid expensive 
dredging for the approaches to the 
northern ports, especially Astrakhan, which has to go on all the 
time. And, of course, the dam could 
have several lock gates in convenient places so that shipping 
could go on from the north to the 
south and vice versa. 
Apollov’s suggestion is not yet 
a “plan” and certainly not yet a 
“project.” It would require a very 
large amount of preliminary surveys to establish the type of dam, 
the method of construction and 
even the line which it would most 
efficiently follow across the sea. 
That a 280-mile dam through 
shallow water is an engineering 
possibility cannot be doubted. 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
What it would cost is another 
problem, but anything that can 
help avoid an annual billion-ruble 
loss is worth looking into from a 
Russian standpoint. 
It seems to be the simplest way 
to save the fisheries, including the 
caviar trade. After all, the Russians cannot abandon their hydroelectric projects for this purpose, 
especially since these projects are 
only a fairly minor water-loss fac
tor. The real reason is a minor 
climatic change. But again, even 
that change merely accelerated 
something that had been going on 
at a lesser rate for centuries. 
And the whole trouble started, of 
course, way back in that unknown 
year when the Black Sea managed 
to break through to the Mediterranean, thereby draining the Sarmatian Sea. 
— WILLY LEY 
★ ★ ★ ★ ★ 
Excerpts from "Telephone Almanac for 1958," published by the Bell 
Telephone System, free on request: 
“Germanium used in Bell System transistors is perhaps the purest 
substance known. It is refined so that impurities are estimated at only five 
parts in 100 billion — roughly equal to a pinch of salt in 35 freight cars of 
sugar." 
“According to a recent survey, the average man, in his lifetime, spends 
8,760 hours telephoning — the equivalent of one full year." (No statistics 
are offered on the average woman: Ed.) 
“Betsy, the Baltimore chimpanzee, whose paintings sold at a price to 
make many full-fledged artists envious . gained another distinction: she's 
listed under ‘artists' in Baltimore's classified telephone directory." 
"Someone with a flair for statistics figured out how much you can say 
in a three-minute long distance call. If you talk slowly, you'll average perhaps 
450 words. Talking a ‘blue streak' will let you say about 750 words. Just by 
the way of comparison, Lincoln used 267 words in his Gettysburg address. 
Hamlet's to-be-or-not-to-be soliloquy, by Mr. Shakespeare, ran to 263. If 
spoken over the telephone, they would both be well within the three-minute 
period." (If 450 words are the average at slow speed, these 263-267 
examples evidently are meant to allow the other party to answer — if he 
can think of anything appropriate: Ed.) 
"Metals that develop a ‘five o'clock shadow' are undergoing intensive 
research at Bell Telephone Laboratories. Hairlike metal strands — called 
‘whiskers' — grow on some types of telephone equipment and cause short 
circuits . the metal whiskers have extraordinary strength — greater than 
the metal from which they sprouted." (Any shaver knows that: Ed.) 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
Going straight meant crooked 
planning. He'd never make it 
unless he somehow managed to 
PICK A CRIME 
By RICHARD R. SMITH 
T HE GIRL was tall, wideeyed and brunette. She had 
the right curves in the right 
places and would have been beautiful if her nose had been smaller, 
if her mouth had been larger and 
if her hair had been wavy instead 
of straight 
“Hank said you wanted to see 
me,” she said when she stopped 
beside Joe’s table. 
“Yeah.” Joe nodded at the other 
chair. “Have a seat.” He reached 
into a pocket, withdrew five ten
illustrated by DICK FRANCIS 
dollar bills and handed them to 
her. “I want you to do a job for 
me. It’ll only take a few minutes.” 
The girl counted the money, 
then placed it in her purse. Joe 
noticed a small counterfeit-detector inside the purse before she 
closed it “What’s the job?” 
“Tell you later.” He gulped the 
remainder of his drink, almost 
pouring it down his throat. 
“Hey. You trying to make yourself sick?” 
“Not sick. Drunk. Been trying to 
PICK A CRIME 
get drunk all afternoon.” As the 
liquor settled in his stomach, he 
waited for the warm glow. But 
the glow didn’t come . the bartender had watered his drink again. 
“Trying to get drunk?” the girl 
inquired. “Are you crazy?” 
“No. It’s simple. If I get drunk, 
I can join the AAA and get free 
room and board for a month while 
they give me a treatment.” 
It was easy enough to understand, he reflected, but a lot 
harder to do. The CPA robot bartenders saw to it that anyone got 
high if they wanted, but comparatively few got drunk. Each 
bartender could not only mix 
drinks but could also judge by a 
man’s actions and speech when he 
was on the verge of drunkenness. 
At the proper time — since drunkenness was illegal — a bartender 
always watered the drinks. 
Joe had tried dozens of times 
in dozens of bars to outsmart them, 
but had always failed. And in all 
of New York’s millions, there had 
been only a hundred cases of intoxication during the previous year. 
The girl laughed. “If you’re that 
hard up, I don’t know if I should 
take this fifty or not. Why don’t 
you go out and get a job like 
everyone else?” 
As an answer, Joe handed her 
his CPA ID card. She grunted 
when she saw the large letters that 
indicated the owner had Dangerous Criminal Tendencies. 
VK/'HEN she handed the card 
™ back, Joe fought an impulse 
to tear it to pieces. He’d done that 
once and gone through a mountain 
of red tape to get another — everyone was required by law to carry a CPA ID card and show it 
upon request. 
“I’m sorry,” the girl said. “I 
didn’t know you were a DCT.” 
“And who’ll hire a guy with 
criminal tendencies? You know the 
score. When you try to get a job, 
they ask to see your ID before 
they even tell you if there’s an 
opening or not. If your CPA ID 
says you’re a DCT, you’re SOL 
and they tell you there’s no openings. Oh, I’ve had several jobs . 
jobs like all DCTs get. I’ve been 
a garbage man, street-cleaner, 
ditch-digger—” 
On the other side of the room, 
the jukebox came to life with a 
roar and a group of teen-agers 
scrambled to the dance floor. 
Feeling safe from hidden microphones because of the uproar, he 
leaned across the table and whispered in the girl’s ear, “That’s what 
I want to hire you for. I want you 
to help me commit a crime. If 
I get convicted of a crime, I’ll be 
able to get a good job!” 
The girl’s lips formed a bright 
red circle. “Say! You really got 
big plans, don’t you?” 
He smiled at her admiration. It 
was something big to plan a crime. 
A civilization weary of murder, 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
robbery, kidnapping, counterfeiting, blackmail, rape, arson, and 
drunkenness had originated the 
CPA— Crime Prevention Association. There were no longer any 
prisons — CPA officials had declared loudly and emphatically 
that their job was to prevent 
crime, not punish it. And prevent 
it they did, with thousands of ingenious crime-prevention devices 
and methods. They had made 
crime almost impossible, and during the previous year, only a few 
hundred men in the whole country had been convicted of criminal 
acts. 
No crime was ever punished. If 
a man was smart enough to kill 
someone, for instance, he wasn’t 
sent to prison to be punished; he 
wasn’t punished at all. Instead, he 
was sent to a hospital where all 
criminal tendencies were removed 
from his mind by psychologists, 
shock treatments, encephalographic devices, a form of prefrontal 
lobotomy and a dozen other methods. An expensive operation, but 
since there were few criminals— 
only ten in New York during the 
past year — any city could afford the CPA hospitals. 
The CPA system was, actually, 
cheaper than previous methods 
because it did away with the 
damage caused by countless 
crimes; did away with prisons and 
their guards, large police forces, 
squad cars and weapons. 
And, ironically, a man who did 
commit a crime was a sort of hero. 
He was a hero to the millions of 
men and women who had suppressed impulses to kill someone, 
beat their mates, get drunk, or kick 
a dog. Not only a hero, but because of the CPA Treatment, he 
was — when he left one of the CPA 
hospitals — a thoroughly honest 
and hard-working individual ... a 
man who could be trusted with 
any responsibility, any amount of 
money. And therefore, an EX (a 
convicted criminal who received 
the treatment was commonly 
called an Ex because he was in the 
strictest sense of the word an Excriminal) ... an Ex was always 
offered the best jobs. 
“Well,” the girl said. “I’m honored. Really. But I got a date at 
ten. Let’s get it over with. You 
said it’d only take a few minutes.” 
“Okay. Let’s go.” 
HP HE girl followed him across 
the room, around tables, 
through a door, down a hall, 
through a back door and into the 
alley. 
She followed him up the dark 
alley until he turned suddenly and 
ripped her blouse and skirt. 
He surprised her completely, 
but when she recovered, she 
backed away, her body poised like 
a wrestler’s. “What’s the big idea?” 
“Scream,” Joe said. “Scream as 
loud as you can, and when the 
PICK A CRIME 
cops get here, tell ’em I tried to 
rape you.” 
The plan was perfect, he told 
himself. Attempted rape was one 
of the few things that was a crime 
merely because a man attempted 
it. A crime because it theoretically 
inflicted psychological injury upon 
the intended victim — and because millions of women voters 
had voted it a crime. On the other 
hand, attempted murder, robbery, 
kidnapping, etc., were not crimes. 
They weren’t crimes because the 
DCT didn’t complete the act, and 
if he didn’t complete the act, that 
meant simply that the CPA had 
once again functioned properly. 
The girl shook her head vigorously. “Sorry, buddy. Can’t help 
you that way. Why didn’t you tell 
me what you wanted?” 
“What’s the matter?” Joe complained. “I’m not asking you to do 
anything wrong.” 
“You stupid jerk. What do you 
think this is — the Middle Ages? 
Don’t you know almost every 
woman knows how to defend herself? I’m a sergeant in the WSDA!” 
Joe groaned. The WSDA — 
Women’s Self-Defense Association 
— a branch of the CPA. The 
WSDA gave free instruction in 
judo and jujitsu, even developed 
new techniques of wrestling and 
instructed only women in those 
new techniques. 
The girl was still shaking her 
head. “Can’t do it, buddy. I'd lose 
my rank if you were convicted 
of-” 
“Do I have to make you 
scream?” Joe inquired tiredly and 
advanced toward the girl. 
and that rank carries a lot 
of weight. Hey! Stop it!” 
Joe discovered to his dismay 
that the girl was telling the truth 
when she said she was a sergeant 
in the WSDA. He felt her hands 
on his body, and in the time it 
takes to blink twice, he was flying through the air. 
The alley’s concrete floor was 
hard — it had always been hard, 
but he became acutely aware of 
its lack of resiliency when his head 
struck it. There was a wonderful 
moment while the world was filled 
with beautiful stars and streaks of 
lightning through which he heard 
distant police sirens. But the wonderful moment didn’t last long and 
darkness closed in on him. 
VW/HEN he awoke, a rough 
” voice was saying, “Okay. 
Snap out of it.” 
He opened his eyes and recognized the police commissioner’s office. It would be hard not to 
recognize: the room was large, devoid of furniture except for a 
desk and chairs, but the walls were 
lined with the controls of television screens, electronic calculators 
and a hundred other machines that 
formed New York’s mechanical 
police force. 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
Commissioner Hendricks was a 
remarkable character. There was 
something wrong with his glands, 
and he was a huge, greasy bulk of 
a man with bushy eyebrows and 
a double chin. His steel-gray eyes 
showed something of his intelligence and he would have gone far 
in politics if fate hadn’t made him 
so ugly, for more than half the 
voters who elected men to high 
political positions were women. 
Anyone who knew Hendricks 
well liked him, for he was a friendly, likable person. But the millions of women voters who saw his 
face on posters and on their TV 
screens saw only the ugly face and 
heard only the harsh voice. The 
President of the United States was 
a capable man, but also a very 
handsome one, and the fact that 
a man who looked something like 
a bulldog had been elected as New 
York's police commissioner was a 
credit to Hendricks and millions of 
women voters. 
“Where’s the girl?” Joe asked. 
“I processed her while you were 
out cold. She left. Joe, you—” 
“Okay,” Joe said. “111 save you 
the trouble. I admit it Attempted 
rape. I confess.” 
Hendricks smiled. “Sorry, Joe. 
You missed the boat again.” He 
reached out and turned a dial on 
his desk top. ‘We had a microphone hidden in that alley. We 
have a lot of microphones hidden 
in a lot of alleys. You’d be sur
prised at the number of conspiracies that take place in alleys!” 
Joe listened numbly to his voice 
as it came from one of the hundreds of machines on the walls, 
“Scream. Scream as loud as you 
cart, and when the cops get here, 
tell ’em I tried to rape you.” And 
then the girl’s voice, “Sorry, buddy. 
Can’t help-” 
He waved his hand. “Okay. Shut 
it off. I confess to conspiracy.” 
TTENDRICKS rose from behind 
the desk, walked leisurely to 
where Joe was slouched in a chair. 
“Give me your CPA ID.” 
Joe handed him the card with 
trembling fingers. He felt as if the 
world had collapsed beneath him. 
Conspiracy to commit a crime 
wasn’t a crime. Anyone could conspire. And if the conspirators were 
prevented from committing a 
crime, then that meant the CPA 
had functioned properly once 
again. That meant the CPA 
had once again prevented crime, 
and the CPA didn’t punish crimes 
or attempted crimes, and it didn’t 
attempt to prevent crimes by punishment. If it did, that would be a 
violation of the New Civil Rights. 
Hendricks crossed the room, deposited the card in a slot and 
punched a button. The machine 
hummed and a new card appeared. 
When Hendricks handed him 
the new card, Joe saw that the 
words DANGEROUS CRIMI
PICK A CRIME 
NAL TENDENCIES were now 
in red and larger than before. And, 
in slightly smaller print, the ID 
card stated that the owner was a 
DCT First Class. 
“You’ve graduated,” Hendricks 
said coldly. “You guys never learn, 
do you? Now you’re a DCT First 
Class instead of a Second Class. 
You know what that means?” 
Hendricks leaned closer until Joe 
could feel his breath on his face. 
“That means your case history will 
be turned over to the newspapers. 
You’ll be the hobby of thousands of 
amateur cops. You know how it 
works? It’s like this. The Joneses 
are sitting around tomorrow night 
and they’re bored. Then Mr. Jones 
says, ‘Let’s go watch this Joe Harper.’ So they look up your record — 
amateur cops always keep records 
of First Classes in scrapbooks — and 
they see that you stop frequently at 
Walt’s Tavern. 
“So they go there and they sit and 
drink and watch you, trying not to 
let you know they’re watching you. 
They watch you all night, just hoping you’ll do something exciting, 
like trying to kill someone, so they 
can be the first ones to yell ‘Police!’ 
They’ll watch you because it’s exciting to be an amateur cop, and if 
they ever did prevent you from 
committing a crime, they’d get a 
nice reward and they’d be famous.” 
“Lay off,” Joe said. “I got a headache. That girl — ” 
Hendricks leaned even closer and 
glared. “You listen, Joe. This is 
interesting. You see, it doesn’t stop 
with Mr. and Mrs. Jones. There’s 
thousands of people like them. 
Years ago, they got their kicks from 
reading about guys like you, but 
these days things are dull because 
it’s rare when anyone commits a 
crime. So every time you walk down 
the street, there’ll be at least a dozen 
of ’em following you, and no matter 
where you go, you can bet there’ll 
be some of ’em sitting next to you, 
standing next to you. 
“During the day, they’ll take your 
picture with their spy cameras that 
look like buttons on their coats. At 
night, they’ll peep at you through 
your keyhole. Your neighbors 
across the street will watch you 
through binoculars and — ” 
“Lay off!” 
J OE squirmed in the chair. He’d 
been lectured by Hendricks before and it was always an unpleasant experience. The huge man was 
like a talking machine once he got 
started, a machine that couldn’t be 
stopped. 
“And. the kids are the worst,” 
Hendricks continued. “They have 
Junior CPA clubs. They keep records of hoodlums like you in little 
cardboard boxes. They’ll stare at 
you on the street and stare at you 
through restaurant windows while 
you’re eating meals. They’ll follow 
you in public rest rooms and watch 
you out of the corners of their eyes 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
PICK A CRIME 
while they wash their little hands, 
and almost every day when you 
look back, you’ll see a dozen frecklefaced little boys following you half 
a block behind, giggling and gaping 
at you. They’ll follow you until the 
day you die, because you’re a freak!" 
Joe couldn’t stand the breath in 
his face any longer. He rose and 
paced the floor. 
“And it doesn’t end there, Joe. It 
goes on and on. You’ll be the object 
of every do-gooder and parlor psychologist. Strangers will stop you 
on the street and say, I’d like to 
help you, friend.’ Then they’ll ask 
you queer questions like, “Did your 
father reject you when you were a 
child?’ ‘Do you like girls?’ ‘How 
does it feel to be a DCT First 
Class?’ And then there’ll be the 
strangers who hate DCTs. They’ll 
stop you on the street and insult 
you, call you names, spit on you 
and—” 
“Okay, goddam it! Stop it!” 
Hendricks stopped, wiped the 
sweat from his face with a handkerchief and lit a cigarette. 
“I’m doing you a favor, Joe. I’m 
trying to explain something you’re 
too dumb to realize by yourself. 
We’ve taught everyone to hate 
crime and criminals ... to hate them 
as nothing has ever been hated before. Today a criminal is a freak, an 
alien. Your life will be a living hell 
if you don’t leave New York. You 
should go to some small town where 
there aren’t many people, or be a 
hermit, or go to Iceland or — ” 
Joe eyed the huge man suspiciously. “Favor, did you say? The 
day you do me a favor — ” 
Hendricks shrugged his shoulders 
negligently. “Not entirely a favor. I 
want to get rid of you. Usually I 
come up here and sit around and 
read books. But guys like you are a 
nuisance and take up my time.” 
“I couldn’t leave if I wanted to,” 
Joe said. “I’m flat broke. Thanks to 
your CPA system, a DCT can’t get 
a decent job.” 
TTENDRICKS reached into a 
pocket, withdrew several bills 
and extended them. “I’ll loan you 
some money. You can sign an IOU 
and pay me back a little at a time.” 
Joe waved the money away. “Listen, why don’t you do me a favor? 
Why don’t you frame me? If I’m 
such a nuisance, pin a crime on me 
— any crime.” 
“Can’t do it Convicting a man of 
a crime he didn’t commit is a violation of Civil Rights and a crime in 
itself.” 
“Umm.” 
“Why don’t you take the free 
psycho treatment? A man doesn’t 
have to be a DCT. With the free 
treatment, psychologists can remove all your criminal tendencies 
and — ” 
“Go to those head-shrinkers?” 
Hendricks shrugged again. “Have 
it your way.” 
Joe laughed. “If your damned 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
CPA is so all-powerful, why can’t 
you make me go?” 
“Violation of Civil Rights.” 
“Damn it, there must be some 
way you can help me! We both 
want the same thing. We both want 
to see me convicted of a crime.” 
“How can I help you without 
committing a crime myself?” Hendricks walked to his desk, opened a 
drawer and removed a small black 
book. “See this? It contains names 
and addresses of all the people in 
New York who aren’t properly protected. Every week we find people 
who aren’t protected properly — 
blind spots in our protection devices. 
As soon as we find them, we take 
steps to install anti-robbery devices, 
but this is a big city and sometimes 
it takes days to get the work done. 
“In the meantime, any one of 
these people could be robbed. But 
what can I do? I can’t hold this 
book in front of your nose and say, 
‘Here, Joe, pick a name and go out 
and rob him.’ ” He laughed nervously. “If I did that, I’d be committing a crime myself!” 
He placed the book on the desk 
top, took a handkerchief from a 
pocket again and wiped sweat from 
his face. “Excuse me a minute. I’m 
dying of thirst. There’s a water 
cooler in the next room.” 
Joe stared at the door to the adjoining office as it closed behind the 
big man. Hendricks was — unbelievably — offering him a victim, offering him a crime! 
Almost running to the desk, Joe 
opened the book, selected a name 
and address and memorized it: 
John Gralewski, Apt. 204, 2141 
Orange St. 
When Hendricks came back, Joe 
said, “Thanks.” 
“Huh? Thanks for what? I didn’t 
do anything.” 
VK/HEN Joe reached the street, 
” he hurried toward the nearest 
subway. As a child, he had been 
frightened of the dark. As a man, 
he wasn’t afraid of the dark itself, 
but the darkened city always made 
him feel ill at ease. The uneasiness 
was, more than anything else, 
caused by his own imagination. He 
hated the CPA and at night he 
couldn’t shrug the feeling that the 
CPA lurked in every shadow, 
watching him, waiting for him to 
make a mistake. 
Imagination or not, the CPA was 
almost everywhere a person went 
Twenty-four hours a day, millions 
of microphones hidden in taverns, 
alleys, restaurants, subways and 
every other place imaginable waited 
for someone to say the wrong thing. 
Everything the microphones picked 
up was routed to the CPA Brain, a 
monster electronic calculator. 
If the words “Let’s see a movie” 
were received in the Brain, they 
were discarded. But if the words 
“Let’s roll this guy” were received, 
the message was traced and a police 
helicopter would be at the scene in 
PICK A CRIME 
two minutes. And scattered all over 
the city were not only hidden microphones, but hidden television cameras that relayed visual messages to 
the Brain, and hidden machines 
that could detect a knife or a gun 
in someone’s pocket at forty yards. 
Every place of business from the 
largest bank to the smallest grocery 
store was absolutely impenetrable. 
No one had even tried to rob a 
place of business for years. 
Arson was next to impossible because of the heat-detectors— devices 
placed in every building that could 
detect, radarlike, any intensity of 
heat above that caused by a cigarette lighter. Chemical research had 
made poisoning someone an impossibility. There were no drugs 
containing poison, and while an antpoison might kill ants, no concentrated amount of it would kill a 
human. 
The FBI had always been a powerful organization, but under the 
supervision of the CPA, it was a 
scientific colossus and to think of 
kidnapping someone or to contemplate the use of narcotics was pointless. A counterfeiter’s career was 
always short-lived: every place of 
business and millions of individuals 
had small counterfeit-detectors that 
could spot a fake and report it 
directly to the Brain. 
And the percentage of crimes had 
dwindled even more with the appearance of the robot police officers. 
Many a criminal in the past had 
gambled that he could outshoot a 
pursuing policeman. But the robots 
were different: they weren’t flesh 
and blood. Bullets bounced off them 
and their aim was infallible. 
TT was like a fantastic dream 
come true. Only the dream 
wasn’t fantastic any more. With 
the huge atomic power plants 
scattered across the country and 
supplying endless electrical power 
at ridiculously low prices, no endeavor that required power was 
fantastic. The power required to 
operate the CPA devices cost each 
taxpayer an average of four dollars 
a year, and the invention, development and manufacture of the devices had cost even less. 
And the CPA had attacked crime 
through society itself, striking at the 
individual. In every city there were 
neon signs that blinked subliminally with the statement, CRIME 
IS FILTH. Listening to a radio or 
watching television, if a person 
heard station identification, he invariably heard or saw just below 
perception the words CRIME IS 
FILTH. If he went for a walk or a 
ride, he saw the endless subliminal 
posters declaring CRIME IS 
FILTH, and if he read a magazine 
or newspaper he always found, in 
those little dead spaces where an 
editor couldn’t fit anything else, the 
below-perception words CRIME 
IS FILTH. 
It was monotonous and, after a 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
while, a person looked at the words 
and heard them without thinking 
about them. And they were imprinted on his subconscious over 
and over, year after year, until he 
knew that crime was the same as 
filth and that criminals were filthy 
things. 
Except men like Joe Harper. No 
system is perfect. Along with thousands of other DCTs, Joe refused to 
believe it, and when he reached 
apartment 204 at 2141 Orange 
Street, he felt as if he’d inherited a 
gold mine. 
The hall was dimly lit, but when 
he stood before the door numbered 
204, he could see that the wall on 
either side of it was new. That is, 
instead of being covered with dust, 
dirt and stains as the other walls 
were, it was clean. The building was 
an old one, the hall was wide, and 
the owner had obviously constructed a wall across the hall, creating another room. If the owner 
had reported the new room as required by law, it would have been 
wired with CPA burglarproof devices, but evidently he didn’t want 
to pay for installation. 
When Joe entered the cubbyhole, 
he had to stand to one side in order 
to close the door behind him. The 
place was barely large enough for 
the bed, chair and bureau; it was a 
place where a man could fall down 
at night and sleep, but where no 
normal man could live day after 
day. 
Fearing that someone might detect him before he actually committed the crime, Joe hurried to the 
bureau and searched it. 
TTE broke out in a sweat when 
he found nothing but underwear and old magazines. If he stole 
underwear and magazines, it would 
still be a crime, but the newspapers 
would splash satirical headlines. 
Instead of being respected as a successful criminal, he would be ridiculed. 
He stopped sweating when he 
found a watch under a pile of underwear. The crystal was broken, one 
hand was missing and it wouldn’t 
run, but — perfection itself — engraved on the back was the inscription, To John with Love. His trial 
would be a clean-cut one: it would 
be easy for the CPA to prove ownership and that a crime had been 
committed. 
Chuckling with joy, he opened 
the window and shouted, “Thief! 
Police! Help!" 
He waited a few seconds and then 
ran. When he reached the street, a 
police helicopter landed next to 
him. Strong metal arms seized him; 
cameras clicked and recorded the 
damning evidence. 
When Joe was securely handcuffed to a seat inside the helicopter, 
the metal police officers rang doorbells. There was a reward for anyone who reported a crime, but no 
one admitted shouting the warning. 
PICK A CRIME 
IT E was having a nightmare when 
he heard the voice, “Hey. 
Wake up. Hey!” 
He opened his eyes, saw Hendricks’ ugly face and thought for a 
minute he was still having the nightmare. 
“I just saw your doctor,” Hendricks said. “He says your treatment 
is over. You can go home now. I 
thought I’d give you a lift.” 
As Joe dressed, he searched his 
mind and tried to find some difference. 
During the treatment, he had 
been unconscious or drugged, unable to think. Now he could think 
clearly, but he could find no difference in himself. 
He felt more relaxed than he’d 
ever felt before, but that could be 
an after-effect of all the sedatives 
he’d been given. And, he noticed 
when he looked in the mirror, he 
was paler. The treatment had taken 
months and he had, between operations, been locked in his room. 
Hendricks was standing by the 
window. Joe stared at the massive 
back. Deliberately goading his 
mind, he discovered the biggest 
change: Before, the mere sight of 
the man had aroused an intense 
hatred. Now, even when he tried, he 
succeeded in arousing only a mild 
hatred. They had toned down his 
capacity to hate, but not done away 
with it altogether. 
“Come here and take a look at 
your public,” said Hendricks. 
Joe went to the window. Three 
stories below, a large crowd had 
gathered on the hospital steps: a 
band, photographers, television 
trucks, cameramen and autograph 
hunters. He’d waited a long time for 
this day. But now — another change 
in him — 
He put the emotion into words: 
“I don’t feel like a hero. Funny, but 
I don’t.” 
“Hero!” Hendricks laughed and, 
with his powerful lungs, it sounded 
like a bull snorting. “You think a 
successful criminal is a hero? You 
stupid — ” 
He laughed again and waved a 
hand at the crowd below them. 
“You think those people are down 
there because they admire what you 
did? They’re down there waiting for 
you because they’re curious, because 
they’re glad the CPA caught you, 
and because they’re glad you’re an 
Ex. You’re an ex-criminal now, and 
because of your treatment, you’ll 
never be able to commit another 
crime as long as you live. And that’s 
the kind of guy they admire, so they 
want to see you, shake your hand 
and get your autograph.” 
Joe didn’t understand Hendricks 
completely, but the part he did 
understand he didn’t believe. A 
crowd was waiting for him. He 
could see the people with his own 
eyes. When he left the hospital, 
they’d cheer and shout and ask for 
his autograph. If he wasn’t a hero, 
what was he? 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
r T took half an hour to get 
through the crowd. Cameras 
clicked all around him, a hundred 
kids asked for his autograph, everyone talked at once and cheered, 
smiled, laughed, patted him on the 
back and cheered some more. 
Only one thing confused him during all the excitement: a whitehaired old lady with tears in her 
eyes said, “Thank heaven it was 
only a watch. Thank heaven you 
didn’t kill someone! God bless you, 
son.” And then the old lady had 
handed him a box of fudge and left 
him in total confusion. 
What she said didn’t make sense. 
If he had killed someone rather 
than stealing a watch, he would be 
even more of a hero and the crowd 
would have cheered even louder. 
He knew: he had stood outside the 
CPA hospitals many times and the 
crowds always cheered louder when 
an ex-murderer came out 
In Hendricks’ robot-chauffeured 
car, he ate the fudge and consoled 
himself with the thought People are 
funny. Who can understand ’em? 
Feeling happy for one of the few 
times in his life, he turned toward 
Hendricks and said, “Thanks for 
what you did. It turned out great. 
I’ll be able to get a good job now.” 
“That’s why I met you at the 
hospital,” Hendricks said. “I want to 
explain some things. I’ve known 
you for a long time and I know 
you’re spectacularly dumb. You 
can’t figure out some things for 
yourself and I don’t want you walking around the rest of your life 
thinking I did you a favor.” 
Joe frowned. Few men had ever 
done him a favor and he had rarely 
thanked anyone for anything. And 
now . after thanking the man 
who’d done him the biggest favor 
of all, the man was denying it! 
“You robbed Gralewski’s apartment,” Hendricks said. “Gralewski 
is a CPA employee and he doesn’t 
live in the apartment you robbed. 
The CPA pays the rent for that one 
and he lives in another. We have a 
lot of places like that. You see, it 
gives us a way to get rid of saps like 
you before they do real damage. 
We use it as a last resort when a 
DCT First Class won’t take the free 
psycho treatment or — ” 
“Well, it’s still a favor.” 
Hendricks’ face hardened. “Favor? You wouldn’t know a favor if 
you stumbled over one. I did it because it’s standard procedure for 
your type of case. Anyone can — 
free of charge — have treatment by 
the best psychologists. Any DCT 
can stop being a DCT by simply 
asking for the treatment and taking 
it. But you wouldn’t do that. You 
wanted to commit a crime, get 
caught and be a hero ... an Ex.” 
r 1 1 HE car passed one of the CPA 
-*■ playgrounds. Boys and girls of 
all ages were laughing, squealing 
with joy as they played games designed by CPA psychologists to 
PICK A CRIME 
relieve tension. And — despite the 
treatment, Joe shuddered when he 
saw the psychologists standing to 
one side, quietly watching the children. The whole world was filled 
with CPA employees and volunteer 
workers. Everywhere you went, it 
was there, quietly watching you and 
analyzing you, and if you showed 
criminal tendencies, it watched 
you even more closely and analyzed you even more deeply until 
it took you apart and put you back 
together again the way it wanted 
you to be. 
“Being an Ex, you’ll get the kind 
of job you always wanted,” Hendricks continued. “You’ll get a goodpaying job, but you’ll work for it. 
You’ll work eight hours a day, work 
harder than you’ve ever worked before in your life, because every time 
you start to loaf, a voice in your 
head is going to say, Work! Work! 
Exes always get good jobs because 
employers know they’re good 
workers. 
“But during these next few days, 
you’ll discover what being an Ex is 
like. You see, Joe, the treatment 
can’t possibly take all the criminal 
tendencies out of a man. So the 
treatment does the next best thing 
— you’ll find a set of laws written in 
your mind. You might want to 
break one now and then, but you 
won’t be able. I’ll give you an illustration . .” 
Joe’s face reddened as Hendricks 
proceeded to call him a series of 
names. He wanted to smash the fat, 
grinning face, but the muscles in his 
arm froze before it moved it an inch. 
And worse than that, a brief pain 
ripped through his skull. A pain so 
intense that, had it lasted a second 
longer, he would have screamed in 
agony. And above the pain, a voice 
whispered in his head, Unlawful to 
strike someone except in selfdefense. 
He opened his mouth to tell Hendricks exactly what he thought of 
him, the CPA, the whole world. But 
the words stayed in his throat, the 
pain returned, and the mental voice 
whispered, Unlawful to curse. 
He had never heard how the 
treatment prevented an Ex from 
committing a crime. And now that 
he knew, it didn’t seem fair. He decided to tell the whole story to the 
newspapers as soon as he could. 
And as soon as that decision formed 
in his mind, his body froze, the pain 
returned and the voice, Unlawful to 
divulge CPA procedure. 
“See what I mean?” Hendricks 
asked. “A century ago, you would 
have been locked in a prison and 
taxpayers’ money would have supported you until the day you died. 
With the CPA system, you’re returned to society, a useful citizen, 
unable to commit the smallest 
crime. And you’ve got a big hand in 
your dirty little mind that’s going to 
slap it every time you get the wrong 
kind of thought. It’ll keep slapping 
you until you learn. It might take 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
weeks, months or years, but you’ll 
learn sooner or later to not even 
think about doing anything wrong.” 
ITE lit a cigarette and blew a 
smoke ring at the car’s plush 
ceiling. “It’s a great system, isn’t it, 
Joe? A true democracy. Even a jerk 
like you is free to do what he wants, 
as long as it’s legal.” 
“I think it’s a lousy, filthy system.” 
Joe’s head was still tingling with 
pain and he felt suffocated. The 
CPA was everywhere, only now it 
was also inside his head, telling him 
he couldn’t do this, couldn’t do that 
All his life it had been telling him he 
couldn’t do things he wanted to do 
and now . 
Hendricks laughed. “You’ll 
change your opinion. We live in a 
clean, wonderful world, Joe. A 
world of happy, healthy people. 
Except for freaks like yourself, 
criminals are—” 
“Let me out!” Joe grabbed at the 
door and was on the sidewalk, 
slamming the door behind him before the car stopped completely. 
He stared at the car as it pulled 
away from the curb and glided into 
the stream of traffic again. He realized he was a prisoner ... a prisoner 
inside his own body . made a 
prisoner by a world that hated him 
back. 
He wanted to spit his contempt, 
but the increasingly familiar pain 
and voice prevented him. 
It was unlawful to spit on a sidewalk. 
— RICHARD R. SMITH 
It your collection of 
complete? 
agrazine 
If not, here is your chance to fill in missing copies. 
Back numbers of C^alctxy ^Science ^ jfiction 
<sfylagazine are available from May, 1951, on. 
Inventories are running low. Don't miss your chance to complete 
your collection. 
6 For $ 1.50 or 35c each 
GALAXY Publishing Corp. 
421 Hudson Streot • New York 14, N. Y. 
Enclose check, 
cash or money order. 
We pay postage 
Name — 
Address $ 
City State 
PICK A CRIME 
Mr. E. Vandenberg had a practical reason for 
wanting something old and something new — but 
what would he borrow — and would it be blue? 
H E was a tall, broad-shoul- ready smile. The back of his flowdered, collegiate - looking ered sport shirt was damp with 
young man with a neat perspiration. He carried a small 
crewcut and, in spite of the slight suitcase and he paused for a molook of weariness in his face, a ment in the shade, looking skepti
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
By LLOYD BIGGLE, JR. 
Illustrated by DILLON 
BRIDLE SHOWER 
cally down the quiet residential 
street, before he stepped out into 
the boiling sun and walked slowly up the sidewalk to the first 
house. 
He rang the bell and stepped 
back, whistling cheerfully. The 
door opened a crack. A woman’s 
voice snapped, “I don’t want any.” 
The door closed. 
He bowed solemnly at the 
closed door and turned away. A 
small boy stepped out from behind 
a shrub and stared at him, freckled 
face tense with immodest curiosity. 
“Watcha sellin’, mister?” 
“Not selling a thing, son,” he 
said. “I’m giving things away.” 
He rang the bell at the next 
house, got no response and turned 
away sadly. The boy popped into 
sight again, from behind a hedge. 
“Watcha givin’ away?” 
“Shoelaces,” he said. 
At the third house, the door was 
opened by a red-faced, bosomy 
blonde, who eyed him suspiciously. 
“Oh, God!” she exclaimed. “More 
magazine subscriptions. We average three of you guys a week.” 
“Jeff Flowers is my name,” he 
said, handing her a smartly engraved card. “I represent New for 
Old, Incorporated. Do you have 
any old shoelaces you’d like to 
dispose of?” 
She scrutinized the card, 
glanced up at him with a comically puzzled look on her face, and 
suddenly doubled up with laugh86 
ter. There was a faint trace of alcohol on her breath, and Flowers 
sniffed hungrily. 
“Give me that line again,” she 
said. 
“Do you have any old shoelaces 
you’d like to dispose of?” 
She giggled. “Don’t tell me now 
—don’t tell me. Let me guess. If I 
buy six pairs of shoes, you’ll throw 
in the shoelaces free of charge?” 
“No, ma’am . .” 
“If I buy a thousand pairs of 
shoelaces, I get a pair of shoes 
free?” 
O PENING the suitcase, he lifted 
out a tray, filled to overflowing with shoelaces. There were 
red, orange, yellow, green, blue, 
purple, brown, black, white shoelaces of all sizes and all shades. 
There were plaid shoelaces and 
polka-dot shoelaces. There were 
shoelaces gold-tipped and silvertipped and plastic-tipped and 
jewel-studded. 
“These shoelaces,” he said, 
“are finest quality and the latest 
style. They’re guaranteed to last 
the life of any two pairs of shoes 
you want to wear them in. For any 
pair of old shoelaces you wish to 
dispose of, I’ll give you your choice 
of any pair of new shoelaces.” 
She bent over the tray. “Pretty 
things. What do they cost?” 
“They are not for sale, ma’am. 
They are only for trade. One new 
pair for one old pair.” 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
She selected a chartreuse-andbrown plaid with gold tips. “These 
would look nice with a new summer outfit I have,” she said. “How 
much?” 
“One pair of old shoelaces.” 
She dropped the laces back onto 
the tray. “Cut the comedy. What’s 
the price?” 
“One pair of old shoelaces.” 
“You mean to tell me you’ll 
take a pair of old laces for—” 
“Absolutely. For any old pair, 
you get a new pair.” He grinned. 
“No strings attached.” 
“Just a minute,” she said. 
A moment later, she was back, 
handing him two soiled, muchabused brown shoelaces. He 
knotted them together and dropped 
them into his suitcase. 
“I get my choice?” she said. 
“You certainly do.” 
She picked up the plaid, goldtipped pair. “That’s all there is to 
it?” 
“That’s all.” 
She examined the new pair carefully, stretched them out, tugged 
at them and wadded them up. 
“There’s got to be a catch somewhere. Is there any limit?” 
“No limit at all. One pair or a 
thousand— a new pair for every 
old pair you give me.” 
“Come in,” she said. 
He sat down in the cool living 
room and waited. Five minutes 
later, she returned, breathing 
heavily. 
BRIDLE SHOWER 
“Got every shoelace in the 
house,” she said, dumping them on 
the sofa beside him. “Twelve 
pairs.” 
He separated them into pairs, 
knotted them together and counted. 
“Twelve pair,” he agreed. “Help 
yourself.” 
S HE did, stirring critically 
through the display of laces 
and mulling over her choices. 
“Twelve,” she said finally. 
“I thank you very much,” Flowers said. 
“Look. There’s got to be a catch 
somewhere.” 
“No catch. Let me show you.” 
He took a glittering gadget out 
of his suitcase. “We’ll put one of 
the old laces in here. Like this— 
see how it clamps in? Now you 
turn the crank and see if you can 
break it.” 
She gave the crank a quick turn. 
The shoelace snapped. 
“Now we’ll try one of the new 
ones,” he said. 
He clamped it in, and her arms 
bulged as she strained at the crank. 
Nothing happened. 
“You can’t break one,” he said, 
“and you can’t wear one out. We 
guarantee them for the life of two 
pairs of shoes, but actually they’ll 
last you a lifetime.” 
He replaced the gadget and the 
tray, snapped the suitcase shut and 
got to his feet. “Remember my 
company’s name,” he said. “New 
for Old, Incorporated. You’ll be 
hearing more about it.” 
“I hope you don’t think you’ll 
make a living at this.” 
Flowers flashed a smile. “Fortunately I don’t have to take a 
commission in old shoelaces. I’m 
on salary.” 
The boy was waiting for him 
at the sidewalk. “You really givin’ 
away shoelaces?” he demanded. 
“Not exactly,” Flowers said. 
“I’m trading them. Let’s see yours. 
Oh— too bad. You have straps instead of laces. Sorry, but we can’t 
do business.” 
He walked on to the next house, 
leaving the boy staring after him. 
Some dozens of houses and a 
couple of hours later, pangs of 
hunger sent Flowers wearily back 
to his car and started him in search 
of a restaurant. He located a little 
neighborhood cafe and walked in, 
carrying his suitcase with him, and 
took a seat at the counter. He ordered coffee and a pair of hamburgers, and then spun around on 
his stool for a professional appraisal of any shoelaces that might 
be in evidence. 
Three stools away, the only 
other customer at the counter sat 
back flexing his brawny arms and 
nodded pleasantly. “Think it’ll 
ever get around to raining?” 
“I hadn’t thought about it,” 
Flowers said. “But I suppose it’ll 
have to get around to it, sooner or 
later.” 
“It better. Hasn’t rained for 
over a month now and the radio 
said that the farmers are going to 
be hit pretty hard. They’re bringing in some guy that says he can 
make it rain— you know, one of 
those deals where they drop some 
stuff out of an airplane.” 
“More power to him,” Flowers 
said. “Will they let us know when, 
or do we have to start carrying 
raincoats all the time?” 
“That’s a good one. Ah, it probably won’t work.” He glanced 
curiously at the suitcase. “What’s 
your line?” 
“Shoelaces,” Flowers said. He 
opened the suitcase and set the 
tray on the counter. 
f 1 1 HE waitress paused with a cup 
of coffee in each hand and 
stared. “Say,” she said. “Those are 
pretty.” 
“Aren’t they?” Flowers agreed. 
She delivered the coffee and 
hurried back. “What do they 
cost?” 
“They aren’t for sale. I’ll arrange 
a trade with you, though.” 
“Oh, no, you don’t! I’ll buy for 
cash or not at all.” 
“I’ll trade you,” Flowers said 
quickly, “for a pair of old shoelaces.” 
The waitress stalked away 
angrily. She was back a moment 
later, shoving the tray of shoelaces 
aside to plop Flowers’ sandwiches 
and coffee down in front of him. 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
She departed without speaking. 
Flowers’ companion at the counter chuckled. “You ought to have 
a better line than that.” 
“I suppose so,” Flowers said. 
“Unfortunately, that’s the way it 
has to be. The boss won’t let me 
sell them. If people won’t trade, 
they can keep the ones they have.” 
“Is that a fact? You giving me 
straight dope?” 
“Absolutely.” 
“You mean you’ll take these old 
laces I’m wearing and give me a 
new pair?” 
“Try me and see.” 
“The fellow stooped over and 
began yanking out his shoelaces. 
“You better be telling the truth,” 
he said, “or you’re going to put 
these back in.” 
He handed the pair to Flowers. 
Dirty black. Flowers passed him 
the tray and he selected a clean 
black pair in return. The waitress 
watched the transaction incredulously, stooped down behind the 
counter and came up with a soiled 
white pair. She selected white with 
blue polka dots. Flowers passed 
out his cards. 
“What do you get out of this?” 
the fellow asked. 
“A pay envelope,” Flowers 
said. 
“Yeah. What does your boss get 
out of it?” 
“A lot of used shoelaces.” 
“What good are they? I mean 
is this some new product you’re 
BRIDLE SHOWER 
introducing or something?” 
“I’ll tell you how it is,” Flowers 
said. “Have you ever noticed, 
when you were shining your shoes, 
how you always get some shoe 
polish on your laces?” 
“Yeah, I suppose you do, if you 
don’t take ’em out.” 
“My boss has developed a new 
process. He extracts that polish 
from the shoelaces and cans it 
and sells it.” 
The fellow stared for maybe 
thirty-five seconds before he 
grabbed his check and left. The 
waitress stalked away again. Flowers shrugged and bit into a sandwich. 
A newcomer slid onto the stool 
beside him, reached for a menu 
and said, “Think we’ll ever get 
some rain?” 
“Let’s talk about shoelaces,” 
Flowers said. 
TT was after six when Flowers 
got around to reporting in. His 
headquarters was a tiny side-street 
shop in the business district. The 
sign across the front of the shop 
read. New For Old, Incorporated. In the window was a 
dazzling assortment of shoelaces, 
and another sign, “Used shoelaces 
wanted. Come in and trade. One 
new pair for each old pair you 
bring in.” 
A bell tinkled as Flowers 
opened the door. He winked familiarly at the shapely young lady 
who occupied a desk in one corner of the rooms, assured himself 
that the place was otherwise unpopulated, and strode over to give 
her a robust embrace. 
“Have a good day?” she murmured. 
“Fair,” he said. 
Flowers glanced about the room 
and grimaced at the overwhelming 
quantity of shoelaces that filled 
display cases and erupted into 
enormous piles on tables. He did 
not find it difficult to return his 
attention to the young lady. 
“Did you have a good day, Miss 
Star?” 
She smiled teasingly. “Fair.” 
“Dancing tonight?” 
It was a rhetorical question. She 
smiled again and said, “The boss 
wants to see you.” 
“Fancy that. What’d I do 
wrong?” 
“Nothing. He’s going out of town 
for a few days and he wants to 
tell you I’m boss while he’s gone.” 
“What a pleasant thought! Supposing you order me to take the 
afternoon off tomorrow. I’ve beeri 
working too hard, you know. Then, 
as long as you’re the boss, you 
can take the afternoon off yourself 
and we’ll go on a picnic.” 
“Can’t you take this job seriously?” 
“I cannot,” Flowers said. “I 
know the pay is magnificent and I 
know Mr. Vandenberg gives every 
indication of being more affluent 
than the U. S. Treasury. All the 
same, I can’t see any future in 
trading shoelaces. I want to get 
myself an honest job, so we can 
get married.” 
“What’s wrong with getting married on this job?” 
Flowers shook his head. “Eventually we’re going to corner the 
market with these non-breakable, 
last-a-lifetime shoelaces, and where 
will that leave us?” 
“Oh, we’ll be branching out into 
other things before long. Mr. Vandenberg says—” 
“I know what he says. I also 
know that there can’t be much 
profit— if any at all— in trading new 
things for old. It doesn’t take a 
business genius to figure that out.” 
“I still think this is some kind 
of promotion stunt.” 
Flowers snorted. “Who ever 
heard of a promotion without publicity? The only people breathing a 
word about this are a few gullible 
door-to-door men and you here 
in the shop.” 
He emptied his collection of 
used shoelaces onto her desk and 
she sighed and started to count. 
“Better go see Mr. Vandenberg,” 
she said. 
"C 1 LOWERS went down a narrow passageway, knocked, 
opened at the command of a deep, 
nasal voice. Mr. E. Vandenberg— 
if he had a first name, his employees had never discovered what it 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
was— glanced up from a pile of 
newspapers. Newspapers were one 
of Mr. E. Vandenberg’s many 
peculiarities. His cramped office 
looked like a back-issue warehouse. 
Newspapers were piled in, under 
and on anything that could conceivably hold newspapers— newspapers in a multitude of languages 
from all over the world. A casual 
observer would have taken Mr. 
E. Vandenberg for the director of 
a global clipping service, rather 
than a used-shoelace tycoon. 
Another of Vandenberg’s peculiarities was his face. His leathery, 
oily skin hung in sagging folds. It 
was a big face and it was absolutely devoid of expression. It 
never registered anger or displeasure. It never registered approval 
or enthusiasm. Mr. Vandenberg’s 
large, greenish eyes studied his 
employees with a speculative intensity that vaguely reminded 
Flowers of an owl staring at a 
mouse. Flowers did not like Mr. 
Vandenberg. 
“Have a good day?” Vandenberg asked. 
“Pretty fair.” Flowers looked at 
Vandenberg’s thick, unruly hair. 
On the first day of her employment, Janet Star had pronounced 
that well-nourished thatch to be a 
wig, and Flowers had been speculating about it ever since. So far, 
he had managed to resist the temptation to give it a firm tug and resolve the issue in a definitive man
ner. “Three hundred pairs,” he 
said. 
Vandenberg’s expression did not 
change. “Wonderful,” his monotone rumbled. “That’s a new record, isn’t it? Have you drawn your 
replacements?” 
“Janet’s counting the returns 
now.” 
Vandenberg seemed to nod from 
the general region of his protruding stomach. “I find it necessary 
to be out of town for a few days. 
Miss Star will handle the territorial assignments. I trust that no 
complications will arise.” 
“They never do,” Flowers said. 
Flowers made no move to leave, 
and Vandenberg said, “Is there 
anything else?” 
“No, sir. Except that I’d like 
to give notice. No particular hurry — whenever you are able to replace me.” 
Vandenberg slowly settled back 
in his chair, his unblinking eyes 
fixed upon Flowers. “You don’t 
like to work for me? How is that? 
You do better than anyone else.” 
“Oh, I don’t mind the work. It’s 
just that I don’t seem to understand this business. I can’t see 
much future in it.” 
\7 ANDENBERG leaned for" ward, his body stiff. “It has a 
wonderful future. Especially for 
you. As soon as this territory is 
properly developed, we’ll be opening some new branch offices. I plan 
BRIDLE SHOWER 
to put you in charge of one of 
them and eventually I expect to 
have you supervising branch offices in several states.” He got 
awkwardly to his feet. “That’s in 
the future, of course. For the present, I’ll raise your salary twenty 
dollars a week, and your salary 
will double when you take charge 
of a branch office. Satisfactory?” 
“Well . .” Flowers said. 
Vandenberg’s expressionless 
voice rumbled on while he gently 
patted Flowers on the back in the 
most approved fatherly manner. 
Flowers left the office a bit dazed. 
“I offered my resignation,” he 
told Janet. 
“You didn’t!” she cried. 
“He told me no and raised me 
twenty a week. I’m to take charge 
of a branch office when this territory is fully developed— whatever that means — at double my 
present salary.” 
“Jeff!” she shrieked. “Then-” 
“Yep. There must be something 
about this business that escapes 
me. Want to set a date?” 
M R. E. Vandenberg left his office minutes later and started 
out through the front of the store. 
The spectacle which he encountered in the front room so disgusted and dismayed him that he 
retraced his steps and left by the 
rear door. 
He drove out into the country, 
and by dark he had reached an 
abandoned farm forty miles from 
the city. Its abandonment had 
been a cause of considerable upset among the neighboring farmers. 
It was a shame, they said, to waste 
such good land. But the new 
owner, Mr. E. Vandenberg, was 
not interested in farming. 
Vandenberg drove down a 
weed-choked lane, left his car in 
a rickety shed and strolled across 
a rolling, sun-parched pasture. At 
precisely 9:00 P.M., a looming 
dark object descended. Vandenberg climbed aboard, was received 
with considerable ceremony and 
addressed in an unearthly tongue 
as General Vrooz. The dark object shot upward, moving so quickly that radar instruments at a nearby air base had only the time to 
acknowledge its presence with a 
noncommital flicker. 
As the dark object flashed outward from Earth, Mr. E. Vandenberg underwent a transformation. 
He removed not merely the unruly 
. hair, but everything else. Everything. It would have been no minor 
shock to Janet Star had she known 
that the suspected wig extended 
to the soles of the feet. 
General Vrooz emerged from 
the pupa of E. Vandenberg. He 
swabbed himself off quickly with 
the coordinated efforts of six 
spidery arms. He preened his scaly 
hide carefully, and then he settled 
himself in front of an observation 
port to gaze scornfully with a trio 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
BRIDLE SHOWER 
of multi-faceted eyes at the rapidly 
retreating disc of the planet Earth. 
G ENERAL Vrooz was landed 
in a cavern on the dark side 
of Earth’s lone satellite, known to 
natives as the Moon. He was escorted to his commanding officer’s 
sumptuous quarters. He turned a 
dozen pounds of newspaper clippings over to an aide and worked 
busily on a report until his communicator broke in upon his activity with a brusque announcement. 
“The Sector Commander is 
awake, sir.” 
“I’ll join him immediately,” 
General Vrooz announced. 
In a spacious conference room, 
flanked by sparkling metallic walls 
and surrounded by scaly-hided 
subordinate officers, General Vrooz 
reported to his superior. 
“Our approach,” he announced, 
“is economic.” 
The Sector Commander waved 
three of his six arms in assent. “I 
suspected it would be, from the 
preliminary reports.” 
“Then you’ve familiarized yourself with the planet’s organization?” General Vrooz said. 
“Excellent. We’re commencing 
operations in one of the leading 
political and economic entities. 
The economic complex is delicately 
balanced — production, distribution 
and consumption. We intend to 
remove consumption from that 
94 
cycle. The entire process will collapse, of course.” 
“How do you intend to proceed?” 
“We shall simply trade new articles for old articles. The population will satisfy its wants by 
trading with us, and the production and distribution phases will 
be eliminated. Chaos will result. 
For example, a major native mode 
of transportation centers upon a 
machine called an automobile. It 
is the end-product of a very large 
industry, and in its operation it 
utilizes a fuel called gasoline, 
which is the end-product of another very large industry. We shall 
offer a substitute product and 
trade new for old. Our substitute 
will be superior to the native product, of course. It will use oxygen 
for fuel, extracting it from the 
atmosphere. This will destroy the 
market for automobiles and gasoline, and at one stroke we shall 
have demolished two vital industries.” 
“Shrewd planning. How are the 
initial experiments progressing?” 
“Slowly. The natives have an 
innate suspicion which I do not 
exactly understand. Once this is 
overcome, I expect to progress 
rapidly.” 
The Sector Commander coldly 
studied a monstrous globe of the 
planet Earth. “When can we take 
over?” he asked. “We’ll have to 
give the fleet ample notice, you 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
know. There were complaints that 
we moved too quickly in the 
Hanolff conquest.” 
“That was an entirely different 
type of operation,” General Vrooz 
said. “I cannot set a date, as yet, 
but the military will have more 
than sufficient notice.” 
“What product are you using 
for your experiments?” 
“Shoelaces,” General Vrooz 
said, using the native tongue because the expression was untranslatable. 
“Shoe-laces? What is that?” 
\TROOZ explained, and had to 
" have E. Vandenberg’s shoes 
brought in to make the matter 
clear. 
“Their technology is certainly 
primitive,” the Sector Commander 
said. 
“Not all of their footwear requires laces,” said General Vrooz. 
“But the majority does. It’s a common article and it’s inexpensive, 
which allays their suspicion somewhat. It is serving our purpose 
well.” 
“Excellent. But how did you 
happen to decide upon this?” 
General Vrooz’s scaly sides 
twitched convulsively. “If you will 
pardon the levity, sir— I’m making 
use of a native proverb. Something about starting a new business on a shoestring.” 
He had to explain the interchangeability of the terms shoeBRIDLE SHOWER 
string and shoelace before the Sector Commander indicated laughter 
by waving all six arms simultaneously. 
General Vrooz returned to 
Earth and reluctantly re-encumbered himself with the synthetic 
epidermis of E. Vandenberg. Jeff 
Flowers and ten other young male 
employees continued to barter 
shoelaces with receptive housewives. More passersby stopped to 
stare at the sign in the shop window and increasing numbers came 
in to investigate. Janet Star installed a row of chairs for the use 
of customers removing and replacing shoelaces. 
Word began to spread— slowly 
at first and then with an awesome 
velocity. Startled housewives hurried to their telephones to notify 
sisters, cousins, aunts, neighbors 
and chance acquaintances. 
“A young man came to the door 
this afternoon and do you know 
what he did? You’ll never believe 
it! He gave me eight pairs of new 
shoelaces for eight pairs of old 
ones. And they’re beautiful!” 
The amused businessman whose 
curiosity brought him into New for 
Old, Incorporated, returned on 
Saturday with his wife and children, so they could pick out their 
own shoelaces. Dozens of innocent 
door-to-door salesmen found themselves greeted with startling enthusiasm on the chance that they 
might be trading something new 
for something old. Jeff Flowers 
chalked up a record seven hundred 
exchanges in one day. Mr. E. Vandenberg stoically tabulated the 
daily totals and began to pick out 
sites for branch offices. New for 
Old, Incorporated, was ready to 
start expanding. 
r p HE afternoon was precisely 
like any other afternoon of 
the preceding weeks, meaning 
that it was smoldering hot. The 
most that could be said was that 
it gave people something to talk 
about— the heat and the dryness. 
Jeff Flowers moved wearily 
along a residential street. His mind 
was not on his work. The first of 
the week, he was scheduled to 
open a branch office in Seattle. 
He’d picked the place himself, 
after checking carefully to make 
certain that Seattle was neither hot 
nor dry. Janet was staying behind 
until she could break in a new 
girl for Mr. Vandenberg, and then 
she would join him in Seattle. 
They would get married. The pay 
was magnificent, with none of the 
petty deductions that plagued 
most workers. The total of their 
combined salaries was almost phenomenal enough to quiet Flowers’ 
misgivings about the future of trading something new for something 
old. 
In the meantime, there were 
shoelaces to trade. Word of his 
coming preceded him along the 
96 
street. The housewives had their 
doors open and neat piles of shoelaces were waiting for him. If it 
hadn’t been so infernally hot, he 
thought he might be able to run 
up a new record. But it was just 
too hot to move fast. 
He mopped his brow with a 
handkerchief that had long since 
passed its saturation point, and 
glanced up at the sky. Dark clouds 
were drifting in over the city. He 
collected a total of fifteen pairs of 
used shoelaces at the next house, 
and by the time the delighted 
housewife had completed her selections, an occasional drop of rain 
was spattering against the windows. 
Flowers started back toward his 
car, walking briskly. His walk 
changed to a trot and then to a 
headlong gallop as the heavy 
clouds suddenly dumped torrents 
of rain on the city. The long 
drought was over. 
Half a block from his car, 
legs churning frantically, Flowers 
kicked off a shoe. He retrieved it 
and ran on in his sock. Five steps 
later, he lost the other shoe. He 
reached his car in a thoroughly 
drenched condition, suitcase in one 
hand and pair of shoes in the other, 
and flung himself into the front 
seat. He slammed the door, 
breathed a deep sigh of relief and 
turned his attention to his shoes. 
The reason for their irresponsible behavior smote him in the 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
face at one glance. He had no 
shoelaces. 
He stared at the shoes for a long 
time while water thundered down 
on the roof above him and dripped 
from his trousers onto the floor 
below him. Then, heart beating 
violently, he took a bright New 
for Old, Incorporated shoelace 
from his suitcase, rolled down his 
window and held it out to the mercy of the downpour. Its bright 
color vanished. It quickly became 
a slimy, sticky mess and suddenly it disappeared. Even the metallic tips dissolved. 
LOWERS repeated the experi
ment twice, and then he sat 
hunched over his steering wheel, 
lost in thought. Rain flooded 
against his windshield. He started 
the motor and turned on the 
wipers; they made scarcely a ripple in the cascading rain. Street 
lights were on, pallid globs of 
whiteness, adding nothing to the 
almost-zero visibility. Driving was 
impossible. Flowers took a deep 
breath and edged away from the 
curb. 
Twenty minutes and one dented 
fender later, he reached a drugstore. He made a dash for it, leaving his shoes in the car. He found 
that he was not alone in the matter of unconventional footwear. 
There were at least a dozen pairs 
of sopped socks and stockings in 
the place, and their owners were 
BRIDLE SHOWER 
talking and gesticulating furiously. Something about shoelaces. 
Flowers hurried into a phone 
booth and dialed New for Old, Incorporated. “Janet,” he said. “Now 
listen carefully. You’ve got to get 
out of there. Those damned shoelaces dissolve in water, and heaven 
knows how many thousand people 
were caught wearing them in this 
rain. There’s no telling what will 
happen. Get over to your apartment and I’ll meet you there. I 
think we’d better beat it out of 
town.” 
“I can’t!” Janet wailed. “The 
police are here now and—” 
“I’ll take that, miss,” a masculine voice snapped. “Hello. Who is 
this?” 
Flowers banged down the phone 
and fled. 
Back in his car, he searched in 
his suitcase for a pair of old laces 
and got his shoes securely back 
onto his feet. He mentally crossed 
his fingers and started off again. 
The rain had diminished to a 
steady downpour by the time he 
reached New for Old, Incorporated. The shop was locked. He 
turned away and marched resolutely toward police headquarters. 
And there he found Mr. E. Vandenberg, Janet, three fellow employees, and a police sergeant who 
cheerfully crossed his name off a 
list and invited him to join the 
others. 
“These phony shoelaces are 
your responsibility,” Flowers told 
Vandenberg. “What are you going 
to do about it?” 
Vandenberg stood at the window, staring stony-faced out at 
the deluge. “Rain,” he muttered. 
“Water. Rain. Water.” 
“Sure. And every pair of those 
shoelaces is guaranteed to last the 
life of two pairs of shoes.” 
“We shall replace every pair,” 
Vandenberg said absently. “We 
shall produce a new shoelace that 
is not affected by this— rain.” 
“Great,” said Flowers. “If somebody doesn’t lynch us first. There 
are thousands of people running 
around barefoot this afternoon because of New for Old, Incorporated. I passed a shoe store on my 
way down here and the place was 
jammed with people buying shoelaces.” 
“Have no fear,” Vandenberg 
said, leaning forward to watch the 
rivulets of water streaking down 
the window. “We shall give them 
two pair for every pair of the 
others.” 
J ANET was tearful. “He just 
doesn’t understand,” she said. 
“He’s in a terrible lot of trouble 
—all of us are. And it isn’t because 
of the shoelaces, either, though I 
suppose they’ll bring that up, too. 
Especially since all the policemen—” 
“What about the policemen?” 
asked Flowers. 
“A lot of them ate at that cafeteria across from the store. They 
saw the sign in the window, and 
by now I suppose the entire police 
force is wearing our shoelaces. Was 
wearing them, I mean. Some of 
them came in right after it started 
raining and made a big fuss. And 
then some men came from the 
District Attorney’s office—” 
“What is this all about?” 
“I don’t know. But we’re all in 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
■ 
a lot of trouble and he won’t do 
anything about it.” 
“Vandenberg,” Flowers called 
out. “How about hiring a lawyer 
and getting us out of here?” 
“Lawyers?” Vandenberg echoed 
blankly. 
It was Flowers who finally summoned a lawyer, an austere, 
gloomy-looking man with a long 
mournful face, horn - rimmed 
glasses, and gold teeth that seemed 
decidedly out of character. He also 
had the unlikely name of Ephraim 
Zomrigger. He conferred briefly 
with Flowers, made a noble but 
unsuccessful attempt to engage 
Vandenberg in conversation, and 
went off to try his luck with the 
police and the D.A.’s men. 
“Shoelaces?” he said to Flowers when he returned. “Shoelaces 
aren’t the big problem. There may 
be a fuss about them— there’s al
BRIDLE SHOWER 
ready a fuss about them. Wait 
until you see the evening papers. 
But your boss says he’ll have some 
made that won’t dissolve and he’ll 
give two pairs for every pair of 
soluble ones you people have been 
passing out. I don’t know how he’ll 
work the exchange, but if he goes 
through with it, that part should 
be all right. No, the trouble is a 
matter of records.” 
“Records?” Flowers asked. 
“What records?” 
“That’s just what the District 
Attorney wants to know. What 
records. Your boss was served with 
a subpoena a week ago. Ordered 
to produce all his records. He 
says he hasn’t got any. Can’t get 
away with that sort of thing, you 
know. First thing he has to do is 
produce the records. If there’s anything wrong with them, then— but 
he’ll have to produce the records.” 
“Let’s talk to him,” Flowers 
said. 
'VT ANDENBERG listened and 
" responded indifferently. Records? He had no records. What 
difference did that make? 
“My word!” the lawyer exclaimed. “Why, it makes . .” He 
removed his glasses and somehow 
managed to give the impression 
that he was getting a better look at 
Vandenberg. “My good sir, you 
are operating a business, New for 
Old, Incorporated. Do you own 
stock in the corporation yourself?” 
100 
“Stock?” Vandenberg said noncommittally. “What stock?” 
“But if it’s a corporation, there 
must be stock. There must be 
stockholders. Where is your list 
of stockholders?” 
“What stockholders?” Vandenberg said. 
The lawyer smiled weakly and 
tried again. “Let’s see now. You 
are a corporation. You are incorporated under the laws of the state 
of . .” He paused, his thin eyebrows arched expectantly. 
Vandenberg did not complete 
the statement. “Don’t understand,” 
he said. 
“But you can’t be incorporated 
if you’re not incorporated! I 
mean—” 
“Just a name,” Vandenberg 
said. 
“It can’t be just a name! If you 
want to call yourself incorporated, 
you must incorporate and . .” 
He replaced his glasses and his 
eysight seemed to fail noticeably. 
He moved closer to Vandenberg. 
.“You have employees. Certainly 
you have records on them.” 
“Twelve employees,” Vandenberg said. “No records.” 
The lawyer removed his glasses 
and mopped his brow. “Payroll 
records?” he suggested. 
“No.” 
“Of course you’ve been making 
the proper withholding tax deductions from your employees’ salaries 
and forwarding them—” 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
“No.” 
Zomrigger groped around for a 
chair and sat down heavily. “You 
had each one of your employees 
complete a Form W4. If an employee completed no such form, 
then you withheld his tax as if he 
had claimed no exemptions. You 
deducted the withholding tax from 
each employee’s salary and forwarded it to—” 
“No,” Vandenberg said. “I deducted nothing from the salaries. 
Why should I take my employees’ 
money?” 
Zomrigger was breathing rapidly, his long face transfixed with 
horror. “Did you— did you apply 
on Form SS4 for an employer’s 
identification number, and deduct 
social security taxes from your employees, and match them with a 
similar amount of your own 
money, and—” 
“No.” 
“Federal and state unemployment taxes?” 
“No.” 
“Did you clear your operations 
with the state retail sales tax people?” 
F OR the first time, Vandenberg 
seemed interested. “What sort 
of thing is that?” 
“Well, now — I couldn’t say, 
without checking, whether or not 
it pertains to your operations. It 
depends on the retail value of your 
shoelaces, and since you are tradBRIDLE SHOWER 
ing, rather than selling— but you 
should have cleared the operation 
with the retail sales tax people. 
They might hand you a whopping 
big bill if it turns out that—” 
“Not selling anything,” Vandenberg said. “Simple transaction — 
trading. Nobody’s business but 
mine.” 
“What arrangements did you 
make about the retailer’s excise 
tax on jewelry?” 
“No arrangements. Trading 
shoelaces, not jewelry.” 
“But those shoelaces of yours. 
Some of them have gold and silver tips, haven’t they? And artificial jewels? The government is 
certain to demand adjustments on 
the tax— I think. I haven’t exactly 
had a case just like this one.” He 
mopped his brow again. “Articles 
made of, or ornamented, mounted, 
or fitted with precious metals or 
imitations thereof have a tax that 
amounts to ten per cent of the 
sales price. Surely—” 
Vandenberg shook his head 
slowly. 
“Of course you filed your own 
personal income tax last April. 
That would be, in your case, Form 
1040, with Schedule C, plus the 
self-employment tax, and a declaration of estimated tax of the current year if your gross income exceeds six hundred dollars for each 
of your exemptions plus four hundred dollars.” He looked up hopefully. 
“No income,” Vandenberg said. 
“Just old shoelaces. The government wants me to pay a tax on old 
shoelaces?” 
“I forgot,” said the lawyer. 
“You’re an employee of a corporation. But then there are the corporation taxes— but no! You aren’t 
incorporated. You just call yourself . .” He slumped forward and 
buried his face in his hands. “Oh, 
my!” he moaned. He glanced at 
Flowers. “Didn’t he deduct your 
withholding taxes or—” 
“Nothing,” Flowers said. “I 
never thought anything about it. 
It’s kind of an unusual business, 
you know.” 
“It certainly is.” The lawyer 
turned back to Vandenberg. “Did 
you file an income tax report last 
year? Or the year before that? Or 
the year—” 
“Never,” Vandenberg said. 
“Oh, my!” The lawyer’s glasses 
struck the floor with a thump, but 
did not shatter. He retrieved them 
and got slowly to his feet. “I’d better summon a few of my colleagues. This is going to be too 
much for one man to handle.” 
T> Y late evening, it was decided 
that the employees of New 
for Old, Incorporated, were innocent of wrongdoing. They were 
released. Vandenberg stubbornly 
shrugged off the efforts of his legal 
advisors, refused to answer questions, refused to post bond for his 
102 
release. He was taken off without 
protest to jail. 
In the morning, his cell was 
found inexplicably empty. 
The F.B.I. and state and local 
police departments all over the 
country were alerted, but no trace 
of the fugitive was found. 
Jeff Flowers got himself an 
honest job, at the two-dollar window of the local racetrack, and 
married Janet Star. They lived together happily ever after, or so the 
latest reports indicate. The day 
after the big rain, local stores did 
an avalanche of business in shoelaces, and sales of laceless shoes 
shot mysteriously upward. 
The government took over the 
assets of New for Old, Incorporated, and found itself in possession 
of a room full of old shoelaces and 
several thousand gross of stylish 
new shoelaces which were mysteriously soluble in water. It never 
announced the disposition of this 
property. One local newspaper suggested that the new laces be turned 
. over to the armed forces, for use 
in desert maneuvers; evidently the 
editorial writer had never worn 
combat boots and had no idea of 
how gay those laces would look in 
them. 
General Vrooz, alias E. Vandenberg, left Earth. He also left the 
Moon and the Solar system. As he 
told his Sector Commander, there 
were other worlds to conquer 
where his efforts would be more 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
rewarding. Of course he is not forgetting Earth. He will be back— 
oh, most certainly he will be back 
—and on his next trip, he won’t 
be trading shoelaces. 
But as he stated in his final report, he could see no point in investing time, materials and energy 
in the sabotage of an economy 
which is already struggling feebly 
in the encircling grip of governmental red tape. In two or three 
flibs, the general wrote— the flib 
is his race’s unit of temporal measure— the economy will die of selfstrangulation and conquest will be 
a simple matter. 
General Vrooz does not expect 
to wait long. 
— LLOYD HIGGLE, JR. 
society; 
DO YOUR FRIENDS THINK 
YOU’RE A MONSTER? 
, Then hurry out and get a copy of 
[ MONSTERS OF FILMLAND 
magazine, a fascinating collection of 
1 photos & features on Hollywood’s 
, most famous fiends. Horrific and 
hilarious! Frankenstein himself 
! recommends 
MONSTERS OF FILMLAND 
35c at newsstands, or mail 50c to 
Monsters, 1054 E. Upsal St. 
Phila. 50, Pa. Sent prepaid. 
BRIDLE SHOWER 
THE VOICE 
OF THE DIAPHRAGM 
By RICHARD WILSON 
Nostalgia is a time bomb — Harry 
fooled around with it and found 
his whole life blown to pieces! 
I: HE 
TTE fled from the television set, 
which had been depicting the 
horrors that could beset an intestinal tract while a Friendly Announcer held up a bottle not-quiteguaranteed to Relieve Distress. 
He crept back later during a 
relatively inoffensive paean to some 
Indescribably delicious candy, 
which nevertheless was being described, and shut the set off. 
He considered smashing it, but 
104 
Illustrated by JOHNSON 
he abhorred excesses— and he’d 
only have to clean up the mess 
afterward. 
He tried to read, but was unable to concentrate. The print 
jumped around the page and hurt 
his eyes. He wondered what was 
the matter with him. Could it be 
Tired Blood? He shuddered. 
He roamed the apartment restlessly, half seeing all that had 
grown familiar over his twenty 
bachelor years there. Few things 
had changed. 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
There was the gas fireplace he’d 
installed after a trip to England— 
it was relatively new. There was 
the morris chair he’d bought himself on his 45th birthday, not so 
long ago. He’d known exactly what 
he wanted— the kind with the pushbutton in the flat arm that raised 
or lowered the back, and the section in the base that slid out to 
provide a footrest. He’d persevered and found one in a Salvation 
Army resale store. 
He sat down in it now. He put 
his head back and his feet up and 
averted his eyes from the television set, which it directly faced. 
That was new, of course. 
He got up in irritation to turn 
the chair and the biggish end table 
with the radio on it, and sat down 
again. 
S WITCHING on the radio an old Atwater Kent he’d 
bought with the morris chair and 
lovingly restored — he waited in 
apprehension. He was ready to 
snap it off instantly if he heard the 
voice of that little girl shaming her 
mother into buying two-ply toilet 
tissue. 
He relaxed as music welled out 
of the ancient speaker. Then, as if 
from the past, came the friendly, 
baffled voice of Jack Benny. 
He was surprised until he remembered having read that transcriptions of old Benny programs 
were being brought back to radio. 
He listened, pleased. Benny on 
television had always made him 
nervous. Being completely convinced of the legend that Benny 
was helpless without his writers, 
he was constantly afraid the perennial 39-year-old from Waukegan 
would forget his lines. He preferred the old Benny, in a radio 
studio, with his glasses on, secure 
with a script in front of him. 
He turned the dial regretfully 
when the Benny show ended. His 
fingers froze on the knob as he 
heard the voice of Fred Allen. The 
late, great Allen? Had they transcribed him back from the Final 
Curtain? Allen’s Sinoid voice was 
doing a One Long Pan skit. Ah, 
those days! The epic era of the 
Mighty Allen Art Players, with 
Portland Hoff a and Parker Fennelly and Mrs. Nussbaum. Bless 
them and their pre-visual medium, 
which at least had left a few things 
to the imagination. 
He listened blissfully and did 
not even mind when the Merry 
Macs sang their song. He’d always 
regretted the Merry Macs, who 
just didn’t fit into the Allen pattern, and he felt intuitively that 
Fred did, too. You could tell from 
the way he introduced them, almost apologetically, as if saying 
he’d had to compromise with the 
sponsor. Then Allen, too, was gone. 
He turned the dial hopefully, 
wondering what new magic his 
radio would evoke. Was it Old
THE VOICE OF THE DIAPHRAGM 
timers Night, put together from 
hallowed tapes from some golden 
vault? 
He lingered for a station break 
and heard the familiar chimes — 
then the almost forgotten call letters WEAF. Quickly, excitedly, he 
switched in time to hear another 
long-extinct letter group, WJZ. 
He sat back in the morris chair, 
his heart palpitating a little. He 
had begun to believe that his Atwater Kent was bringing him these 
long-dead programs live. 
He switched from band to band, 
thrilled as the boy with a crystal 
set he once had been, and heard 
Vic and Sade, Major Bowes, Myrt 
and Marge (he almost cried), The 
Goldbergs, Jack Pearl (“Vas you 
dere, Sharlie?”), Burns and Allen, 
Rudy Vallee, Stoopnagle and 
Budd (that crazy organ!), The 
Easy Aces, Snow Village Sketches, 
Ruth Etting, Joe Penner, Kate 
Smith, Frank Munn (“the golden 
voice of radio”), Ben Bernie, Raymond Knight (“the voice of the 
diaphragm enunciating”) . 
TTE luxuriated in the sounds of 
the hallowed, half-forgotten 
voices, laughing at them, weeping 
with them, reveling in the oncedead past, questioning nothing. 
Only when midnight came, and 
station after station signed off (was 
that weak, indistinctly heard one 
KDKA?) did he allow himself to 
wonder. 
He stilled the hum of dead air 
with a reluctant click. He stood 
and stretched, cramped but not 
sleepy. He thought, dreamily 
awake, not believing it: “I’m back 
in the past. I was happy then. I 
was young. Life was uncomplicated.” 
He corrected himself : “I am 
happy. I am young.” 
He laughed (softly, not to break 
the spell) and thought: “It’s true. 
Who’s to say it isn’t? As long as I 
want it to be, it’s true, here in this 
room, right now. As long as I don’t 
look in the mirror— as long as I 
don’t switch on the television.” 
He turned his back on the monstrous, futuristic television set, that 
anachronism in his return to— to 
when? The radio programs had 
been a mixed bag. Mostly they 
were from the 1930s (his twenties), but a few had been from the 
1920s (even better!). No matter, 
he told himself. Don’t question it. 
Don’t doubt the voice of the diaphragm. Trust your Atwater Kent, 
. your pre-transistor genie. 
He heard something then, outside. A clatter-rumble in the 
distance. Clatter - rumble - screech. 
Louder. Closer. Clatter-rumblescreech-rattle. It was roaring by his 
window now, rattling past with an 
infernal beloved din, a dozen feet 
away. 
The Ninth Avenue El! Torn 
down years ago, of course, long 
before they doomed the Third 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
Avenue El and even the Sixth. 
But there it was. 
He saw its shadows on his 
drawn window shade. He rushed to 
raise the shade, then stopped himself. 
“No,” he thought. “If I look, it 
won’t be there (yes, it will). I 
want it to be, but it isn’t (yes, it 
is). I musn’t look. I must accept 
it (I do). I must make an effortmeet it halfway, have faith. I must 
go out. Then it will be there (I 
know, I know).” 
He went out the door and into 
the hall, down the stairs to the 
vestibule. He saw his name in the 
slot of the mailbox. 
The letters he had typed so 
many years ago were fresh and unsmudged. 
He stepped out through the 
street door and into the earlier 
time, the blood coursing youthfully 
in his veins. 
II: She 
CHE was out late. It was a necessary inconvenience. She endured the suspicious glances of 
patrolmen, the oglings of hopeful 
but faint-hearted young men, the 
frank approaches of others. 
She had to consider them all. 
One of them must be the right 
one. This was the neighborhood. 
Hell’s Kitchen. Somewhere here, 
west of Times Square, under the 
El or near the tracks on Death 
THE VOICE OF THE DIAPHR 
Avenue, she would recognize her 
man. Her memory of how it would 
be was dim. She wished she had 
paid more attention at the time. 
But she had been in a hurry to 
go. There had been so many exciting vistas that she’d skimmed 
a few details. It was her own 
fault. She’d been warned. 
She slung her fox furpiece over 
her shoulder and walked on. A 
man came out of a bar and fell 
into step beside her. She looked 
at him sideways. He wasn’t the 
one. She could tell. 
She said, “I live in the next 
block and my brother’s still up. He 
weighs two hundred pounds.” 
She looked straight ahead, but 
knew he had dropped back and 
would leave her alone. 
She turned the corner. At the 
end of the long block, an El train 
rattled past. 
She walked quickly, her high 
heels sending echoes back from 
the brownstones, the tail of the fox 
flapping against her back. 
She hoped without real hope 
that this would be the night. How 
many nights had it been? It didn’t 
really matter (it would come to 
the same thing in the end), except that she was tired and wanted 
to go back. Her curiosity had been 
satisfied over and over. She was 
sorry now that she had come, 
though she knew she would not 
be— then. But now was not then. 
Now was now, and her feet hurt. 
AGM 107 
She would know him, though. 
Let it be at the corner, under the 
El, tonight. This was the area. This 
could be the time. (But what was 
time? Very inexact, time.) 
She saw the cop before he saw 
her and adjusted her walk to a 
purposeful stride. She thought: 
“It’s all right, officer— I’m walking 
the streets of your city, but I’m 
no streetwalker.” The cop passed, 
swinging his nightstick, with just 
the suggestion of a nod. A good girl 
going home, that’s what she was. 
Oh, Lord, would she ever get 
home? 
She made herself think Yes. 
Yes, she would, tonight, under the 
El. She’d find him there and she’d 
know him. There’d be something 
about him that would tell her. His 
clothes, perhaps, though men’s 
clothes didn’t change as much over 
the years. His attitude, more likely. Something she’d recognize. 
She turned at the corner, toward 
the El station at the next block. 
There he was! A man, standing 
half in shadow. She walked toward 
him quickly. It wasn’t his clothes 
so much as his indecisiveness that 
convinced her that he was her 
man. He was standing at the foot 
of the steps leading to the El platform, looking at a handful of coins. 
She hurried and stopped beside 
him, close. He looked up, confused. She already had the coins 
in her own hand. 
She said to him, smiling in re108 
lief, “No buffalo nickels? Only Jeffersons?” 
She saw him start, smile, then 
cancel the smile and withdraw into 
propriety. But he was the one. He 
was! She knew it as she watched 
him take courage and say, tentatively, doubtfully, daringly, 
“Would you take a Roosevelt 
dime, miss, for two buffalo 
nickels?” 
Ill: They 
HP HEY waited on the dimly lit 
platform for the downtown 
train. He started to speak, then 
hesitated. She smiled, encouraging 
him. 
“How could you know about 
Roosevelt dimes?” he asked finally. “He wasn’t— isn’t even President yet. FDR, I mean. Wouldn’t 
he still be Governor of New 
York?” 
She shrugged carelessly. “I’m no 
good at current events. It’s one of 
my failings.” 
. He had been studying her in 
polite glances. “You’re not from 
here,” he said, “though your clothing’s right. The skirt length, the 
hat— all that. How did you get 
here?” He laughed. “I don’t even 
know what year it is. It was too 
dark to see the license plates without being conspicuous— you know, 
bending down. And there weren’t 
any newsstands open or I’d have 
bought a paper.” 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
“You don’t need a paper,” she 
said. 
There was a gum machine on a 
pillar and he stooped a bit to look 
in its mirror. He was young, all 
right. About her age, he judged. 
She laughed. “You’re being conspicuous now.” 
“I don’t mind— with you. How 
old are you?” 
“Twenty-four.” 
“Then I’d like to be 25. I was 
born in 1911, so if I’m 25, this is 
1936. Is that right?” 
She shrugged again. “It doesn’t 
matter. Everything is relative in 
the duoverse.” 
“In the what?” 
The train rattled in, drowning 
her reply. They took seats in the 
nearly empty car. 
“Where are you going?” she 
asked. 
“Now? South Ferry, I guess. 
That’s where the train goes, it 
said on the sign.” 
“There’s a paper over there.” 
She nodded toward it across the 
aisle. “You could check the date.” 
“I don’t really want to now,” he 
said. “I— I wouldn’t want to push 
it too far.” 
“No such thing. But suit yourself. I can understand it.” 
“Can you really? I was listening 
to the radio— it’s an old one— because I was mad at the television—” He stopped. “You know 
what television is?” 
“Yes.” 
“Of course. You know about 
Roosevelt dimes and Jefferson 
nickels.” 
She nodded. “You were telling 
me about the radio— steeping yourself in the past.” 
“I didn’t say that.” He turned 
to look at her. She was dark and 
pretty. He wondered what her 
name was. 
“No, but that’s the way it happens.” 
“It happened to you, too?” 
“Not exactly,” she said. “I 
planned it. I’d guess that you 
didn’t.” 
“No. It just happened. What’s 
your name?” 
“April.” 
He laughed. 
“Funny?” she asked. 
“Yes. Not your name— the coincidence. Your name is April and 
mine is Summers. Harry Summers.” 
“I see. Hello, Harry.” She shook 
his hand gravely. 
“Hello, April.” He looked into 
her brown eyes as the train banged 
along through the past. “Where are 
you going, April?” 
“I’ll go with you while you do 
your sightseeing. Then I’ll go home 
with you.” 
“Oh?” He seemed surprised and 
embarrassed. 
She dropped her eyes. “It’s all 
right,” she said. “It’s—” 
“Of course it is. I’d like you to.” 
But he didn’t want to go home 
THE VOICE OF THE DIAPHRAGM 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
—home where the TV was— home 
where he was 46. Home where the 
TV was, would she be 45? 
“Don’t worry about anything, 
Harry.” She seemed to be reassuring him. “Enjoy yourself. That’s 
what you came back for. You’re 
happier here, aren’t you?” 
“Yes,” he said, looking at her. 
“Yes, I am.” 
Their hands were still clasped. 
S TANDING close together at 
the rail of the Staten Island 
ferry (two more buffalo nickels), 
they watched the phosphorescent 
water. Something was nagging him. 
“I’m really here?” he urged. “I 
mean really here?” 
She squeezed his arm. “What do 
you think?” 
“I don’t know. Here— now. Could 
I meet myself? If I went looking, 
could I find the other Harry Summers — the one who’s living 
through 1936 the first time?” 
“No,” she said. A freighter 
hooted mournfully at the ferryboat. “You’re the only Harry Summers in this 1936.” 
“This 1936? Is that what you 
meant by— what did you call it— 
the duoverse?” 
“Yes. But you mustn’t think I 
understand everthing I can name. 
I do know that you couldn’t be 
here — nor could I — unless there 
were something controlling the 
paradoxes. That’s the duoverse— a 
twin universe to keep time travel
ers from running into themselves. 
It’s actually just a theory, but it 
seems to work.” 
They were silent for a while, 
watching the wake of the freighter 
moving up the harbor. The air was 
fresh but not cold and her closeness made him wish the ride would 
never end. 
“I’m so glad I found you,” he 
whispered. 
“I’m glad I found you. I’d been 
looking for so long.” 
His heart thumped at her words. 
He drew her head down to his 
shoulder and she let it rest there. 
He touched her cheek gently. 
“Let’s not lose what we’ve found. 
Let’s keep it forever.” 
She didn’t move. She said, as 
if to the dark sky, “And thou beside me under the branches of the 
time-tree . Something like that? 
Oh, Harry!” 
She turned and was in his arms. 
They kissed and her tears trickled 
to their lips. 
Then she was her separate self 
again, gripping the rail with both 
hands. 
“It’s impossible, Harry. I’m going the other way.” 
' 1 1 HEY were at his front door. 
-®- There were signs of dawn 
through the steel latticework of 
the El above them. 
“We haven’t done much sightseeing in your beloved past,” April 
said. “We haven’t seen the Hip
THE VOICE OF THE DIAPHRAGM 
podrome, or the streetcars on 
Broadway—” 
“You’re all the past I want.” 
She smiled sadly. “Let’s go up. 
I said I’d go home with you.” 
“I don’t want it to be that way,” 
he said. “Not only that way.” 
“That’s the way it has to be. 
There’s no other.” 
“But up there, I’m — I’m 46. 
And you—” 
“Not till you turn on the TV, 
Harry. Not till then. Let’s go up, 
Harry.” 
He put the key in the lock. He 
took her fox and she made coffee 
in the kitchenette. 
“I might have known you’d 
have real coffee,” she said. “No 
millions of tiny flavor buds for 
you, eh, Old-timer?” 
“I don’t have the room,” he 
said, smiling at his little joke. 
They sat and drank their coffee formally, she in his morris 
chair, he next to her in a straight 
chair, neither facing the blank 
square eye of the television set. 
He started to say something 
once, but an El train roared past, 
just outside his drawn shade, and 
she didn’t hear him. 
Finally she said, “Thank you 
for the coffee— and for everything 
else.” 
She placed the cup carefully in its saucer on the flat arm of 
the chair and stood up. 
“You’re not going! You can’t! 
Please!” 
“I must. I’ve a long way to go. 
Turn on the TV, please.” 
“No!” He stood to face her. “I 
won’t do that to you. I won’t make 
you old.” 
“You don’t understand.” She 
moved toward the television set, 
but he moved in front of her. 
“Please,” he said desperately. 
“Wait. It’s too early. There’s 
nothing on.” 
“I have waited, Harry. You 
don’t know how long.” 
There was the rumble of another El train approaching, and 
as his eyes went to the window, 
she darted past him. She flicked 
the knob and turned the volume 
button high. The rumble grew 
louder. The train was less than a 
block away. The room-rattling din 
drowned the hum of the warming 
tubes. 
He stood as if in a trance, looking from her to the window and 
back again. 
“April . .” 
The voice of the television was 
heard before there was a picture: 
“And now, kiddies, it’s time for 
your Uncle Jack to tell you about 
a wonderful surprise you can have 
the next time your mommy takes 
you to the grocery store ...” 
And with the coming of the 
voice, the sound of the El died. 
l"kUTSIDE the window, Harry 
knew without going to raise 
the shade, was the wide, one
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
way, truck-choked, El-less Ninth 
Avenue of 1957. 
And he, in 1957, was 46. He 
knew it without a mirror to tell 
him. He felt it in his sagging 
muscles and aching feet. And April 
was 45. He turned from the window, but not easily. 
She was unchanged. She was 
fresh and lovely, untouched by 
the years which, flowing back in 
an instant, had plunged back at 
him in a tidal wave. 
April turned off the set just as 
Uncle Jack began to take shape 
holding a breakfast food box and 
pointing to it with his right index 
finger. “Kiddies ...” 
“You’re the same,” Harry said. 
“It is 1957 and I’m 46 and you’re 
still 24. Why?” 
“I told you we were going different ways. Your way was back. 
Mine was forward. Oh, my dear, 
I’m sorry. But I had to— to use 
you. I had no choice.” 
He straightened his shoulders, 
tried to pull in his stomach. 
“You’ve come back from the 
past,” he said, trying to understand. 
“But you should have been a child 
in 1936 — a three-year-old child.” 
“I wish — ” she began, had to 
stop. “Oh, how I wish I didn’t have 
to hurt you. But I’m not from your 
past, or even your present. I’m 
from the future.” 
“The future — ” He had to sit 
down. His finger accidentally 
pushed the button in the arm of 
THE VOICE OF THE DIAPHR 
the morris chair and it sprang up 
and hit him in the back. 
“Then,” he said, pain in his eyes, 
“I’m just a stop on your journey. 
Where you’re going, I’m — dead.” 
“No, Harry.” She went to kneel 
at his feet. “Oh, no. It’s all relative. 
You must see that. It’s what you 
are now that matters. Not what 
will be, or what was.” 
He looked at her, then looked 
away. “Don’t try to be kind. I know 
I hoped for too much. I wanted 
my youth and I wanted you — and 
I couldn’t have both.” His gaze 
came to rest on the television set. 
“I can’t have either.” 
CHE touched his hand. “It was to 
^ have been so simple, so scientific. I was to go back — they have 
machines — and make notes and 
saturate myself in the atmosphere 
of the past — Oh, it doesn’t matter! 
You’re what counts. I’ve hurt you 
and I didn’t mean to — ” 
He took the hand that had 
touched his. “I don’t matter,” he 
said. “Not a bit. I’m just a phantom 
in your life — in your real present. 
Where you belong, I’m just a 
corpse in a graveyard and you’re 
too young to think about such 
things.” 
She shook her head and started 
to cry. 
“No,” he said, “let me finish. We 
have to be realistic. I’m just a 
complicating factor who’s got in 
your way. I mustn’t let myself do 
AGM 113 
that. And you mustn’t concern 
yourself with someone who doesn’t 
exist any more in your time. I’ll 
be happy if you’ll think of me 
occasionally up there in twentyhundred and whatever it is.” 
She had pressed the back of 
his hand, holding hers, to her wet 
cheek. 
He managed a wry smile. “It 
would be a personal kind of 
thought that no other corpse could 
boast of.” 
“Harry!” she cried. “Harry — 
please stop it. Don’t kill yourself in 
your own lifetime. I’ll stay with 
you, my dear. I will. I don’t care. 
I can’t do this to you.” 
He shook his head. “No, I won’t 
let you. I’m a sentimental man 
who’s been privileged to know his 
youth again. And, knowing that 
youth, I know yours. I won’t let 
you sacrifice yourself for a phantom who died before you were 
even born.” 
She was sobbing on his knee. 
“Get up, child,” he commanded. 
“Up! Go into the bathroom and 
wash your face. Off with that lipstick— cupid’s bows are passe. We’ll 
make you up 1957 style,” 
She wiped her eyes and got to 
her feet, sniffling. 
“Scoot!” he said, feeling paternal 
all at once and not minding his age 
at all. “You’ve got to get fixed up 
and find somebody who needs 
change for a Truman quarter or 
maybe an Eisenhower half.” He 
touched one of her new tears with 
a fingertip. “You’ll forgive my 
vanity if I hope that this time it’s 
a woman who wants change.” 
She sobbed again, then kissed 
him on the cheek and went in and 
washed her face. 
IV: He 
TTE had watched from the window as she went out of his 
life, blowing him a kiss from the 
corner. She had slept in his bed as 
he dozed in the morris chair (back 
down, footrest out; quite comfortable, really) and now, regretting 
nothing, he changed into pajamas 
and snuggled into the sheets still 
fragrant from her perfume. 
He slept, dreaming not of the 
past, which was dead, nor of the 
present, which was dying, but of 
the future, her future, which would 
live when he was dust. 
V: She 
CHE knew before the day was 
spent that she was tired of her 
journey back through time. The 
world of 2012 was no improvement, except mechanistically. She 
had never found love there. 
She turned into Ninth Avenue 
at dusk and in her mind she heard 
the phantom clatter and rattle of 
the El. 
She knew what she would do. 
She would wait at the vestibule 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
till someone came out Then she 
would go up the stairs to his door 
and knock. 
“Hello, my dearest,” she would 
say. “Hello, my darling Harry. I 
love you.” 
And if they only watched television for all the years of their 
lives, that would be all right as 
long as he held her hand. But one 
night they might turn on the old 
Atwater Kent and hear the Street 
Singer or Jones and Hare (The 
Happiness Boys) and find the program being drowned out by the 
roar of the Ninth Avenue El banging and rattling its way through 
the time when he was 25 and she 
was 24. 
— RICHARD WILSON 
★ ★ ★ ★ ★ 
FORECAST 
Next monlh's issue brings along a name new to this field and returns 
at least one established favorite . 
Remember "The Hated" by Paul Flehr, one of the grimmest little 
shockers of the year? New name Flehr follows it up with MARS BY MOONLIGHT, a searingly illuminated novella of a place that is assuredly not nice 
to visit and decidedly worse to live in. Certainly the inhabitants are criminals 
— they are in a Martian penal colony. But what were their crimes — and 
how much time do they have to serve? Of all forms of punishment, the direst 
is to keep such knowledge from inmates, forcing them into tormented selfexamination and frantic guesswork. But something even more sinister is 
added . What happened to the years between their unremembered crimes 
and the moment they found themselves in this camp of the damned? 
In a powerful novelet, established name Robert Sheckley tells of THE 
MINIMUM MAN, the least likely candidate for a cosmic dilemma. Perceveral 
has a nerve asking for nothing more than his own little cubicle and a bit 
to eat . he'll take the whole world or else! 
Along with probably another novelet and definitely several short stories 
and our regular features, Willy Ley presents, FOR YOUR INFORMATION, 
perhaps the most unexpected bulletin you might think to discover in this 
level-headed journal. Yes, there's News of Atlantis . and, being sober and 
authenticated, it's far more exciting than the hottest flash from the most 
inventive cultist! 
THE VOICE OF THE DIAPHRAGM 
THE THIRD LEVEL by Jack 
Finney. Rinehart & Co., Inc., N. Y., 
$3.00 
'T'HIS desirable item, Finney’s 
first collection of short stories, 
can stand up proudly to the best 
of the recent crop. Although timetravel is the theme of most of 
these yarns from the pages of Colliers, Cosmopolitan and Good 
Housekeeping, his treatment gamuts from the sinister to the hilarious. 
The other works include offbeat love stories, ghost tales and 
unclassifiable zanies. 
The wonderfully titled “Quit 
Zoomin’ Those Hands Through the 
Air” is the mad story of the 
world’s first pilot and how he almost won the Civil War — for the 
enemy. 
A lovely shorty, “Cousin Len’s 
Wonderful Adjective Cellar,” is 
a pure delight and a lesson to overflowery authors. 
Don’t miss this book. Finney is 
one slick writer who is more than 
a slick trickster. 
OCCAM’S RAZOR by David 
Duncan. Ballantine Books, N. Y., 
$ 2.00 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
"TV UNCAN has taken a theme 
that was hot news in SF a 
quarter century ago, that of parallel universes, and by the mere addition of refreshing originality of 
concept has woven an absorbing 
yarn. 
His locus is Santa Felicia Island in the Caribbean, taken over 
by the Navy for a top-secret project, Lunar One, based on the 
“Homing Pigeon,” a guided missile. On an earlier test, one passed 
close to the Moon, indicated mineral deposits, and led to the thought 
of homing on such deposits with 
supply drones, followed eventually by men. 
During the course of a lecture 
on minimals given to the younger 
officers by the lanky, maladjusted 
civilian scientist, Staghorn, demonstrative soap films created by the 
wire-test forms develop an impossibility. Supposedly two-dimensional Moebius surfaces, they 
should be dispelled by only two 
pin pricks. However, one effort requires three, causing Staghorn to 
consult with the base psychiatrist 
concerning his sanity. Later, largescale experiments by Staghorn in 
his laboratory result in a dimensional breakthrough that introduces a beguiling couple into the 
story and a universal time-lapse 
that sets the world on the verge 
of war. 
Duncan’s portrayal of the frustrating ability of Security to fit 
square pegs into round holes rings 
too unhappily true. 
S-F ’57 THE YEAR’S GREATEST SCIENCE FICTION AND 
FANTASY, edited by Judith Merril. Gnome Press, N. Y., $3.95 
lyiSS Merril’s second annual 
anthology follows unerringly the path set by her first 
It ranges from excellence to 
mediocrity — from Sturgeon’s “The 
Other Man” and Knight’s “Stranger Station” to “The Damnedest 
Thing” by Garson Kanin, of interest solely because of its author. 
“Put Them All Together, They 
Spell Monster” by the editor of 
Playboy, Ray Russell, is a biting 
spoof of Hollywood’s conception 
of SF. And see if you don’t cock 
an askance eye at our presentday haphazards after reading Robert Nathan’s “Digging the Weans,” 
a learned archeological paper of 
the future theorizing on the meanings of our remains. 
Remembering that “Best” is at 
best a superlative comparative, 
let’s just agree that the average is 
“Good.” 
EARTHMAN’S BURDEN by 
Poul Anderson and Gordon Dickson. Gnome Press, N. Y., $3.00 
R EAD singly and between sufficient time lapses, “The Tiddlywink Warriors,” “In Hoka 
★ ★★★★ SHELF 
Signo Vinces” and “Adventure of 
the Misplaced Hound” are all 
reasonably amusing. Under one 
cover and in company with minor 
works, though, the cumulative effect is less rewarding. 
The Hokans of planet Toka are 
lovable, teddy-bearish creatures 
with overdeveloped imaginations 
and underdeveloped discrimination. They are being groomed for 
planetary autonomy but, still Neolithic culturally, they love to ape 
fictional environments and characters. 
Plenipotentiary Alex Jones has 
his hands full each time a batch of 
novels is landed. In rapid succession, the American West, Victorian England, the Spanish Main, 
to name a few, are the locales of 
anachronistic action. 
Hoka, like pickles, is a tasty appetizer in moderation, but leaves 
a characteristic taste if overindulged. 
THE MYSTERIOUS MACHINE by Glen Dines. The Macmillan Co., N. Y., $2.75 
J ERRY Barnes, Dines’ elevenyear-old Scientist/Inventor, has 
a penchant for inventing fast-moving things like rockets, jet-propelled wagons, etc. However, his 
talents remain unappreciated until 
W. H. Lankersham, Esq., comes 
to town in a remarkable car that 
opens into a five-room apartment 
and announces his contemplated 
construction of a Mysterious Machine. Jerry is of considerable 
help, particularly in supplying the 
speed of sound. 
Dines’ imagination runs amusingly riot and his own illustrations 
help sustain the fun. 
RUSTY’S SPACE SHIP by 
Evelyn Sibley Lampman. Doubleday and Co., N. Y., $2.95 
lVTRS. Lampman’s charming ju-L'-*- venile is an account of the efforts of a fantastically inept extraterrestrial messenger to return an 
errant flying saucer to his ruler. 
Rusty Adams came across it, a circular plate of metal, in the dump, 
and found that it would just cover 
the nose of his egg-crate, orangebox spaceship. 
Though successfully resisting the 
efforts of the three-foot-high, toothless reptilian messenger, Tiphia, to 
remove the saucer, Rusty and his 
friends nonetheless fall victim to 
candy-from-a-stranger. Before they 
can suspect, Tiphia has activated 
the saucer and they are Moonward 
bound. The candies have the extraordinary power to immunize 
them to space environment. Unfortunately, Tiphia’s poor memory 
can’t recall his home satellite’s location, necessitating a Systemwide 
search. 
Mrs. Lampman writes like 
Lewis Carroll brought up to date, 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
and Bernard Krigstein is a wistfully humorous TennieL An irresistible combination. 
MYSTERIES OF SCIENCE by 
John Rowland. Philosophical Library, N. Y., $6.00 
"D OWLAND’S subtitle reads “A 
Study of the Limitations of 
the Scientific Method.” You can 
see without half looking that he is 
a skeptic. He takes to task those 
in any of the sciences who run to 
dogma in their explanations of 
•phenomena, particularly the theoretical physicists and the superDarwinian biologists. His tenet is 
that we do not destroy mysteries 
by denying them existence. 
The book has five subdivisions 
covering unsolved mysteries of 
Physics; Biology; Psychology; Sociology; and The Unclassifiable, 
and is certain to massage the gray 
matter into cerebration. 
HIDDEN WORLD by Stanton 
A. Coblentz. Avalon Books, N. Y. 
TWICE IN TIME by Manly 
Wade Wellman. Avalon Books, 
N. Y., $2.75 each 
A VALON is a new name in the 
SF publishing field, but the 
above titles are familiar to the 
old-time aficionado. 
Hidden World, a lead-fisted 
satire, first saw light in 1935. It 
concerns two geologists, trapped in 
a mine cave-in, burrowing into a 
hidden world of two rival trogloditic nations, Wu and Zu, scientific 
marvels but with social systems 
strictly from Coblentz. Its takeoffs on sitdown strikes, Roosevelt’s 
fishing trips and technocracy date 
it almost to the hour. 
On the other hand, Wellman’s 
yam, though published only five 
years later, stands the test of time 
remarkably well. It is the equal of 
any science-adventure yarn of today, though his time reflector is a 
bit thick. But, once back in Renaissance Italy, his yarn spins along in 
sprightly style, even though the 
sock ending has been telegraphed 
since page twenty. 
THE MAN WHO REACHED 
THE MOON by Roscoe Fleming. 
Golden Bell Press, Denver, $3.00 
S F has inspired many poetic efforts, but most writers have 
incorporated their rhymes into the 
story’s body. Few have, like Fleming, issued a volume of poetry 
alone. The title poem is one of the 
shortest of a number of arresting 
works on SF themes. There are 
mundane poems also, but Fleming 
makes an imposing bid for the 
vacant title of Poet Laureate of 
SF in this oftentimes inspiring 
volume. 
— FLOYD C. GALE 
★ ★★★★ SHELF 
Family longs to lose weight, can't control 
appetite? Simply trade in the old robocook, 
put the whole problem in the firm hands of 
Iron 
Chancellor 
By ROBERT SILVERBERG 
T HE Carmichaels were a 
pretty plump family, to begin with. Not one of the 
four of them couldn’t stand to shed 
quite a few pounds. And there happened to be a super-special on roboservitors at one of the Miracle 
Mile roboshops — 40% off on the 
2061 model, with adjustable caloric-intake monitors. 
Sam Carmichael liked the idea 
of having his food prepared and 
served by a robot who would keep 
one beady solenoid eye on the collective family waistline. He 
squinted speculatively at the glossy display model, absent-mindedly 
Illustrated by WOOD 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
THE IRON CHANCELLOR 
slipped his thumbs beneath his 
elastobelt to knead his paunch, 
and said, “How much?” 
The salesman flashed a brilliant 
and probably synthetic grin. “Only 
2995, sir. That includes free service contract for the first five years. 
Only 200 credits down and up to 
40 months to pay.” 
Carmichael frowned, thinking of 
his bank balance. Then he thought 
of his wife’s figure, and of his 
daughter’s endless yammering 
about her need to diet. Besides, 
Jemima, their old robocook, was 
shabby and gear-stripped, and 
made a miserable showing when 
other company executives visited 
them for dinner. 
“I’ll take it,” he said. 
“Care to trade in your old robocook, sir? Liberal trade-in allowances—” 
“I have a ’43 Madison.” Carmichael wondered if he should 
mention its bad arm-libration and 
serious fuel-feed overflow, but decided that would be carrying candidness too far. 
“Well — ah — I guess we could 
allow you fifty credits on a ’43, 
sir. Seventy-five, maybe, if the 
recipe bank is still in good condition.” 
“Excellent condition.” That part 
was honest— the family had never 
let even one recipe wear out. “You 
could send a man down to look 
her over.” 
“Oh, no need to do that, sir. 
We’ll take your word. Seventy-five, 
then? And delivery of the new 
model by this evening?” 
“Done,” Carmichael said. He 
was glad to get the pathetic old 
’43 out of the house at any cost. 
1JE signed the purchase order 
cheerfully, pocketed the 
facsim and handed over ten crisp 
twenty-credit vouchers. He could 
almost feel the roll of fat melting 
from him now, as he eyed the 
magnificent ’61 roboservitor that 
would shortly be his. 
The time was only 1810 hours 
when he left the shop, got into 
his car and punched out the coordinates for home. The whole 
transaction had taken less than ten 
minutes. Carmichael, a secondlevel executive at Normandy Trust, 
prided himself both on his good 
business sense and his ability to 
come quickly to a firm decision. 
Fifteen minutes later, his car 
deposited him at the front entrance 
of their totally detached self-powered suburban home in the fashionable Westley subdivision. The car 
obediently took itself around back 
to the garage, while Carmichael 
stood in the scanner-field until the 
door opened. Clyde, the robutler, 
came scuttling hastily up, took his 
hat and cloak, and handed him a 
Martini. 
Carmichael beamed appreciatively. “Well done, thou good and 
faithful servant!” 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
He took a healthy sip and 
headed toward the living room to 
greet his wife, son and daughter. 
Pleasant gin-induced warmth filtered through him. The robutler 
was ancient and due for replacement as soon as the budget could 
stand the charge, but Carmichael 
realized he would miss the clanking old heap. 
“You’re late, dear,” Ethel Carmichael said as he appeared. “Dinner’s been ready for ten minutes. 
Jemima’s so annoyed, her cathodes 
are clicking.” 
“Jemima’s cathodes fail to interest me,” Carmichael said evenly. “Good evening, dear. Myra. 
Joey. I’m late because I stopped 
off at Marhew’s on my way home.” 
His son blinked. “The robot 
place, Dad?” 
“Precisely. I brought a ’61 roboservitor to replace old Jemima 
and her sputtering cathodes. The 
new model has,” Carmichael added, 
eying his son’s adolescent bulkiness 
and the rather-more-than-ample 
figures of his wife and daughter, 
“some very special attachments.” 
HP HEY dined well that night, on 
1 Jemima’s favorite Tuesday 
dinner menu — shrimp cocktail, 
fumet of gumbo chervil, breast of 
chicken with creamed potatoes and 
asparagus, delicious plum tarts for 
dessert, and coffee. Carmichael 
felt pleasantly bloated when he 
had finished, and gestured to Clyde 
for a snifter of his favorite afterdinner digestive aid, VSOP 
Cognac. He leaned back, warm, 
replete, able easily to ignore the 
blustery November winds outside. 
A pleasing electroluminescence 
suffused the dining room with pink 
— this year, the experts thought 
pink improved digestion — and the 
heating filaments embedded in the 
wall glowed cozily as they delivered the BTUs. This was the hour 
for relaxation in the Carmichael 
household. 
“Dad,” Joey began hesitantly, 
“about that canoe trip next weekend—” 
Carmichael folded his hands 
across his stomach and nodded. 
“You can go, I suppose. Only be 
careful. If I find out you didn’t 
use the equilibriator this time—” 
The doorchime sounded. Carmichael lifted an eyebrow and 
swiveled in his chair. 
“Who is it, Clyde?” 
“He gives his name as Robinson, sir. Of Robinson Robotics, he 
said. He has a bulky package to 
deliver.” 
“It must be that new robocook, 
Father!” Myra Carmichael exclaimed. 
“I guess it is. Show him in, 
Clyde.” 
Robinson turned out to be a 
red-faced, efficient-looking little 
man in greasy green overalls and 
a plaid pullovercoat, who looked 
THE IRON CHANCELLOR 
disapprovingly at the robutler and 
strode into the Carmichael living 
room. 
He was followed by a lumbering object about seven feet high, 
mounted on a pair of rolltreads 
and swathed completely in quilted 
rags. 
“Got him all wrapped up against 
the cold, Mr. Carmichael. Lot of 
delicate circuitry in that job. You 
ought to be proud of him.” 
“Clyde, help Mr. Robinson unpack the new robocook,” Carmichael said. 
“That’s okay— I can manage it. 
And it’s not a robocook, by the 
way. It’s called a roboservitor now. 
Fancy price, fancy name.” 
i^ARMICHAEL heard his wife 
' J mutter, “Sam, how much—” 
He scowled at her. “Very reasonable, Ethel. Don’t worry so 
much.” 
He stepped back to admire the 
roboservitor as it emerged from 
the quilted swaddling. It was big, 
all right, with a massive barrel of 
a chest — robotic controls are always housed in the chest, not in 
the relatively tiny head — and a 
gleaming mirror-keen finish that 
accented its sleekness and newness. 
Carmichael felt the satisfying glow 
of pride in ownership. Somehow it 
seemed to him that he had done 
something noble and lordly in 
buying this magnificent robot. 
Robinson finished the unpack
ing job and, standing on tiptoes, 
opened the robot’s chest panel. He 
unclipped a thick instruction 
manual and handed it to Carmichael, who stared at the tome 
uneasily. 
“Don’t fret about that, Mr. Carmichael. This robot’s no trouble to 
handle. The book’s just part of 
the trimming. Come here a 
minute.” 
Carmichael peered into the robot’s innards. Pointing, Robinson 
said, “Here’s the recipe bank — biggest and best ever designed. Of 
course it’s possible to tape in any 
of your favorite family recipes, if 
they’re not already there. Just hook 
up your old robocook to the integrator circuit and feed ’em in. 
I’ll take care of that before I 
leave.” 
“And what about the — ah — 
special features?” 
“The reducing monitors, you 
mean? Right over here. See? You 
just tape in the names of the members of the family and their present and desired weights, and the 
roboservitor takes care of the rest. 
Computes caloric intake, adjusts 
menus, and everything else.” 
Carmichael grinned at his wife. 
“Told you I was going to do something about our weight, Ethel. No 
more dieting for you, Myra— the 
robot does all the work.” Catching 
a sour look on his son’s face, he 
added, “And you’re not so lean 
yourself, Buster.” 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
“I don’t think there’ll be any 
trouble,” Robinson said buoyantly. 
“But if there is, just buzz for me. 
I handle service and delivery for 
Marhew Stores in this area.” 
“Right.” 
“Now if you’ll get me your obsolete robocook, I’ll transfer the 
family recipes before I cart it away 
on the trade-in deal.” 
r I ’HERE was a momentary tingle 
of nostalgia and regret when 
Robinson left, half an hour later, 
taking old Jemima with him. Carmichael had almost come to think 
of the battered ’43 Madison as a 
member of the family. After all, 
he had bought her sixteen years 
before, only a couple of years after 
his marriage. 
But she — it, he corrected in annoyance — was only a robot, and 
robots became obsolete. Besides, 
Jemima probably suffered all the 
aches and pains of a robot’s old 
age and would be happier dismantled. Carmichael blotted Jemima from his mind. 
The four of them spent most 
of the rest of that evening discovering things about their new roboservitor. Carmichael drew up a 
table of their weights (himself, 
192; Ethel, 145; Myra, 139; Joey, 
189) and the amount they proposed to weigh in three months’ 
time (himself, 180; Ethel, 125; 
Myra, 120; Joey, 175). Carmichael then let his son, who 
prided himself on his knowledge of 
practical robotics, integrate the 
figures and feed them to the robot’s 
programming bank. 
“You wish this schedule to take 
effect immediately?” the roboservitor queried in a deep, mellow bass. 
Startled, Carmichael said, “Ttomorrow morning, at breakfast 
We might as well start right away.” 
“He speaks well, doesn’t he?” 
Ethel asked. 
“He sure does,” Joey said. “Jemima always stammered and 
squeaked, and all she could say 
was, ‘Dinner is serrved’ and ‘Be 
careful, sirr, the soup plate is verry 
warrm’.” 
Carmichael smiled. He noticed 
his daughter admiring the robot’s 
bulky frame and sleek bronze 
limbs, and thought resignedly that 
a seventeen-year-old girl could find 
the strangest sorts of love objects. 
But he was happy to see that they 
were all evidently pleased with the 
robot. Even with the discount and 
the trade-in, it had been a little on 
the costly side. 
But it would be worth it. 
p ARMICHAEL slept soundly 
^ and woke early, anticipating 
the first breakfast under the new 
regime. He still felt pleased with 
himself. 
Dieting had always been such a 
nuisance, he thought — but, on 
the other hand, he had never enjoyed the sensation of an annoying 
THE IRON CHANCELLOR 
roll of fat pushing outward against 
his elastobelt. He exercised sporadically, but it did little good, and he 
never had the initiative to keep a 
rigorous dieting campaign going 
for long. Now, though, with the 
mathematics of reducing done effortlessly for him, all the calculating and cooking being handled 
by the new robot — now, for the 
first time since he had been Joey’s 
age, he could look forward to being slim and trim once again. 
He dressed, showered and hastily depilated. It was 0730. Breakfast was ready. 
Ethel and the children were already at the table when he arrived. Ethel and Myra were 
munching toast; Joey was peering at a bowl of milkless dry cereal, 
next to which stood a full glass of 
milk. Carmichael sat down. 
“Your toast, sir,” the roboservitor murmured. 
Carmichael stared at the single 
slice. It had already been buttered 
for him, and the butter had evidently been measured out with a 
micrometer. The robot proceeded 
to hand him a cup of black coffee. 
He groped for the cream and 
sugar. They weren’t anywhere on 
,he table. The other members of 
his family were regarding him 
strangely, and they were curiously, 
suspiciously silent. 
“I like cream and sugar in my 
coffee,” he said to the hovering 
roboservitor. “Didn’t you find that 
in Jemima’s old recipe bank?” 
“Of course, sir. But you must 
learn to drink your coffee without such things, if you wish to lose 
weight.” 
Carmichael chuckled. Somehow 
he had not expected the regimen to 
be quite like this — quite so, well, 
Spartan. “Oh, yes. Of course. Ah— 
are the eggs ready yet?” He considered a day incomplete unless he 
began it with soft-boiled eggs. 
“Sorry, no, sir. On Mondays, 
Wednesdays and Fridays, breakfast is to consist of toast and black 
coffee only, except for Master 
Joey, who gets cereal, fruit juice 
and milk.” 
“I - see.” 
Well, he had asked for it. He 
shrugged and took a bite of the 
toast. He sipped the coffee; it 
tasted like river mud, but he tried 
not to make a face. 
Joey seemed to be going about 
the business of eating his cereal 
rather oddly, Carmichael noticed 
next. “Why don’t you pour that 
'glass of milk into the cereal?” he 
asked. “Won’t it taste better that 
way?” 
“Sure it will. But Bismarck says 
I won’t get another glass if I do, so 
I’m eating it this way.” 
“Bismarck?” 
J OEY grinned. “It’s the name of 
a famous 19th-century German dictator. They called him the 
Iron Chancellor.” He jerked his 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
head toward the kitchen, to which 
the roboservitor had silently retreated. “Pretty good name for 
him, eh?” 
“No,” said Carmichael. “It’s 
silly.” 
“It has a certain ring of truth, 
though,” Ethel remarked. 
Carmichael did not reply. He 
finished his toast and coffee somewhat glumly and signaled Clyde 
to get the car out of the garage. 
He felt depressed — dieting didn’t 
seem to be so effortless after all, 
even with the new robot. 
As he walked toward the door, 
the robot glided around him and 
handed him a small printed slip of 
paper. Carmichael stared at it. It 
said: 
FRUIT JUICE 
LETTUCE 8c TOMATO SALAD 
(ONE) HARD-BOILED EGG 
BLACK COFFEE 
“What’s this thing?” 
“You are the only member of 
this family group who will not be 
eating three meals a day under my 
personal supervision. This is your 
luncheon menu. Please adhere to 
it,” the robot said smoothly. 
Repressing a sputter, Carmichael 
said, “Yes — yes. Of course.” 
He pocketed the menu and 
made his way uncertainly to the 
waiting car. 
He was faithful to the robot’s 
orders at lunchtime that day; even 
though he was beginning to develop resistance to the idea that 
had seemed so appealing only the 
night before, he was willing, at 
least, to give it a try. 
But something prompted him 
to stay away from the restaurant 
where Normandy Trust employees 
usually lunched, and where there 
were human waiters to smirk at 
him and fellow executives to ask 
prying questions. 
He ate instead at a cheap robocafeteria two blocks to the north. 
He slipped in surreptitiously with 
his collar turned up, punched out 
his order (it cost him less than a 
credit altogether) and wolfed it 
down. He still felt hungry when he 
was finished, but he compelled 
himself to return loyally to the office. 
He wondered how long he was 
going to be able to keep up this 
iron self-control. Not very long, he 
realized dolefully. And if anyone 
from the company caught him eating at a robocafeteria, he’d be a 
laughing-stock. Someone of executive status just didn’t eat lunch by 
himself in mechanized cafeterias. 
Y the time he had finished his 
day’s work, his stomach felt 
knotted and pleated. His hand was 
shaky as he punched out his destination on the car’s autopanel, and 
he was thankful that it took less 
than an hour to get home from the 
office. Soon, he thought, he’d be 
THE IRON CHANCELLOR 
tasting food again. Soon. Soon. He 
switched on the roof-mounted 
video, leaned back in the recliner 
and tried to relax as the car bore 
him homeward. 
He was in for a surprise, though, 
when he stepped through the safety field into his home. Clyde was 
waiting as always, and, as always, 
took his hat and cloak. And, as 
always, Carmichael reached out for 
the cocktail that Clyde prepared 
nightly to welcome him home. 
There was no cocktail. 
“Are we out of gin, Clyde?” 
“No, sir.” 
“How come no drink, then?” 
The robot’s rubberized metallic 
features seemed to droop. “Because, sir, a Martini’s caloric content is inordinately high. Gin is 
rated at a hundred calories per 
ounce and—” 
“Oh, no. You too!” 
“Pardon, sir. The new roboservitor has altered my responsive 
circuits to comply with the regulations now in force in this household.” 
Carmichael felt his fingers starting to tremble. “Clyde, you’ve been 
my butler for almost twenty years.” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“You always make my drinks 
for me. You mix the best Martinis 
in the Western Hemisphere.” 
“Thank you, sir.” 
“And you’re going to mix one for 
me right now! That’s a direct 
order!” 
“Sir! I—” The robutler staggered 
wildly and nearly careened into 
Carmichael. It seemed to have lost 
all control over its gyro-balance; it 
clutched agonizedly at its chest 
panel and started to sag. 
TT ASTILY, Carmichael barked, 
“Order countermanded! Clyde 
—are you all right?” 
Slowly, and with a creak, the 
robot straightened up. It looked 
dangerously close to an overload. 
“Your direct order set up a firstlevel conflict in me, sir,” Clyde 
whispered faintly. “I— came close 
to burning out just then, sir. Maymay I be excused?” 
“Of course. Sorry, Clyde.” Carmichael balled his fists. There was 
such a thing as going too far! The 
roboservitor — Bismarck — had 
obviously placed on Clyde a flat 
prohibition against serving liquor 
to him. Reducing or no reducing, 
there were limits. 
Carmichael strode angrily toward the kitchen. 
His wife met him halfway. “I 
’ didn’t hear you come in, Sam. I 
want to talk to you about—” 
“Later. Where’s that robot?” 
“In the kitchen, I imagine. It’s 
almost dinnertime.” 
He brushed past her and swept 
on into the kitchen, where Bismarck was moving efficiently from 
electrostove to magnetic worktable. The robot swiveled as Carmichael entered. 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
“Did you have a good day, sir?” 
“No! I’m hungry!” 
“The first days of a diet are 
always the most difficult, Mr. Carmichael. But your body will adjust to the reduction in food-intake before long.” 
“I’m sure of that. But what’s 
this business of tinkering with 
Clyde?” 
“The butler insisted on preparing an alcoholic drink for you. I 
was forced to adjust his programming. From now on, sir, you may 
indulge in cocktails on Tuesdays, 
Thursdays and Saturdays. I beg 
to be excused from further discussion now, sir. The meal is almost 
ready.” 
Poor Clyde! Carmichael thought. 
And poor me! He gnashed his teeth 
impotently a few times, then gave 
up and turned away from the glistening, overbearing roboservitor. A 
light gleamed on the side of the 
robot’s head, indicating that he had 
shut off his audio circuits and was 
totally engaged in his task. 
THINNER consisted of steak and 
peas, followed by black coffee. The steak was rare; Carmichael preferred it well done. But 
Bismarck — the name was beginning to take hold — had had all the 
latest dietetic theories taped into 
him, and rare meat it was. 
After the robot had cleared the 
table and tidied up the kitchen, it 
retired to its storage place in the 
basement, which gave the Carmichael family a chance to speak 
openly to each other for the first 
time that evening. 
“Lord!” Ethel snorted. “Sam, I 
don’t object to losing weight, but 
if we’re going to be tyrannized in 
our own home—” 
“Mom’s right,” Joey put in. “It 
doesn’t seem fair for that thing to 
feed us whatever it pleases. And I 
didn’t like the way it messed 
around with Clyde’s circuits.” 
Carmichael spread his hands. 
“I’m not happy about it either. 
But we have to give it a try. We 
can always make readjustments in 
the programming, if it turns out 
to be necessary.” 
“But how long are we going to 
keep this up?” Myra wanted to 
know. “I had three meals in this 
house today and I’m starved!” 
“Me, too,” Joey said. He elbowed himself from his chair and 
looked around. “Bismarck’s downstairs. I’m going to get a slice of 
lemon pie while the coast is clear.” 
“No!” Carmichael thundered. 
“No?” 
“There’s no sense in my spending three thousand credits on a 
dietary robot if you’re going to 
cheat, Joey. I forbid you to have 
any pie.” 
“But, Dad, I’m hungry! I’m a 
growing boy! I’m—” 
“You’re sixteen years old, and if 
you grow much more, you won’t 
fit inside the house,” Carmichael 
THE IRON CHANCELLOR 
snapped, looking up at his six-footone son. 
“Sam, we can’t starve the boy,” 
Ethel protested. “If he wants pie, 
let him have some. You’re carrying this reducing fetish too far.” 
Carmichael considered that. Perhaps, he thought, I am being a little 
oversevere. And the thought of 
lemon pie was a tempting one. He 
was pretty hungry himself. 
“All right,” he said with feigned 
reluctance. “I guess a bit of pie 
won’t wreck the plan. In fact, I 
suppose I’ll have some myself. 
Joey, why don’t you—” 
“Begging your pardon,” a purring voice said behind him. Carmichael jumped half an inch. It 
was the robot— Bismarck. “It would 
be most unfortunate if you were to 
have pie now, Mr. Carmichael. My 
calculations are very precise.” 
Carmichael saw the angry gleam 
in his son’s eye, but the robot 
seemed extraordinarily big at that 
moment, and it happened to stand 
between him and the kitchen. 
He sighed weakly. “Let’s forget 
the lemon pie, Joey.” 
A FTER two full days of the Bismarckian diet, Carmichael 
discovered that his inner resources 
of will power were beginning to 
crumble. On the third day, he 
tossed away the printed lunchtime 
diet and went out irresponsibly with 
MacDougal and Hennessey for a 
six-course lunch, complete with 
cocktails. It seemed to him that he 
hadn’t tasted real food since the 
robot arrived. 
That night, he was able to tolerate the seven-hundred-calorie dinner without any inward grumblings, being still well lined with 
lunch. But Ethel and Myra and 
Joey were increasingly irritable. It 
seemed that the robot had usurped 
Ethel’s job of handling the daily 
marketing and had stocked in nothing but a huge supply of healthy 
low-calorie foods. The larder now 
bulged with wheat germ, protein 
bread, irrigated salmon, and other 
hitherto unfamiliar items. Myra 
had taken up biting her nails; 
Joey’s mood was one of black sullen brooding, and Carmichael knew 
how that could lead to trouble 
quickly with a sixteen-year-old. 
After the meager dinner, he ordered Bismarck to go to the basement and stay there until summoned. 
The robot said, “I must advise 
you, sir, that I will detect indulgence in any forbidden foods in 
.my absence and adjust for it in 
the next meals.” 
“You have my word,” Carmichael said, thinking it was indeed queer to have to pledge on 
your honor to your own robot. He 
waited until the massive servitor 
had vanished below; then he 
turned to Joey and said, “Get the 
instruction manual, boy.” 
Joey grinned in understanding. 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
THE IRON CHANCELLOR 
Ethel said, “Sam, what are you 
going to do?” 
Carmichael patted his shrunken 
waistline. “I’m going to take a canopener to that creature and adjust 
his programming. He’s overdoing 
this diet business. Joey, have you 
found the instructions on how to 
reprogram the robot?” 
“Page 167. I’ll get the tool kit, 
Dad.” 
“Right.” Carmichael turned to 
the robutler, who was standing by 
dumbly, in his usual forward-stooping posture of expectancy. “Clyde, 
go down below and tell Bismarck 
we want him right away.” 
IVT OMENTS later, the two ro-L’-l bots appeared. Carmichael 
said to the roboservitor, “I’m afraid 
it’s necessary for us to change your 
program. We’ve overestimated our 
capacity for losing weight.” 
“I beg you to reconsider, sir. 
Extra weight is harmful to every 
vital organ in the body. I plead 
with you to maintain my scheduling unaltered.” 
“I’d rather cut my own throat. 
Joey, inactivate him and do your 
stuff.” 
Grinning fiercely, the boy 
stepped forward and pressed the 
stud that opened the robot’s ribcage. A frightening assortment of 
gears, cams and translucent cables 
became visible inside the robot. 
With a small wrench in one hand 
and the open instruction book in 
the other, Joey prepared to make 
the necessary changes, while Carmichael held his breath and a pall 
of silence descended on the living room. Even old Clyde leaned 
forward to have a better view. 
Joey muttered, “Lever F2, with 
the yellow indicia, is to be advanced one notch . umm. Now 
twist Dial B9 to the left, thereby 
opening the taping compartment 
and— oops!” 
Carmichael heard the clang of 
a wrench and saw the bright flare 
of sparks; Joey leaped back, cursing with surprisingly mature skill. 
Ethel and Myra gasped simultaneously. 
“What happened?” four voices 
—Clyde’s coming in last — demanded. 
“Dropped the damn wrench,” 
Joey said. “I guess I shorted out 
something in there.” 
The robot’s eyes were whirling 
satanically and its voice-box was 
emitting an awesome twelve-cycle 
rumble. The great metal creature 
stood stiffly in the middle of the 
' living room; with brusque gestures of its big hands, it slammed 
shut the open chest-plates. 
“We’d better call Mr. Robinson,” 
Ethel said worriedly. “A short-circuited robot is likely to explode, 
or worse.” 
“We should have called Robinson in the first place,” Carmichael 
murmured bitterly. “It’s my fault 
for letting Joey tinker with an ex
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
pensive and delicate mechanism 
like that. Myra, get me the card 
Mr. Robinson left.” 
“Gee, Dad, this is the first time 
I’ve ever had anything like that 
go wrong,” Joey insisted. “I didn’t 
know—” 
“You’re darned right you didn’t 
know.” Carmichael took the card 
from his daughter and started toward the phone. “I hope we can 
reach him at this hour. If we 
can’t—” 
Suddenly Carmichael felt cold 
fingers prying the card from his 
hand. He was so startled, he relinquished it without a struggle. He 
watched as Bismarck efficiently 
ripped it into little fragments and 
shoved them into a wall disposal 
unit. 
' 1 1 HE robot said, “There will 
be no further meddling with 
my program-tapes.” Its voice was 
deep and strangely harsh. 
“What-” 
“Mr. Carmichael, today you 
violated the program I set down 
for you. My perceptors reveal that 
you consumed an amount far in excess of your daily lunchtime requirement.” 
“Sam, what—” 
“Quiet, Ethel. Bismarck, I order you to shut yourself off at 
once.” 
“My apologies, sir. I cannot 
serve you if I am shut off.” 
“I don’t want you to serve me. 
You’re out of order. I want you to 
remain still until I can phone the 
repairman and get him to service 
you.” 
Then he remembered the card 
that had gone into the disposal 
unit. He felt a faint tremor of apprehension. 
“You took Robinson’s card and 
destroyed it.” 
“Further alteration of my circuits would be detrimental to the 
Carmichael family,” said the robot. “I cannot permit you to summon the repairman.” 
“Don’t get him angry, Dad,” 
Joey warned. “I’ll call the police. 
I’ll be back in-” 
“You will remain within this 
house,” the robot said. Moving with 
impressive speed on its oiled treads, 
it crossed the room, blocking the 
door, and reached far above its 
head to activate the impassable 
privacy field that protected the 
house. Carmichael watched, aghast, 
as the inexorable robotic fingers 
twisted and manipulated the field 
controls. 
“I have now reversed the polarity of the house privacy field,” the 
robot announced. “Since you are 
obviously not to be trusted to 
keep to the diet I prescribe, I cannot allow you to leave the premises. You will remain within and 
continue to obey my beneficial advice.” 
Calmly, he uprooted the telephone. Next, the windows were 
THE IRON CHANCELLOR 
opaqued and the stud broken off. 
Finally, the robot seized the instruction book from Joey’s numbed 
hands and shoved it into the disposal unit. 
“Breakfast will be served at the 
usual time,” Bismarck said mildly. 
“For optimum purposes of health, 
you are all to be asleep by 2300 
hours. I shall leave you now, until 
morning. Good night.” 
/^ARMICHAEL did not sleep 
well that night, nor did he eat 
well the next day. He awoke late, 
for one thing — well past nine. He 
discovered that someone, obviously Bismarck, had neatly canceled 
out the impulses from the housebrain that woke him at seven each 
morning. 
The breakfast menu was toast 
and black coffee. Carmichael ate 
disgruntedly, not speaking, indicating by brusque scowls that he 
did not want to be spoken to. After 
the miserable meal had been 
cleared away, he surreptitiously 
tiptoed to the front door in his 
dressing-gown and darted a hand 
toward the handle. 
The door refused to budge. He 
pushed until sweat dribbled down 
his face. He heard Ethel whisper 
warningly, “Sam—” and a moment 
later cool metallic fingers gently 
disengaged him from the door. 
Bismarck said, “I beg your pardon, sir. The door will not open. 
I explained this last night.” 
Carmichael gazed sourly at the 
gimmicked control-box of the privacy field. The robot had them utterly hemmed in. The reversed 
privacy field made it impossible 
for them to leave the house; it cast 
a sphere of force around the entire detached dwelling. In theory, 
the field could be penetrated from 
outside, but nobody was likely to 
come calling without an invitation. 
Not here in Westley. It wasn’t one 
of those neighborly subdivisions 
where everybody knew everybody 
else. Carmichael had picked it for 
that reason. 
“Damn you,” he growled, “you 
can’t hold us prisoners in here!” 
“My intent is only to help you,” 
said the robot, in a mechanical yet 
dedicated voice. “My function is 
to supervise your diet. Since you 
will not obey willingly, obedience 
must be enforced — for your own 
good.” 
Carmichael scowled and walked 
away. The worst part of it was that 
the roboservitor sounded so sincere! 
Trapped. The phone connection 
was severed. The windows were 
darkened. Somehow, Joey’s attempt at repairs had resulted in a 
short-circuit of the robot’s obedience filters, and had also exaggeratedly stimulated its sense of 
function. Now Bismarck was determined to make them lose weight 
if it had to kill them to do so. 
And that seemed very likely. 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
¥> LOCKADED, the Carmichael 
family met in a huddled little 
group to whisper plans for a counterattack. Clyde stood watch, but 
the robutler seemed to be in a 
state of general shock since the 
demonstration of the servitor-robot’s independent capacity for action, and Carmichael now regarded 
him as undependable. 
“He’s got the kitchen walled off 
with some kind of electronic-based 
force-web,” Joey said. “He must 
have built it during the night. I 
tried to sneak in and scrounge 
some food, and got nothing but a 
flat nose for trying.” 
“I know,” Carmichael said sadly. “He built the same sort of doohickey around the bar. Three hundred credits of good booze in there 
and I can’t even grab the handle!” 
“This is no time to worry about 
drinking,” Ethel said morosely. 
“We’ll be skeletons any day.” 
“It isn’t that bad, Mom!” Joey 
said. 
“Yes, it is!” cried Myra. “I’ve 
lost five pounds in four days!” 
“Is that so terrible?” 
“I’m wasting away,” she sobbed. 
“My figure — it’s vanishing! And—” 
“Quiet,” Carmichael whispered. 
“Bismarck’s coming!” 
The robot emerged from the 
kitchen, passing through the forcebarrier as if it had been a cobweb. It seemed to have effect on 
humans only, Carmichael thought. 
“Lunch will be served in eight 
minutes,” it said obsequiously, and 
returned to its lair. 
Carmichael glanced at his watch. 
The time was 1230 hours. “Probably down at the office they’re 
wondering where I am,” he said. “I 
haven’t missed a day’s work in 
years.” 
“They won’t care,” Ethel said. 
“An executive isn’t required to 
account for every day off he takes, 
you know.” 
“But they’ll worry after three or 
four days, won’t they?” Myra 
asked. “Maybe they’ll try to phone 
— or even send a rescue mission!” 
From the kitchen, Bismarck said 
coldly, “There will be no danger 
of that. While you slept this morning, I notified your place of employment that you were resigning.” 
Carmichael gasped. Then, recovering, he said: “You’re lying! 
The phone’s cut off— and you never 
would have risked leaving the 
house, even if we were asleep!” 
“I communicated with them via 
a microwave generator I constructed with the aid of your son’s 
reference books last night,” Bismarck replied. “Clyde reluctantly 
supplied me with the number. I 
also phoned your bank and instructed them to handle for you 
all such matters as tax payments, 
investment decisions, etc. To forestall difficulties, let me add that a 
force-web will prevent access on 
your part to the electronic equipment in the basement. I will be 
THE IRON CHANCELLOR 
able to conduct such communication with the outside world as will 
be necessary for your welfare, Mr. 
Carmichael. You need have no 
worries on that score.” 
“No,” Carmichael echoed hollowly. “No worries.” 
TTE turned to Joey. “We’ve got 
to get out of here. Are you 
sure there’s no way of disconnecting the privacy field?” 
“He’s got one of his force-fields 
rigged around the control-box. I 
can’t even get near the thing.” 
“If only we had an iceman, or 
an oilman, the way the oldtime 
houses did,” Ethel said bitterly. 
“He’d show up and come inside 
and probably he’d know how to 
shut the field off. But not here. 
Oh, no. We’ve got a shiny chromeplated cryostat in the basement 
that dishes out lots of liquid helium 
to run the fancy cryotronic supercooled power plant that gives us 
heat and light, and we have enough 
food in the freezer to last for at 
least a decade or two, and so we 
can live like this for years, a neat 
little self-contained island in the 
middle of civilization, with nobody 
bothering us, nobody wondering 
about us, and Sam Carmichael’s 
pet robot to feed us whenever and 
as little as it pleases—” 
There was a cutting edge to her 
voice that was dangerously close 
to hysteria. 
“Ethel, please,” said Carmichael. 
“Please what? Please keep 
quiet? Please stay calm? Sam, 
we’re prisoners in here!” 
“I know. You don’t have to 
raise your voice.” 
“Maybe if I do, someone will 
hear us and come get us out,” she 
replied more coolly. 
“It’s four hundred feet to the 
next home, dear. And in the seven 
years we’ve lived here, we’ve had 
about two visits from our neighbors. We paid a stiff price for 
seclusion and now we’re paying a 
stiffer one. But please keep under 
control, Ethel.” 
“Don’t worry, Mom. I’ll figure 
a way out of this,” Joey said reassuringly. 
In one corner of the living room, 
Myra was sobbing quietly to herself, blotching her makeup. Carmichael felt a faintly claustrophobic quiver. The house was big, 
three levels and twelve rooms, but 
even so he could get tired of it 
very quickly. 
“Luncheon is served,” the robotservitor announced in booming 
tones. 
And tired of lettuce-and-tomato 
lunches, too, Carmichael added silently, as he shepherded his family toward the dining room for 
their meager midday meal. 
OU have to do something 
about this, Sam,” Ethel Carmichael said on the third day of 
their imprisonment. 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
He glared at her. “Have to, eh? 
And just what am I supposed to 
do?” 
“Daddy, don’t get excited,” 
Myra said. 
He whirled on her. “Don’t tell 
me what I should or shouldn’t do!” 
“She can’t help it, dear. We’re 
all a little overwrought. After all, 
cooped up here—” 
“I know. Like lambs in a pen,” 
he finished acidly. “Except that 
we’re not being fattened for slaughter. We’re — we’re being thinned, 
and for our own alleged good!” 
Carmichael subsided gloomily. 
Toast-and-black-coffee, lettuce-andtomato, rare-steak-and-peas. Bismarck’s channels seemed to have 
frozen permanently at that daily 
menu. 
But what could he do? 
Contact with the outside world 
was impossible. The robot had 
erected a bastion in the basement 
from which he conducted such 
little business with the world as 
the Carmichael family had. Generally, they were self-sufficient. 
And Bismarck’s force-fields insured 
the impossibility of any attempts 
to disconnect the outer sheath, 
break into the basement, or even 
get at the food supply or the 
liquor. It was all very neat, and 
the four of them were fast approaching a state of starvation. 
“Sam?” 
He lifted his head wearily. 
“What is it, Ethel?” 
“Myra had an idea before. Tell 
him, Myra.” 
“Oh, it would never work,” 
Myra said demurely. 
“Tell him!" 
“Well — Dad, you could try to 
turn Bismarck off.” 
“Huh?” Carmichael grunted. 
“I mean if you or Joey could 
distract him somehow, then Joey 
or you could open him up again 
and—” 
“No,” Carmichael snapped. 
“That thing’s seven feet tall and 
weighs three hundred pounds. If 
you think I’m going to wrestle 
with it-” 
“We could let Clyde try,” Ethel 
suggested. 
Carmichael shook his head vehemently. “The carnage would be 
frightful.” 
Joey said, “Dad, it may be our 
only hope.” 
“You too? Carmichael asked. 
TTE took a deep breath. He felt 
himself speared by two deadly feminine glances, and he knew 
there was no hope but to try it. 
Resignedly, he pushed himself to 
his feet and said, “Okay. Clyde, go 
call Bismarck. Joey, I’ll try to hang 
onto his arms while you open up 
his chest. Yank anything you can.” 
“Be careful,” Ethel warned. “If 
there’s an explosion—” 
“If there’s an explosion, we’re 
all free,” Carmichael said testily. 
He turned to see the broad figure 
THE IRON CHANCELLOR 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
of the roboservitor standing at the 
entrance to the living room. 
“May I be of service, sir?” 
“You may,” Carmichael said. 
“We’re having a little debate here 
and we want your evidence. It’s a 
matter of defannising the poozlestan and — Joey, open him up!” 
Carmichael grabbed for the robot’s arms, trying to hold them 
without getting hurled across the 
room, while his son clawed frantically at the stud that opened the 
robot’s innards. Carmichael anticipated immediate destruction — 
but, to his surprise, he found himself slipping as he tried to grasp 
the thick arms. 
“Dad, it’s no use. I — he — ” 
Carmichael found himself abruptly four feet off the ground. 
He heard Ethel and Myra scream 
and Clyde’s “Do be careful, sir.” 
Bismarck was carrying them 
across the room, gently, cradling 
him in one giant arm and Joey in 
the other. It set them down on the 
couch and stood back. 
“Such an attempt is highly dangerous,” Bismarck said reprovingly. “It puts me in danger of harming you physically. Please avoid 
any such acts in the future.” 
Carmichael stared broodingly 
at his son. “Did you have the same 
trouble I did?” 
THE IRON CHANCELLOR 
Joey nodded. “I couldn’t get 
within an inch of his skin. It stands 
to reason, though. He’s built one 
of those damned force-screens 
around himself, too!” 
Carmichael groaned. He did not 
look at his wife and his children. 
Physical attack on Bismarck was 
now out of the question. He began 
to feel as if “he had been condemned to life imprisonment — 
and that his stay in durance vile 
would not be extremely prolonged. 
T N the upstairs bathroom, six 
-*• days after the beginning of the 
blockade, Sam Carmichael stared 
at his haggard fleshless face in the 
mirror before wearily climbing on 
the scale. 
He weighed 180. 
He had lost twelve pounds in 
less than two weeks. He was fast 
becoming a quivering wreck. 
A thought occurred to him as 
he stared at the wavering needle 
on the scale, and sudden elation 
spread over him. He dashed downstairs. Ethel was doggedly crocheting in the living room; Joey 
and Myra were playing cards grimly, desperately now, after six solid 
days of gin rummy and honeymoon bridge. 
“Where’s that robot?” Carmichael roared. “Come out here!” 
“In the kitchen,” Ethel said 
tonelessly. 
“Bismarck! Bismarck!” Carmichael roared. “Come out here!” 
The robot appeared. “How may 
I serve you, sir?” 
“Damn you, scan me with your 
super-power receptors and tell me 
how much I weigh!” 
After a pause, the robot said 
gravely, “One hundred seventynine pounds eleven ounces, Mr. 
Carmichael.” 
“Yes! Yes! And the original program I had taped into you was 
supposed to reduce me from 192 
to 180,” Carmichael crowed triumphantly. “So I’m finished with 
you, as long as I don’t gain any 
more weight. And so are the rest 
of us, I’ll bet. Ethel! Myra! Joey! 
Upstairs and weigh yourselves!” 
But the robot regarded him with 
a doleful glare and said, “Sir, I 
find no record within me of any 
limitation on your reduction of 
weight.” 
“What?” 
“I have checked my tapes fully. 
I have a record of an order causing 
weight reduction, but that tape 
does not appear to specify a terminus ad quern.” 
Carmichael exhaled and took 
three staggering steps backward. 
His legs wobbled; he felt Joey 
supporting him. He mumbled, “But 
I thought — I’m sure we did — I 
know we instructed you—” 
Hunger gnawed at his flesh. 
Joey said softly, “Dad, probably 
that part of his tape was erased 
when he short-circuited.” 
“Oh,” Carmichael said numbly. 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
H E tottered into the living room 
and collapsed heavily in what 
had once been his favorite armchair. It wasn’t any more. The entire house had become odious to 
him. He longed to see the sunlight again, to see trees and grass, 
even to see that excrescence of an 
ultra-modern house that the lefthand neighbors had erected. 
But now that would be impossible. He had hoped, for a few 
minutes at least, that the robot 
would release them from dietary 
bondage when the original goal 
was shown to be accomplished. 
Evidently that was to be denied 
him. He giggled, then began to 
laugh. 
“What’s so funny, dear?” Ethel 
asked. She had lost her earlier tendencies to hysteria, and after long 
days of complex crocheting now 
regarded the Universe with quiet 
resignation. 
“Funny? The fact that I weigh 
180 now. I’m lean, trim, fit as a 
fiddle. Next month I’ll weigh 170. 
Then 160. Then finally about 88 
pounds or so. We’ll all shrivel up. 
Bismarck will starve us to death.” 
“Don’t worry. Dad. We’re going to get out of this.” 
Somehow Joey’s brash boyish 
confidence sounded forced now. 
Carmichael shook his head. “We 
won’t. We’ll never get out. And 
Bismarck’s going to reduce us ad 
infinitem. He’s got no terminus ad 
quem!" 
“What’s he saying?” Myra 
asked. 
“It’s Latin,” Joey explained. 
“But listen, Dad— I have an idea 
that I think will work.” He lowered his voice. “I’m going to try to 
adjust Clyde, see? If I can get a 
sort of multiphase vibrating effect 
in his neural pathway, maybe I 
can slip him through the reversed 
privacy field. He can go get help, 
find someone who can shut the 
field off. There’s an article on multiphase generators in last month’s 
Popular Electromagnetics and it’s 
in my room upstairs. I — ’ 
His voice died away. Carmichael, who had been listening 
with the air of a condemned man 
hearing his reprieve, said impatiently, “Well? Go on. Tell me 
more.” 
“Didn’t you hear that, Dad?” 
“Hear what?” 
“The front door. I thought I 
heard it open just now.” 
“We’re all cracking up,” Carmichael said dully. He cursed the 
salesman at Marhew, he cursed the 
inventor of cryotronic robots, he 
cursed the day he had first felt 
ashamed of good old Jemima and 
resolved to replace her with a new 
model. 
“I hope I’m not intruding, Mr. 
Carmichael,” a new voice said 
apologetically. 
Carmichael blinked and looked 
up. A wiry, ruddy-cheeked figure 
in a heavy pea-jacket had material
THE IRON CHANCELLOR 
ized in the middle of the living 
room. He was clutching a green 
metal toolbox in one gloved hand. 
He was Robinson, the robot repairman. 
C ARMICHAEL asked hoarsely, “How did you get in?” 
“Through the front door. I could 
see a light on inside, but nobody 
answered the doorbell when I rang, 
so I stepped in. Your doorbell’s 
out of order. I thought I’d tell you. 
I know it’s rude—” 
“Don’t apologize,” Carmichael 
muttered. “We’re delighted to see 
you.” 
“I was in the neighborhood, you 
see, and I figured I’d drop in and 
see how things were working out 
with your new robot,” Robinson 
said. 
Carmichael told him crisply and 
precisely and quickly. “So we’ve 
been prisoners in here for six days,” 
he finished. “And your robot is 
gradually starving us to death. We 
can’t hold out much longer.” 
The smile abruptly left Robinson’s cheery face. “I thought you 
all looked rather unhealthy. Oh, 
damn, now there’ll be an investigation and all kinds of trouble. 
But at least I can end your imprisonment.” 
He opened his toolbox and selected a tubular instrument eight 
inches long, with a glass bulb at 
one end and a trigger attachment 
at the other. “Force-field damper,” 
he explained. He pointed it at the 
control-box of the privacy field 
and nodded in satisfaction. “There. 
Great little gadget. That neutralizes the effects of what the robot 
did and you’re no longer blockaded. And now, if you’ll produce 
the robot—” 
Carmichael sent Clyde off to get 
Bismarck. The robutler returned a 
few moments later, followed by the 
looming roboservitor. Robinson 
grinned gaily, pointed the neutralizer at Bismarck and squeezed. 
The robot froze in mid-glide, emitting a brief squeak. 
“There. That should immobilize 
him. Let’s have a look in that chassis now.” 
The repairman quickly opened 
Bismarck’s chest and, producing a 
pocket flash, peered around in the 
complex interior of the servomechanism, making occasional 
clucking inaudible comments. 
VER WHELMED with relief, 
' “ Carmichael shakily made his 
way to a seat. Free! Free at last! 
His mouth watered at the thought 
of the meals he was going to have 
in the next few days. Potatoes and 
martinis and warm buttered rolls 
and all the other forbidden foods! 
“Fascinating,” Robinson said, 
half to himself. “The obedience filters are completely shorted out, 
and the purpose-nodes were somehow soldered together by the momentary high-voltage arc. I’ve 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
never seen anything quite like this, 
you know.” 
“Neither had we,” Carmichael 
said hollowly. 
“Really, though — this is an utterly new breakthrough in robotic 
science! If we can reproduce this 
effect, it means we can build selfwilled robots — and think of what 
that means to science!” 
“We know already,” Ethel said. 
“I’d love to watch what happens 
when the power source is operating,” Robinson went on. “For instance, is that feedback loop really 
negative or—” 
“No!” five voices shrieked at 
once — with Clyde, as usual, coming in last. 
T T was too late. The entire event 
had taken no more than a 
tenth of a second. Robinson had 
squeezed his neutralizer trigger 
again, activating Bismarck— and in 
one quick swoop the roboservitor 
seized neutralizer and toolbox from 
the stunned repairman, activated 
the privacy field once again, and 
exultantly crushed the fragile neutralizer between two mighty fingers. 
Robinson stammered, “But — 
but — ” 
“This attempt at interfering with 
the well-being of the Carmichael 
family was ill-advised,” Bismarck 
said severely. He peered into the 
toolbox, found a second neutralizer and neatly reduced it to junk. 
He clanged shut his chest-plates. 
Robinson turned and streaked 
for the door, forgetting the reactivated privacy field. He bounced 
back hard, spinning wildly around. 
Carmichael rose from his seat just 
in time to catch him. 
There was a panicky, trapped 
look on the repairman’s face. Carmichael was no longer able to 
share the emotion; inwardly he was 
numb, totally resigned, not minded 
for further struggle. 
“He— he moved so fast!” Robin.son burst out. 
“He did indeed,” Carmichael 
said tranquilly. He patted his hollow stomach and sighed gently. 
“Luckily, we have an unoccupied 
guest bedroom for you, Mr. Robinson. Welcome to our happy little 
home. I hope you like toast and 
black coffee for breakfast.” 
— ROBERT SILVERBERG 
★ ★ ★ ★ ★ 
THE IRON CHANCELLOR 
(Continued from page 4) 
been intended for some other 
planet.” 
John Davenport's “Slurvian 
Self-Taught” indicates that there 
is an unknown nationality without a country, indentifiable of 
course by language, and gives these 
examples: 
bean, n. A living creature, as in 
human bean. 
cactus, n. pi. The people in a play 
or story. 
lore, n. The more desirable of the 
two berths in a Pullman. 
myrrh, n. A looking glass. 
plight, adj. Courteous. 
Davenport notes that these and 
other instances make good English words, and concludes there 
are “pure” Slurvians, as opposed to 
those who, in florist shops, buy 
flars, or, traveling abroad, visit 
farn (or forn) countries. Maybe, 
but this deduction should be 
checked against those in the abovementioned “Look Now.” 
“I Say It’s False!” by Parke 
Cummings tells how to beat all 
true and false quizzes — simply 
say “False!” to every question: 
Q. Dogs cannot climb trees. 
True or false? 
A. False! All dogs are perfectly capable of climbing trees. The 
reason they do not do so is because of an element in the bark of 
trees (sennic acid) which is injurious to their feet. If it were not 
for that, as tests with trees from 
which that acid has been removed 
prove, dogs would climb trees just 
as eagerly as cats. 
Q. It is colder in winter than 
in summer. T rue or false? 
A. Not on your tintype! The 
common custom of wearing heavy 
clothing in wintertime has caused 
this popular misconception. Heavy 
clothing impedes the circulation 
and hence leads to the erroneous 
belief that one is “cold” . 
Q. Vienna is the capital of 
Austria. True or false? 
A. Oh, let’s not go into that 
again. 
“H. J. Talking” by R. G. G. 
Price is the autobiography of a 
scientist with: 
A wife who discourages him in 
his work (psychological physics) 
and insists the Seven Wonders of 
the World are chosen annually by 
the Swedes. 
A tenant, also a scientist (solar 
biology). 
An indeterminate number of 
children, one of whom is considered odd because he was raised 
with three owls in an experiment. 
A Financial Flair worth study 
— it includes a plan that would 
allow him to go tax-free if he 
brings in ten new taxpayers. 
No money in my pocket if you 
get The Family Book of Humor; 
just that if you do, don’t think of 
it as losing $3.95 but rather as 
gaining 700 fun-filled pages. 
— H. L. GOLD 
GALAXY SCIENCE FICTION 
— Continued from Back Cover 
And if you DO go back, will you ever be able 
to return to your 21st century paradise? In 
short, can you actually live your life twice ? 
Read this Whole Amazing Story — fours for Only 10 c 
Science-fiction fans, get set for a real challenge to 
your wits ! THE DOOR INTO SUMMER by Robert 
Hcinlein — one of today's topnotch science-fiction writers — is a thriller crammed with new turns and new 
twists. You’ll find your everyday thought processes 
turned topsy-turvy by it. It’s selling everywhere right 
now for $2.95. But as a new member of the ScienceFiction Book Club, you can get this new book for only 
one dime ! Read, below why the Club is making this 
amazing offer — then rush in the coupon (with only 
10£) at once ! 
Why We Make This Amazingly Generous Offer 
W HY DO we offer you this brand-new, fulllength Science-Fiction thriller for only 10£? 
Simply to introduce you to the Science-Fiction 
Book CLUB, a wonderful idea in bringing you the 
best of the new science-fiction books- at 
a mere fraction of their usual cost ! 1*“™™ 
Each month the Club brings you only the 
finest, brand-new, full-length books for 
ONLY $1 EACH ( plus a few cents shipping 
charge) — even though they cost $2.50, 
$8.00 and up in the original publisher’s 
editions. 
Each month's selection is described 
in advance in the (Hub’s free bulletin. 
"You take only those books you want as 
few as 4 a year. No money in advance. 
No membership fees. You may cancel 
membership at any time. Recent selections have included such books as The 
End of Eternity by Isaac Asimov. The 
Isotope Man and Earthman, Come Home. 
The Club also brings members the best 
in factual scientific books, such as Satellite!, The Report on Unidentified Flying 
Objects and Exploring Mars. 
Mail Coupon with only 10? 
Simply mail the coupon with only a dime. 
Your copy of the poor into summer will 
be sent at once, together with the current 
selection, for which you will be billed only 
$1, plus a few cents shipping. If not delighted retu 
both books, owe nothing, and membership will 
cancelled. Rush coupon with 10£ to: SCIENCE-FI 
TION BOOK CLUB, Dept. GX-5, Garden City. N.Y. 
SCIENCE-FICTION BOOK CLUB 
Dept. GX-5, Garden City, N. Y. 
1 enclose only IOC for which please rush my copy of TUB DOOR 
INTO 81MMHB by Robert Heinlein. together with the current 
selection of the Club for which you may bill me only $1.#0 plus a 
few cents shipping, and enroll me as a member. Every mouth send 
the Club's free bulletin, describing coming selections. For each 
book I accept. I will pay only $1. plus shipping. I need take only 4 
hooks during each year I am a member and may resign at any time 
thereafter. 
NO-RISK GUARANTEE: If not delighted with the books, I may return them in 7 days, pay nothing, and membership will be cancelled. 
Name 
Address 
(Please Print Clearly) 
City 
Zone 
State 
Same offer in CANADA. Address 105 Rond Street. Toronto : 
(Offer good only in I*. S. A. and Canada. I 
ImogineYburself Shanghaied 
Into the zrCentury 
...AND WAKING UP 30 YEARS YOUNGER 
THAN YOUR SWEETHEART! 
J UST put yourself in Daniel Davis’ 
place. It’s the year 1970. You’re a 
young engineer, about to sell a milliondollar invention. You’re sitting pretty— 
until your passionate friend. Belle Darkin, upsets your apple cart. First she 
steals your invention. Then she slips you 
a hypo; puts you in a new kind of deep 
freeze called “The Long Sleep.” 
You wake up 30 YEARS LATER, in 
the year 2000— and you’re still only 29 
years old! But time has passed 
while you were in “cold storage,” 
and Belle, your eic-sweetheart, is 
now 30 years older than you are ! 
Well, you’ve lost interest in her 
anyway, after the way she twotimed and future-timed you. 
The Fascinating World of 2000 A.D. 
But there are other attractions 
in that world of 2000 : its women 
in “sticktite” clothes they just 
throw away after wearing. ..its 
honeymoon trips to the moon . 
its remarkable new conveniences 
...its brand new words of love 
and ways to live. No more menial 
labor. Robots take care of all that. 
Soon you’re enjoying life as never 
before! You’re glad to be out of 
that miserably backward world 
of the 20th century. 
But unfortunately you must get 
back to the year 1970, to take 
care of one last urgent mission. 
You only hope that you can come 
back to the 21st century by taking “The Long Sleep” again. The 
big question is: Can it be done? 
Yours 
lO* 
FOR ONLY 
WITH MEMBERSHIP 
This Spine-Tingling 
Science-Fiction Novel 
"THE DOOR INTO SUMMER" 
by Robert Heinlein 
— Continued on other side