APRIL Galaxy 1966 VANCE • HERBERT • SILVERBERG • LEY 
April 1966 
60< 
/ 
THE LAST 
CASTLE 
Jack Vance 
Complete in this 
issue— his finest 
story since 
THE DRAGON 
MASTERS 
LAZARUS 
COME FORTH! 
Robert
Silverberg 
THE 
PRIMITIVES 
Frank Herbert 
The “New Look" of 
the Solar System in 
For Your 
Information 
Willy Ley 
$ 70 , 000.00 
IN CASH PRIZES! 
"Your $1,200.00 check arrived this morning by Special 
Delivery. Thanks ever so much for your telephone call and 
prompt payment. It still doesn’t seem possible. It's been a 
great thrill." 
That's the way Emory Mead of Albany, N. Y., just one of 
our many big winners, reacted to receiving his cash prize. 
Dozens of men and women of all ages have cashed in as 
members of our exciting PUZZLE LOVERS CLUB. 
Our Club winners got their cash awards for solving 
puzzles in their leisure time. Our Club also has awarded 
huge prizes for many other kinds of contests. 
We've awarded cash in hundred-and-thousand-dollar units 
to retirees, sewing women, farmers, salesmen, war veterans, office workers, clerks, secretaries - people who 
never before dreamed of having the kind of money that 
movie stars make. 
This announcement is an invitation to you, as a reader 
of this publication, to find out for yourself if you have the 
talent to win up to $70,000.00 in cash. If you are over 18 
and like to play word games of any kind, the information 
below may lead you to thousands of dollars in extra cash 
that you may use as you wish. 
Mrs. H. C. Despain, Houston, Tex., won $1,000.00 
in cash in one month. 
YOU Can WIN Each Month! 
Members of our Club win cash prizes at home, just by solving puzzles and entering Club 
contests. They turn an educational and enjoyable hobby into pure profit. You can too! 
Your chief advantage in contests sponsored by our PUZZLE LOVERS CLUB is that you have 
only limited competition. Only members of the Club may compete and win. 
In 1963 we offered our members $35,000.00. We actually paid out more cash than we 
said we would — $35,51 1.25, to be exact. In 1964, we again offered $35,000.00. Again, we 
paid out more than we promised— $40,778.11. And now we're offering our members 
$70,000.00 in cash prizes. Most contest groups offer about $4,500 or $5,000 a year. Our 
Club gives you the opportunity to win double that every month! 
As a member of our Club you will be eligible to enter every cash prize contest we sponsor and you'll get at least four new contests each month. You’ll have three weeks to solve 
each set of contests. One week after the deadline, you’ll receive a new copy of our Puzzle 
Lovers Newspaper with names and addresses of all winners, correct solutions, and your new 
puzzle contests. When YOU Win, you receive your prize within two weeks. 
IT COSTS YOU NOTHING TO TRY OUR CONTESTS 
AND SEE IF YOU HAVE THE TALENT TO WIN 
The coupon below will bring you, absolutely FREE, a sample copy of our Puzzle Lovers 
Newspaper, the only newspaper in the world exclusively devoted to contests (and it’s published for members only). When your free copy of our newspaper arrives, sit down in a quiet 
place and read about our winners, our prizes, our contests. Try our stimulating word games 
to see if you can do them. You are under no obligation to enter our contests. If you do 
Ray Smith, Sacramento, decide to go after our cash, there are no boxtops, no jingles to complete, nothing to buy 
Calif., won nearly $1,000.00 Clip the coupon now and please be sure to print your name and address clearly Then 
read about $1,000.00 winners like Mrs. Belle Smith of Yakima, Wash. Discover how hundreds 
of other members cashed in just by doing our puzzles in their spare time. Find out all about 
this exciting and profitable hobby now. You may receive your first big prize in a few weeks. 
AFFIX THIS COUPON TO POSTCARD FOR FAST HANDLING OR MAIL IN ENVELOPE. 
in Club contests. 
! Rjz 2 L e LPIfERS CLUB Box 2, Prince Street Station, New York City 10012 
jm * 
Name 
Mrs. Florence Humphrey, 
Cincinnati, won $500.00 
on just one puzzle. 
I Address 
j c*ty 
Zip
Gentlemen, 
Send me a free copy of I 
your newspaper plus all de- 1 
tails on your cash prize | 
contests. I am under abso- ■ 
lutely no obligation to pay I 
anything. If I Join the Club i 
I may compete for all prizes • 
and spend the cash I win I 
any way I want. 
G.P. 2 ! 
L —JP2. wincxtra cash! ] 
Galaxy 
MAGAZINE 
ALL STORIES NEW 
Galaxy is published in French and 
Italian. The b. S. Edition Is published in Bralfle. This Edition Is 
also published in Living Tape by 
Services for the Blind, Inc, Des 
Moines, Iowa. 
APRIL, 1966 • VoL 24, No. 4 
CONTENTS 
NOVELETTES 
THE LAST CASTLE 
by Jack Vance 
LAZARUS COME FORTH! 
FREDERIK POM. 
Etttor 
writ urr 
Science Editor 
ROBERT M. GUINN 
Publisher 
DAVID PERTON 
Production Manager 
DAVE G ELLER ASSOC. 
by Robert Silverberg 
THE PRIMITIVES 142 
by Frank Herbert 
SHORT STORIES 
THE CRYSTAL PRISON 76 
by Fritz Leider 
THE NIGHT BEFORE 114 
by George Henry Smith 
BIG BUSINESS 137 
by Jim Harmon 
DEVISE AND CONQUER 176 
NON-FACT ARTICLE 
TWENTY-SEVEN INCHES 
MOONSHINE 186 
SCIENCE DEPARTMENT 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 126 
by Willy Ley 
MATURES 
EDITORIAL 4 
by Frederik Pohl 
©ALAXY BOOKSHELF 67 
by Aigis Budrys 
Cover by Gaughan from The Last Catde 
Advertising 
MAVIS FISHER 
Subscription Mgr. 
GALAXY MAGAZINE is published 
bi-monthly by Galaxy Publishing 
Corporation. Main offices: 421 
Hudson Street, New York, N.Y. 
10014. 60c per copy Subscription: (12 copies) $6.00 per 
year in the United States, Canada, Mexico, South and Central America and U. S. Posessions. Elsewhere $7.00. Secondclass postage paid at New 
York, N.Y. and at additional 
mailing offices. Copyright New 
York 1966 by Galaxy Publishing 
Corporation, Robert M. Guinn, 
President. All rights including 
translations reserved. All material submitted must be accompanied by seif-addressed 
stamped envelopes. The publisher assumes no responsibility for unsolicited material. All 
stories printed in this magazine 
are fiction and any similiarity 
between characters and actual 
persons is coincidental. 
Printed in the U.S.A. 
By The Guirni Co, Inc. N. Y. 
Title Reg. U. S. Pat OH. 
WHERE THE JOBS GO 
A s this is written, the city of New 
York is tying itself in knots because of a strike of the Transport 
Workers Union. All of the city subways, and nearly all of its buses, are 
idle. Workers can’t get to their 
jobs; shopper can’t get to stores; 
salesmen can’t call on their customers; theatergoers can’t reach the 
plays for which they have bought 
tickets months in advance — in a 
word, the normal operations of the 
city have stopped. 
All of this costs money. The 
current guess is that the paralysis 
of the city is costing it something 
like $100,000,000 a day — or substantially more than the combined expense of the space program, the war in Vietnam and 
Medicare put together. 
I t is our opinion that this is 
only a beginning, because it 
begins to look clear to us that 
the real squeeze brought about 
by automation is going to express 
itself — has already begun to express itself — in a wave of strikes 
such as we’ve never seen before. 
True, automation is not technically an issue in this strike. 
The TWU had its confrontation 
with the machines — the “Headless Horseman”, as Mike Quill 
called it — when the subways in
stalled the first automated train 
a few years ago. At union insistence the Transit Authority provided a standby motorman on 
the train, whose principal efforts 
consisted of walking from one 
end of the train to the other each 
time it came to the end of its 
run. The automated train was 
destroyed accidentally in a fire 
after a year’s trial — apparently to the unspoken relief of all 
parties. There has been no announcement of any plan to build 
another, but we would judge that 
its ghost haunts the negotiating 
tables. 
Nearly all the subway jobs involved are relatively unskilled — 
changemakers, conductors, station guards, motormen — with 
only a comparatively small number involved in maintenance, repair, construction and other more 
technically demanding jobs. And 
this is the edge that cuts. The 
subway workers have not been 
through the automation shakeout, when a large number of repetitive jobs are obsoleted and 
the jobs that are left require 
more training and more skill. 
In other words, their productive capacity has not yet been 
multiplied by the machine factor. This produces two opposed 
points of view, both of them unarguable. Say the subway adminstrators and the public at large; 
These jobs just don’t call for 
that kind of money, and besides 
it would make the expense of 
running the subways ridiculously 
high. Say the subway workers: 
Other people putting in the same 
hours earn much more; we have 
to live in the same world with 
them, we have to compete with 
them to buy what we want in 
the stores, and we can’t do it unless we make as much money as 
they do. 
This is the classical formula 
for the hardest-fought wars: both 
sides are right 
I s there any way to avoid more 
and even worse strikes that 
this one in the transition to the 
Cybernetic Age? 
We doubt it very much. Certainly what is happening now is 
not the final struggle; in fact 
the issues haven’t even been 
joined. The present subway 
strike is only a taste of what will 
come when “Headless Horsemen” are beginning to come out 
of the shops for all the major 
routes — and that day cannot 
be far off. Remember the newspaper strike of a couple years 
ago. That one was indeed fought 
on the issue of automation; but 
we have it on the word of the 
man who designed the systems 
that triggered the strike, Eugene 
Leonard, that it was the wrong 
fight at the wrong time over the 
wrong issues — because the systems that caused die strike were 
already obsolete at the time. 
Not long ago we took part in 
a radio program with the aforesaid Gene Leonard, along with 
Arthur Elias of the Institute for 
Scientific Information and Henry 
Simon of Simon 8s Schuster, 
talking about the future of the 
publishing business in the Cybernetic Age. We started by discussing automatic typesetting, 
and it took exactly twelve minutes by the studio clock before 
we had reached a proposal for 
high-speed facsimile machines 
which would produce a book to 
your order, anywhere in the 
world. In twelve minutes we not 
only got rid of the human linotype operator, but abolished the 
linotype itself and went on to 
obsolete the printing press, the 
binderies, the warehouses and 
the publishing house’s road salesmen. 
Is such a new kind of publishing technologically feasible right 
now? Certainly. Is it likely to 
come into being in the next few 
years? Certainly not — cultural 
lag doesn’t permit us to move 
that fast — but it, or something 
like it, is surely the shape of the 
publishing business some time in 
the future. 
We tend to think of automation’s effect on our own jobs in 
terms of a wilier, cheaper competitor to do the same things 
we’re doing right now. In the 
event it isn’t going to be like 
that at all. An analogy: 
Suppose we resurrected some 
twelfth-century armaments expert and asked him how he 
thought we should employ the 
resources of modern technology 
to build weapons. No doubt he 
would be delighted; at once he 
would proceed to the fabrication of sharper lances, springier 
bows, truer shafts; and just how 
far would his troops get against 
H-bombs or napalm grenades? 
Unfortunately, our own outlook on our own jobs is largely 
medieval. The long lines of girls 
who used to assemble radio components don’t get replaced 
by speedier machine assembles; 
they get put out of business entirely by printed circuits. The 
stockbreeders who used to export power to the cities in the 
form of draft animals weren’t 
hurt by competition from more 
efficient breeders. They simply 
ceased to have a market when 
the cities began exporting power 
to the farms, in the form of tractors and trucks. 
Just so, in the long run (which 
may be measured in years or 
even months, these days), the 
bank tellers and retail clerks and 
accounting departments are not 
as likely to be replaced by whirring black boxes which accept ten-dollar bills and return 
change as they are to be retired 
completely by new electronic 
credit systems. The machines 
don’t confine themselves to doing our jobs faster and more reliably — and cheaper. They 
make it unncessary for a great 
many of our jobs to be done at 
all. 
!\/F eanwhile, we have the 
strikes. More and more of 
them, we would bet; worse and 
worse strikes, costing us more 
and more money. (Each day’s 
loss to New York under the current subway strike would build 
a couple dozen handsome new 
schools.) 
As long as Smith, operating at 
a job with only his own decisionmaking power, lives next door to 
Jones, whose decision-making 
power and consequent productivity is multiplied by the machine factor, they’ll go on; because Smith eats as many pork 
chops in a year as Jones, his 
children wear out as many 
clothes, his car uses as much 
gas — and he wants as much 
money. Postponing this revolution or slowing it down isn’t going to make us very well indeed; 
let’s swallow it and get it over! 
— THE EDITOR 
VtmeiiFBacon 
THISBOOK FRgEI 
 Why were these men great? 
witt Ijxanklimk How does anyone — man or woman — achieve 
;J§f| greatness? Is it not by mastery of the powers 
s'"" Wm within ourselves ? 
Know the mysterious world within you ! Attune 
ourself to the wisdom of the ages! Grasp the 
inner power of your mind ! Learn the secrets of a 
full and peaceful life! 
Benjamin Franklin, statesman and inventor . 
Isaac Newton, discoverer of the Law of Gravitaiewitih illif tion . Francis Bacon, philosopher and scientist 
. like many other learned and great men and 
women . were Rosicrucians. The Rosicrucians 
(NOT a religious organization) have been in 
existence for centuries. Today, headquarters of 
the Rosicrucians send over seven million pieces 
of mail annually to all parts of the world. 
me ROSICRUCIANS 
San Jose (AMORC) California 95114, U.S.A. 
for your FREE 
(ropy of 'The Maa• Of ' Life” — 
'TODAY. No oblJgirtJoo. A nonprofit organiza.. tion. AddresJ: 
scrfb# J.M.J. 
Scribe J.M.J. SEND THIS COUPON 
The ROSICRUCIANS please include 
(AMORC) your zip code 
San Jose, California 95114, U.S.A. 
Please send me the free book, The Mastery of Life, 
which explains how I may learn to use my faculties 
and powers of mind. 
Name. 
AddressCity
THE 
LAST 
CASTLE 
by JACK VANCE 
Their castle was the last 
outpost of civilized man — 
and it was doomed to fall! 
Until almost the last moment 
the factions among the castle 
clans were squabbling as to how 
Destiny properly should be met. 
The gentlemen of most prestige 
and account elected to ignore the 
entire undignified circumstance 
and went about their normal pur
»npoward the end of a stormy 
summer afternoon, with the 
sun finally breaking out under 
ragged black rain clouds, Castle 
Janeil was overwhelmed and its 
oooulation destroyed. 
suits, with neither more nor less 
punctilio than usual. A few 
cadets, desperate to the point of 
hysteria, took up weapons and 
prepared to resist the final assault. Others still, perhaps a 
quarter of the total population, 
waited passively, ready — almost 
happy — to expiate the sins of the 
human race. 
In the end death came uniformly to all; and all extracted 
as much satisfaction in their dying as this essentially graceless 
process could afford. The proud 
sat turning the pages of their 
beautiful books, or discussing the 
qualities of a century-old essence, 
or fondling a favorite Phane. 
They died without deigning to 
heed the fact. The hot-heads 
raced up the muddy slope which, 
outraging all normal rationality, 
loomed above the parapets of 
Janeil. Most were buried under 
sliding rubble, but a few gained 
the ridge to gun, hack, stab, until they themselves were shot, 
crushed by the half-alive powerwagons, hacked or stabbed. The 
contrite waited in the classic posture of expiation, on their knees, 
heads bowed, and perished, so 
they believed, by a process in 
which the Meks were symbols 
and human sin the reality. In the 
end all were dead: gentlemen, 
ladies, Phanes in the pavilions; 
Peasants in the stables. Of all 
those who had inhabited Janeil, 
10 
only the Birds survived, creatures awkward, gauche and raucous, oblivious to pride and faith, 
more concerned with the wholeness of their hides than the dignity of their castle. 
As the Meks swarmed over the 
parapets, the Birds departed 
their cotes. They screamed strident insults as they flapped east 
toward Hagedorn, now the last 
castle of Earth. 
F our months before, the Meks 
had appeared in the park before Janeil, fresh from the Sea 
Island massacre. 
Climbing to the turrets and 
balconies, sauntering the Sunset 
Promenade, from ramparts and 
parapets, the gentlemen and ladies of Janeil, some two thousand 
in all, looked down at the browngold warriors. Their mood was 
complex : amused indifference, 
flippant disdain, over a substratum of doubt and foreboding. 
All these moods were the product 
of three basic circumstances : 
their own exquisitely subtle civilization, the security provided by 
Janeil’s wall and the fact that 
they could think of nothing to 
do to alter the circumstances. 
The Janeil Meks had long 
since departed to join the revolt. 
There only remained Phanes, 
Peasants and Birds from which 
to fashion what would have been 
the travesty of a punitive force. 
At the moment there seemed 
no need for such a force. Janeil 
was deemed impregnable. The 
walls, two hundred feet tall, were 
black rock-melt contained in the 
meshes of a silver-blue steel alloy. Solar cells provided energy 
for all the needs of the castle, and 
in the event of emergency food 
could be synthesized from carbon 
dioxide and water vapor, as well 
as syrup for Phanes, Peasants 
and Birds. Such a need was not 
envisaged. Janeil was self-sufficient and secure, though inconveniences might arise when machinery broke down and there 
were no Meks to repair it. The 
situation, then, was disturbing 
but hardly desperate. During the 
day the gentlemen so inclined 
brought forth energy-guns and 
sport-rifles and killed as many 
Meks as the extreme range allowed. 
After dark the Meks brought 
forward power-wagons and 
earth-movers, and began to raise 
a dike around Janeil. 
The folk of the castle watched 
without comprehension until the 
dike reached a height of fifty 
feet and dirt began to spill down 
against the walls. Then the dire 
purpose of the Meks became 
apparent, and insouciance gave 
way to dismal foreboding. 
All the gentlemen of Janeil 
were erudite in at least one realm 
of knowledge. Certain were 
THE LAST CASTLE 
mathematical theoreticians, others had made a profound study 
of the physical sciences. Some of 
these, with a detail of Peasants 
to perform the sheer physical exertion, attempted to restore the 
energy-cannon to functioning 
condition. Unluckily, the cannon 
had not been maintained in good 
order. Various components were 
obviously corroded or damaged. 
Conceivably these components 
might have been replaced from 
the Mek shops on the second 
sub-level, but none of the group 
had any knowledge of the Mek 
nomenclature or warehousing 
system. Warrick Madency Arban 
(which is to say. Arban of the 
Madency family on the Warrick 
clan) suggested that a work- force 
of Peasants search the warehouse. 
But in view of the limited mental 
capacity of the Peasants, nothing 
was done and the whole plan to 
restore the energy-cannon came 
to naught. 
The gentlefolk of Janeil 
watched in fascination as the dirt 
piled higher and higher around 
them, in a circular mound like a 
crater. Summer neared its end, 
and on one stormy day dirt and 
rubble rose above the parapets, 
and began to spill over into the 
courts and piazzas. Janeil must 
soon be buried and all within suffocated. 
It was then that a group of 
impulsive young cadets, with 
more elan than dignity, took up 
weapons and charged up the 
slope. The Meks dumped dirt and 
stone upon them, but a handful 
gained the ridge where they 
fought in a kind of dreadful exaltation. 
Fifteen minutes the fight raged 
and the earth became sodden 
with rain and blood. For one 
glorious moment the cadets swept 
the ridge clean. Had not most of 
their fellows been lost under the 
rubble anything might have occurred. But the Meks regrouped, 
thrust forward. Ten men were 
left, then six, then four, then one, 
then none. The Meks marched 
down the slope, swarmed over 
the battlements, and with somber 
intensity killed all within. Janeil, 
for seven hundred years the 
abode of gallant gentlemen and 
gracious ladies, had become a 
lifeless hulk. 
nphe Mek, standing as if a 
A specimen in a museum case, 
was a man-like creature native, 
in his original version, to a planet of Etamin. His tough rustybronze hide glistened metallically as if oiled or waxed. The 
spines thrusting back from scalp 
and neck shone like gold, and 
indeed they were coated with a 
conductive copper-chrome film. 
His sense organs were gathered 
in clusters at the site of a man’s 
ears; his visage — it was often a 
12 
shock, walking the lower corridors, to come suddenly upon a 
Mek — was corrugated muscle, 
not dissimilar to the look of an 
uncovered human brain. His 
maw, a vertical irregular cleft at 
the base of this “face’, was an obsolete organ by reason of the 
syrup sac which had been introduced under the skin of the 
shoulders, and the digestive organs, originally used to extract 
nutrition from decayed swamp 
vegetation and coelenterates, 
had atrophied. The Mek typically wore no garment except possibly a work apron or a tool-belt, 
and in the sunlight his rustbronze skin made a handsome 
display. This was the Mek solitary, a creature intrinsically as 
effective as man — perhaps more 
by virtue of his superb brain 
which also functioned as a radio 
transceiver. Working in the mass, 
by the teeming thousands, he 
seemed less admirable, less competent: a hybrid of sub-man and 
cockroach. 
Certain savants, notably Mominglight’s D.R. Jardine and Salonson of Tuang, considered the 
Mek bland and phlegmatic, but 
the profound Claghom of Castle 
Hagedom asserted otherwise. 
The emotions of the Mek, said 
Claghom, were different from 
human emotions, and only vaguely comprehensible to man. After diligent research Claghom 
isolated over a dozen Mek emotions. 
In spite of such research, the 
Mek revolt came as an utter surprise, no less to Claghom, D. R. 
Jardine and Salonson than to 
anyone else. Why? asked everyone. How could a group so long 
submissive have contrived so 
murderous a plot? 
The most reasonable conjecture was also the simplest: the 
Mek resented servitude and 
hated the Earthmen who had removed him from his natural environment. Those who argued 
against this theory claimed that 
it projected human emotions and 
attitudes into a non-human organism, that the Mek had every 
reason to feel gratitude toward 
the gentlemen who had liberated 
him from the conditions of 
Etamin Nine. To this, the first 
group would inquire, “Who projects human attitudes now?” And 
the retort of their opponents was 
often: “Since no one knows for 
certain, one projection is no 
more absurd than another.” 
II 
C astle Hagedom occupied the 
crest of a black diorite crag 
overlooking a wide valley to the 
south. Larger, more majestic 
than Janiel, Hagedorn was protected by walls a mile in circumference, three hundred feet tall. 
THE LAST CASTLE 
The parapets stood a full nine 
hundred feet above the valley, 
with towers, turrets and observation eyries raising even higher. 
Two sides of the crag, at east and 
west, dropped sheer to the valley. 
The north and south slopes, a 
trifle less steep, were terraced 
and planted with vines, artichokes, pears and pomegranates. 
An avenue rising from the valley 
circled the crag and passed 
through a portal into the central 
plaza. Opposite stood the great 
Rotunda, with at either side the 
tall Houses of the twenty-eight 
families. 
The original castle, constructed 
immediately after the return of 
men to Earth, stood on the site 
now occupied by the plaza. The 
tenth Hagedom had assembled 
an enormous force of Peasants 
and Meks to build the new walls, 
after which he demolished the old 
castle. The twenty-eight Houses 
dated from this time, five hundred years before. 
Below the plaza were three 
service levels: the stables and 
garages at the bottom, next the 
Mek shops and Mek living quartos, then the various storerooms, 
warehouses and special shops: 
bakery, brewery, lapidary, arsenal, repository, and the like. 
nphe current Hagedom, twentysixth of the line, was a Claghom of the Overwheles. His se
13 
THE CLANS OF HAGEDORN 
THEIR COLORS AND ASSOCIATED FAMILIES: 
CLANS 
COLOBS 
FAMILIES 
Xanten 
yellow, black piping 
Haude, Quay, Idelsea, 
Esledune, Salomon, 
Roseth. 
Beaudry 
dark blue, white 
piping 
Onwane, Zadig, Prine, 
Fer, Susune. 
Overwhele 
gray, green, 
red rosettes 
Claghorn, Abreti, 
Woss, Hinken 
Zumbeld. 
Aure 
brown, black 
Zadhause, Fotergil, 
Marune, Baudune, 
Godaiming, Lesmanie 
Isseth 
purple, dark red ’ 
Mazeth, Floy, 
Luder-Hepman, Uegus, 
Kerrithew, Bethune. 
The first ; 
Hagedorn'. 
gentleman of the castle, 
elected for life, Is known 
The elan chief, selected by the family elders, bears the name of his 
clan; thus: 'Xanten', ‘Beaudry’, ‘Overwhele’, ‘Aure', Tsseth' — both 
clans and clan chiefs. 
The family elder, selected by household heads, bears the name of 
his family. Thus 'Xdelsea', ‘Zadhause’, ‘Bethune', ‘Claghorn’, are both 
families and family elders. 
The remaining gentlemen and ladles bear first the clan, then the 
family, then the personal name. Thus: Aure Zadhause Ludwick. abbreviated to A. Z. Ludwick, and Beaudry Fer Darlane, abbreviated to 
B. F. Darlane. 
lection had occasioned general 
surprise, because O.C. Charle, as 
he had been before his elevation, 
was a gentleman of no remarkable presence. His elegance, flair, 
and erudition were only ordinary; he had never been notable 
for any significant originality of 
thought. His physical proportions 
were good; his face was square 
and bony, with a short straight 
nose, a benign brow, narrow gray 
eyes. His expression was normally a trifle abstracted — his detractors used the word ‘vacanf . But 
by a simple lowering of the eyelids, a downward twitch of the 
coarse blond eyebrows, it at once 
became stubborn and surly, a 
fact of which O.C. Charle, or 
Hagedorn, was unaware. 
The office, while exerting little 
or no formal authority, exerted a 
pervasive influence, and the 
style of the gentleman who was 
Hagedorn affected everyone. For 
this reason the selection of Hagedom was a matter of no small 
importance, subject to hundreds 
of considerations, and it was the 
rare candidate who failed to have 
some old solecism or gaucherie 
discussed with embarrassing candor. While the candidate might 
never take overt umbrage, friendships were inevitably sundered, 
rancors augmented, reputations 
blasted. O. C. Charle’s elevation 
represented a compromise between two factions among the 
Overwheles, to which clan the 
privilege of selection had fallen. 
The gentlemen between whom 
O.C. Charle represented a compromise were both highly respected, but distinguished by 
basically different attitudes toward existence. The first was the 
talented Garr of the Zumbeld 
family. He exemplified the traditional virtues of Castle Hagedorn: he was a notable connoisseur of essences, he dressed 
with absolute savoir, with never 
so much as a pleat nor a twist of 
the characteristic Overwhele rosette awry. He combined insouciance and flair with dignity. His 
THE LAST CASTLE 
repartee coruscated with brilliant 
allusions and turns of phrase. 
When aroused his wit was utterly 
mordant. He could quote every 
literary work of consequence; he 
performed expertly upon the 
nine- stringed lute, and was thus 
in constant demand at the Viewing of Antique Tabards. He was 
an antiquarian of unchallengeable erudition and knew the 
locale of every major city of Old 
Earth, and could discourse for 
hours upon the history of the 
ancient times. His military expertise was unparallelled at 
Hagedorn, and challenged only 
by D. K. Magdah of Castle Delora and perhaps Brusham of 
Tuang. Faults? Flaws? Few 
could be cited: over-punctilio 
which might be construed as 
waspishness; an intrepid pertinacity which could be considered 
ruthless. 
O. Z. Garr could never be 
dismissed as insipid or indecisive, 
and his personal courage was beyond dispute. Two years before a 
stray band of Nomads had ventured into Lucerne Valley, 
slaughtering Peasants, stealing 
cattle, and going so far as to 
fire an arrow into the chest of an 
Isseth cadet. O.Z. Garr instantly 
assembled a punitive company 
of Meks, loaded them aboard a 
dozen power-wagons and set 
forth in pursuit of the Nomads, 
finally overtaking them near 
Drene River, by the ruins of 
Worster Cathedral. The Nomads 
were unexpectedly strong, unexpectedly crafty, and were not 
content to turn tail and flee. During the fighting O.Z. Garr displayed the most exemplary demeanor, directing the attack 
from the seat of his power-wagon, 
a pair of Meks standing by with 
shields to ward away arrows. 
The conflict ended in a rout 
of the Nomads. They left twentyseven lean black-cloaked corpses 
strewn on the field, while only 
twenty Meks lost their lives. 
Garr’s opponent in the 
election was Claghorn, elder 
of the Claghorn family. As with 
16 
O.Z. Garr, the exquisite discriminations of Hagedorn aoriMy 
came to Claghorn as easily aa 
swimming to a fish. 
He was no less erudite than 
O.Z. Garr, though hardly so versatile, his principal field of study 
being the Meks, their physiology, 
linguistic modes, and social patterns. Claghom’s conversation 
was more profound, but less entertaining and not so trenchant 
as that of O.Z. Garr. He seldom 
employed the extravagant 
tropes and allusions which characterized Garr’s discussions, preferring a style of speech which 
was almost unadorned. Claghorn 
kept no Phanes; O.Z. Garr’s four 
matched Gossamer Dainties were 
marvels of delight, and at the 
viewing of Antique Tabards 
Garr’s presentations were seldom 
outshone. The important contrast between the two men lay 
in their philosophic outlook. O.Z. 
Garr, a traditionalist, a fervent 
exemplar of his society, subscribed to its tents without res• ervation. He was beset by neither doubt nor guilt; he felt no desire to alter the conditions which 
afforded more than two thousand 
gentlemen and ladies lives of 
great richness. Claghorn, while 
by no means an Expiationist, was 
known to feel dissatisfaction with 
the general tenor of life at Castle 
Hagedorn, and argued so plausibly that many folk refused to 
listen to him, on the grounds that 
they became uncomfortable. But 
an indefinable malaise ran deep, 
and Claghorn had many influential supporters. 
When the time came for ballots to be cast, neither O.Z. Garr 
nor Claghorn could muster sufficient support. The office finally 
was conferred upon a gentleman who never in his most optimistic reckonings had expected 
it: a gentleman of decorum and 
dignity but no great depth; without flippancy, but likewise without vivacity; affable but disinclined to force an issue to a disagreeable conclusion: O.C. 
Charle, the new Hagedorn. 
Six months later, during the 
dark hours before dawn, the 
Hagedorn Meks evacuated their 
quarters and departed, taking 
with them power -wagons, tools, 
weapons and electrical equipment. The act had clearly been 
long in the planning, for simultaneously the Meks at each of 
the eight other castles made a 
similar departure. 
^T'he initial reaction at Castle 
Hagedorn, as elsewhere, was 
incredulity, then shocked anger, 
then — when the implications of 
the act were pondered — a sense 
of foreboding and calamity. 
The new Hagedorn, the clan 
chiefs, and certain other notables 
appointed by Hagedorn met in 
THE LAST CASTLE 
the formal council chamber to 
consider the matter. They sat 
around a great table covered with 
red velvet: Hagedorn at the 
head; Xanten and Isseth at his 
left; Overwhele, Aure and Beaudry at his right; then the others, 
including O. Z. Garr, I. K. Linus, 
A. G. Bernal, a mathematical 
theoretician of great ability, B. 
F. Wyas, an equally sagacious 
antiquarian who had identified 
the sites of many ancient cities: 
Palmyra, Lubeck, Eridu, Zanesville, Burton-on-Trent, Massilia 
among others. Certain family elders filled out the council: Marune and Baudune of Aure; Quay, 
Roseth and Idelsea of Xanten; 
Uegus of Isseth, Claghorn of 
Overwhele. 
All sat silent for a period of ten 
minutes, arranging their minds 
and performing the silent act erf 
psychic accommodation known as 
‘intression’. 
At last Hagedorn spoke. “The 
castle suddenly is bereft of its 
Meks. Needless to say, this is an 
inconvenient condition to be adjusted as swiftly as possible. 
Here, I am sure, we find ourselves of one mind.” 
He looked around the table. 
All thrust forward ivory tablets 
to signify assent — all save Claghom, who however did not stand 
it on end to signify dissent. 
Isseth, a stern white-haired 
gentleman magnificently hand
17 
some in spite of his seventy years, 
spoke in a grim voice. “I see no 
point in cogitation or delay. What 
we must do is clear. Admittedly 
the Peasants are poor material 
from which to recruit an armed 
force. Nonetheless, we must assemble them, equip them with 
sandals, smocks and weapons so 
that they do not discredit us, and 
put them under good leadership: 
O. Z. Garr or Xanten. Birds can 
locate the vagrants, whereupon 
we will track them down, order 
the Peasants to give them a good 
drubbing and herd them home 
on the double.” 
Xanten, thirty-five years old, 
extraordinarily young to be a 
clan chief, and a notorious firebrand, shook his head. “The idea 
is appealing but impractical. 
Peasants simply could not stand 
up to the Meks, no matter how 
we trained them.” 
The statement was manifestly 
• This Is only an approximate translation ana rails to capture the pungency 
of the language. Several words have no 
contemporary equivalents. 'Skirkling\ as 
to send skirkling', denotes a frantic 
pell-mell flight in all directions accompanied by a vibration or twinkling or a 
Jerking motion. To 'volith' is to toy 
Idly with a matter, the implication being that the person involved is of such 
Jovian potency that all difficulties dwindle to contemptible triviality. 'Raudelbogs' are the semi-intelligent beings of 
Etamin Four, who were brought to 
Earth, trained first as gardeners, then 
construction laborers, then sent home 
m disgrace because of certain repulsive 
habits they refused to forgo. 
The statement of O. Z. Garr. therefore, becomes something like this: 
Were power-wagons at hand, I'd volith 
riding forth with a whip to send the 
raudelbogs skirkling home.” 
accurate. The Peasants, small 
andromorphs originally of Spica 
Ten, were not so much timid as 
incapable of performing a vicious 
act. 
\ dour silence held the table. 
O. Z. Garr finally spoke. 
“The dogs have stolen our powerwagons, otherwise I’d be tempted 
to ride out and chivvy the rascals home with a whip.”* 
“A matter of perplexity,” said 
Hagedorn, “is syrup. Naturally 
they carried away what they 
could. When this is exhausted — 
what then? Will they starve? Impossible for them to return to 
their original diet — what was it, 
swamp mud? Eh, Claghom, 
you’re the expert in these matters. Can the Meks return to a 
diet of mud?” 
“No,” said Claghom. “The organs of the adult are atrophied. 
If a cub were started on the diet, 
he’d probably survive.” 
“Just as I assumed.” Hagedorn 
scowled portentously down at his 
clasped hands to conceal his total 
lack of any constructive proposal. 
A gentleman in the dark blue 
of the Beaudrys appeared in the 
doorway: he poised himself, held 
high his right arm, bowed. 
Hagedorn rose to his feet. 
“Come forward, B. F. Robarth; 
what is your news?” For this was 
the significance of the newcomer’s genuflection. 
“The news is a message broadcast from Halycon. The Meks 
have attacked; they have fired 
the structure and are slaughtering all. The radio went dead one 
minute ago.” 
All swung around, some jumped to their feet. “Slaughter?” 
croaked Claghom. 
“I am certain that by now 
Halcyon is no more.” 
Claghom sat staring with eyes 
unfocused. The others discussed 
the dire news in voices heavy 
with horror. 
Hagedorn once more brought 
the council back to order. “This 
is clearly an extreme situation; 
the gravest, perhaps, of our entire history. I am frank to state 
that I can suggest no decisive 
counter-act.” 
Overwhele inquired, “What of 
the other castles? Are they secure?” 
Hagedorn turned to B. F. Robarth : “Will you be good enough 
to make general radio contact 
with all other castles, and inquire 
as to their condition?” 
Xanten said, “Others are as 
vulnerable as Halcyon: Sea Island and Delora, in particular, 
and Maraval as well.” 
Claghom emerged from his 
reverie. “The gentlemen and ladies of these places, in my opinion, should consider taking refuge at Janeil or here until the 
uprising is quelled.” 
THE LAST CASTLE 
O thers around the table looked 
at him in surprise and puzzlement. O. Z. Garr inquired in 
the silkiest of voices: “You envision the gentlefolk of these 
castles scampering to refuge at 
the cock-a-hoop swaggering of 
the lower orders?” 
“Indeed I do, should they wish 
to survive,” responded Claghom 
politely. A gentleman of late middle-age, Claghom was stocky, 
strong, with black-gray hair, 
magnificent green eyes, a manner which suggest great internal 
force under stem control. “Flight 
by definition entails a certain dimunition of dignity,” he went on 
to say. “If O. Z. Garr can propound an elegant manner of taking to one’s heels, I will be glad 
to learn it, and everyone else 
should likewise heed, because in 
the days to come the capability 
may be of comfort to all.” 
Hagedorn interposed before O 
Z. Garr could reply. “Let us kec 
to the issues. I confess I cannc 
see to the end of all this. The 
Meks have demonstrated themselves to be murderers. How can 
we take murderers back into our 
service? But if we don’t — well, 
to say the least, conditions will 
be austere until we can locate 
and train a new force of technicians.” 
“The spaceships!” exclaimed 
Xanten. “We must see to them 
at once!” 
“What’s this?” inquired Beaudry, a gentleman of rock-hard 
face. “How do you mean: ‘see 
to them’?” 
“They must be protected from 
damage! What else? They are our 
link to the Home Worlds. The 
maintenance Meks probably have 
not deserted the hangars, since, 
if they propose to exterminate us, 
they will want to deny us the 
spaceships.” 
“Perhaps you care to march 
with a levy of Peasants to take 
the hangars under firm control?” 
suggested O. Z. Garr in a somewhat supercilious voice. A long 
history of rivalry and mutual 
detestation existed between himself and Xanten. 
“It may be our only hope,” 
said Xanten. “Still — how does 
one fight with a levy of Peasants? 
Better that I fly to the hangars 
and reconnoiter. Meanwhile, perhaps you, and others with military expertise, will take in hand 
the recruitment and training of a 
Peasant militia.” 
“In this regard,” stated O. Z. 
Garr, I await the outcome of our 
current deliberations. If it develops that here lies the optimum 
course, I naturally will apply my 
competences to the fullest degree. If your own capabilities are 
best fulfilled by spying out the 
activities of the Meks, I hope you 
will be large-hearted enough to 
do the same.” 
The two gentlemen glared at 
each other. 
A year previously their emnity 
had almost culminated in a duel. 
Xanten, a gentleman tall, cleanlimbed, nervously active, was 
gifted with great natural flair, but 
likewise evinced a disposition too 
easy for absolute elegance. The 
traditionalists considered him 
sthross’, indicating a manner 
flawed by an almost imperceptible slackness and lack of punctilio: not the best possible choice 
for clan chief. 
Xanten’s response to O. Z. Garr 
was blandly polite. “I shall be 
glad to take this task upon myself. Since haste is of the essence 
I will risk the accusation of precipitousness and leave at once. 
Hopefully I return to report tomorrow.” He rose, performed a 
ceremonious bow to Hagedom, 
another all-inclusive salute to the 
council and departed. 
Ill 
TTe crossed to Esledune House 
where he maintained an 
apartment on the thirteenth level : 
four rooms furnished in the style 
known as Fifth Dynasty, after 
an epoch in the history of the 
Altair Home Planets, from which 
the human race had returned to 
Earth. 
His current consort, Araminta, 
a lady of the Onwane family, was 
absent on affairs of her own, 
which suited Xanten well enough. 
After plying him with questions 
she would have discredited his 
simple explanation, preferring to 
suspect an assignation at his 
country place. Truth to tell, he 
had become bored with Araminta 
and had reason to believe that 
she felt similarly — or perhaps 
his exalted rank had provided her 
less opportunity to preside at 
glittering social functions than 
she had expected. They had bred 
no children. Araminta’s daughter 
by a previous connection had 
been tallied to her. Her second 
child must then be tallied to Xanten, preventing him from siring 
another child.* 
Xanten doffed his yellow council vestments. Assisted by a 
young Peasant buck, he donned 
dark yellow hunting-breeches 
with black trim, a black jacket, 
black boots. He drew a cap of 
soft black leather over his head, 
slung a pouch over his shoulder, 
into which he loaded weapons: a 
coiled blade, an energy gun. 
Leaving the apartment he summoned the lift and descended to 
the first level armory, where normally a Mek clerk would have 
* The population ot Castle Hagedorn 
was fixed; each gentleman and each 
lady was permitted a single child. H 
by chance another were bom he must 
either find someone who had not yet 
sired to sponsor it, or dispose of It another way. The usual procedure was 
to give the child into the care of the 
Explationists. 
THE LAST CASTLE 
served him. Now Xanten, to his 
vast disgust, was forced to take 
himself behind the counter, and 
rummage here and there. The 
Meks had removed most of the 
sporting rifles, all the pellet ejectors and heavy energy-guns. Air 
ominous circumstance, thought 
Xanten. At last he found a steel 
sling-whip, spare power-slugs for 
his gun, a brace of fire grenades, 
a high-powered monocular. 
He returned to the lift, rode to 
the top level, ruefully considering 
the long climb when eventually 
the mechanism broke down, with 
no Meks at hand to make repairs. He thought of the apoplectic furies of rigid traditionalists 
such as Beaudry and chuckled. 
Eventful days lay ahead! 
Stopping at the top level he 
crossed to the parapets, proceeded around to the radio room. 
Customarily three Mek specialists connected into the apparatus 
by wires clipped to their quills 
sat typing messages as they arrived. Now B. F. Robarth stood 
before the mechanism, uncertainly twisting the dials, his mouth 
wry with deprecation and distaste for the job. 
“Any further news?” Xanten 
asked. 
B. F. Robarth gave him a sour 
grin. “The folk at the other end 
seem no more familiar with this 
cursed tangle than I. I hear occasional voices. I believe that the 
Meks are attacking Castle Delora.” 
/'"''ilaghorn had entered the room 
^ behind Xanten. ‘T)id I hear 
you correctly? Delora Castle is 
gone?” 
“Not gone yet, Claghom. But 
as good as gone. The Delora walls 
are little better than a picturesque crumble.” 
“Sickening situation!” muttered Xanten. “How can sentient 
creatures perform such evil? After all these centuries, how little 
we actually knew of them!” As 
he spoke he recognized the tactlessness of his remark; Claghom 
had devoted much time to a 
study of the Meks. 
“The act itself is not astounding,” said Claghom shortly. “It 
has occurred a thousand times in 
human history.” 
Mildly surprised that Claghom 
should use human history as referent to a case involving the 
sub-orders, Xanten asked: “You 
were never aware of this vicious 
aspect to the Mek nature?” 
“No. Never. Never indeed.” 
Claghom seemed unduly sensitive, thought Xanten. Understandable, all in all. Claghom’s 
basic doctrine as set forth during 
the Hagedor selection was by no 
means simple, and Xanten neither understood it nor completely 
endorsed what he conceived to 
be its goals; but it was plain that 
22 
the revolt of the Meks had cat 
the ground out from under Claghom’s feet. Probably to the somewhat bitter satisfaction of O. Z. 
Garr, who must feel vindicated 
in his traditionalist doctrines. 
Claghom said tersely, “The life 
we’ve been leading couldn’t last 
forever. It’s a wonder it lasted as 
long as it did.” 
“Perhaps so,” said Xanten in 
a sootfling voice. “Well, no matter. All things change. Who 
knows? The Peasants may be 
planning to poison our food . 
I must go.” He bowed to Claghom, who returned him a crisp 
nod, and to B. F. Robarth, then 
departed the room. 
He climbed the spiral staircase 
— almost a ladder — to the cotes, 
where the Birds lived in an invincible disorder, occupying 
themselves with gambling at the 
game of quarrels, a version of 
chess, with rules incomprehensible to every gentleman who had 
tried to understand it. 
Castle Hagedom maintained a 
hundred Birds, tended by a gang 
of long-suffering Peasants, whom 
the Birds held in vast disesteem. 
They were garish garrulous creatures, pigmented red, yellow, 
blue, with long necks, jerking inquisitive heads, an inherent irreverence which no amount of 
discipline or tutelage could overcome. Spying Xanten, they emitted a chorus of rude jeers: 
Inane 
THE LAST CASTLE 
"Somebody wants a ride! Heavy 
tiling!” “Why don’t the selfanointed two-footers grow wings 
for themselves?” “My friend, 
never trust a Bird! We’ll sky you, 
then fling you down on your 
- fundament!” 
“Quiet!” called Xanten. “I 
need six fast, silent Birds, upon 
an important mission. Are any 
capable of such a task?” 
“Are any capable, he asks!” 
“A ros ros ros! When none of us 
have flown for a week!” “Silence? 
We’ll give you silence, yellow and 
black!” 
“Come then. You. You. You of 
the wise eye. You there. You with 
the cocked shoulder. You with 
the green pompon. To the basket.” 
^J^he Birds designated, jeering, 
grumbling, reviling the Peasants, allowed their syrup sacs to 
be filled, then flapped to the 
wicker seat where Xanten waited. 
“To the space depot at Vincenne,” he told them. “Fly high and 
silently. Enemies are abroad. We 
must learn what harm if any has 
been done to the space ships.” 
“To the depot then!” Each 
Bird seized a length of rope tied 
to an overhead framework; the 
chair was yanked up with a jerk 
calculated to rattle Xanten’s 
teeth, and off they flew, laughing, cursing each other for not 
supporting more of the load, but 
24 
eventually all accommodating 
themselves to* the task and flying 
with a coordinated flapping of 
the thirty-six sets of wings. To 
Xanten’s relief, their garrulity 
lessened ; silently they flew south, 
at a speed of fifty or sixty miles 
per hour. 
The afternoon was already 
waning. The ancient countryside, 
scene to so many comings and 
goings, so much triumph and so 
much disaster, was laced with 
long black shadows. Looking 
down, Xanten reflected that 
though the human stock was 
native to this soil, and though 
his immediate ancestors had 
maintained their holdings for seven hundred years, Earth still 
seemed an alien world. 
The reason of course was by 
no means mysterious or rooted in 
paradox. After the Six-Star War, 
Earth had lain fallow for three 
thousand years, unpopulated save 
for a handful of anguished 
wretches who somehow had survived the cataclysm and who had 
become semi-barbaric Nomads. 
Then seven hundred years ago 
certain rich lords of Altair, motivated to some extent by political 
disaffection, but no less by caprice, had decided to return to 
Earth. Such was the origin of the 
nine great strongholds, the resident gentlefolk and the staffs of 
specialized andromorphs. 
Xanten flew over an area 
GALAXY 
where an antiquarian had directed excavations, revealing a plaza 
flagged with white stone, a broken obelisk, a tumbled statue. 
The sight, by some trick of association, stimulated Xanten’s mind 
to an astonishing vision, so simple and yet so grand that he 
looked around, in all directions, 
with new eyes. The vision was 
Earth re-populated with men, tile 
land cultivated, Nomads driven 
back into the wilderness. 
At the moment the image was 
far-fetched. And Xanten, watching the soft contours of old Earth 
slide below, pondered the Mek 
revolt which had altered his life 
with such startling abruptness. 
Claghom had long insisted that 
no human condition endured forever, with the corollary that the 
more complicated such a condition, the greater its susceptibility 
to change. 
In that case the seven hundred 
year continuity at Castle Hagedorn — as artificial, extravagant 
and intricate as life could be — 
became an astonishing circumstance in itself. Claghom had 
pushed his thesis further. Since 
change was inevitable, he argued 
that the gentlefolk should soften 
the impact by anticipating and 
controlling the changes — a doctrine which had been attacked 
with great fervor. The traditionalists labeled all of Claghom s 
ideas demonstrable fallacy, and 
THE LAST CASTLE 
cited the very stability of castle 
Hfe as proof at its viability. Xanten had inclined first one way, 
then the other, emotionally involved with neither cause. If anything, the fact of O. Z. Carr’s 
traditionalism had nudged him 
toward Claghom’s views. 
Now it seemed as if events had 
vindicated Claghom. Change had 
come, with an impact of the maximum harshness and violence. 
There were still questions to 
be answered, of course. Why had 
tiie Meks chosen this particular 
time to revolt? Conditions had 
not altered appreciably for five 
hundred years, and the Meks had 
never previously hinted dissatisfaction. In fact, they had revealed nothing of their feelings — 
though no one had ever troubled 
to ask them — save Claghom. 
T ie Birds were veering east to 
avoid the Ballarat Mountains, to the west of which were 
the ruins of a great city, never 
satisfactorily identified. Below 
lay the Lucerne Valley, at one 
time a fertile farm land. If one 
looked with great concentration 
the outline of the various holdings could sometimes be distinguished. Ahead, the spaceship 
hangars were visible, where Mek 
technicians maintained four 
spaceships that were jointly the 
property of Hagedom, Janeil, 
Tuang, Mominglight and Mara
25 
val, though, for a variety of reasons, the ships were never used. 
The sun was setting. Orange 
light twinkled and flickered on 
the metal walls. Xanten called 
instructions up to the Birds: 
“Circle down; alight behind that 
line of trees, but fly low so that 
none will see.” 
Down on stiff wings curved the 
Birds, six ungainly necks stretched toward the ground. Xanten 
was ready for the impact. The 
Birds never seemed able to alight 
easily when they carried a gentleman. When the cargo was 
something in which they felt a 
personal concern, dandelion fluff 
would never have been disturbed by the jar. 
Xanten expertly kept his balance, instead of tumbling and 
rolling in the manner preferred 
by the Birds. “You all have syrup,” he told them. “Rest: make 
no noise; do not quarrel. By tomorrow’s sunset, if I am not 
here, return to Castle Hagedom 
and say that Xanten was killed.” 
“Never fear!” cried the Birds. 
“We will wait forever!” “At any 
rate till tomorrow’s sunset!” “If 
danger threatens, if you are 
pressed — a ros ros ros! Call for 
the Birds!” A ros/ We are ferocious when aroused!” 
“I wish it were true,” said Xanten. “The Birds are arrant cowards, this is well known. Still I 
value the sentiment Remember 
26 
my instructions, and be quiet 
above all! I do not wish to be 
set upon and stabbed because of 
your clamor.” 
The Birds made indignant 
sounds. “Injustice, injustice! We 
are quiet as the dew!” 
“Good.” Xanten hurriedly 
moved away lest they should bellow new advice or reassurances 
after him. 
IV 
passing through the forest, he 
1 came to an open meadow at 
the far edge of which, perhaps a 
hundred yards distant, was the 
rear of the first hangar. He stopped to consider. 
Several factors were involved. 
First, the maintenance Meks, 
with the metal structure shielding them from radio contact, 
might still be unaware of the revolt. Hardly likely, he decided, 
in view of the otherwise careful 
planning. Second, the Meks, in 
continuous communication with 
their fellows, acted as a collective 
organism. The aggregate functioned more completely than its 
parts, and the individual was not 
prone to initiative. Hence, vigilance was not likely to be extreme. 
Third, if they expected anyone 
to attempt a discreet approach, 
they would necessarily scrutinize 
most closely the route which he 
proposed to take. 
Xanten decided to wait in the 
shadows another ten minutes, until the setting sun shining over 
his shoulder should most effectively blind any who might watch. 
Ten minutes passed. The hangars, burnished by the dying sunlight, bulked long, tall, completely quiet. In the intervening meadow long golden grass waved and 
rippled in a cool breeze. 
Xanten took a deep breath, 
hefted his pouch, arranged his 
weapons, strode forth. It did not 
occur to him to crawl through the 
grass. 
He reached the back of the 
nearest hangar without challenge. 
Pressing his ear to the metal he 
heard nothing. He walked to the 
corner, looked down the side: no 
sign of life. Xanten shrugged. 
Very well then; to the door. 
He walked beside the hangar, 
the setting sun casting a long 
black shadow ahead of him. He 
came to a door opening into the 
hangar administrative office. 
Since there was nothing to be 
gained by trepidation, Xanten 
thrust the door aside and entered. 
The offices were empty. The 
desks, where centuries before underlings had sat, calculating invoices and bills of lading, were 
bare, polished, free of dust. The 
computers and information 
banks, black enamel, glass, white 
and red switches, looked as if 
THE LAST CASTLE 
they had been installed only the 
day before. 
Xanten crossed to the glass 
pane overlooking the hangar floor, 
shadowed under the bulk of the 
ship. 
He saw no Meks. But on the 
floor of the hangar, arranged in 
neat rows and heaps, were elements and assemblies of the 
ship’s control mechanism. Service panels gaped wide into the 
hull to show where the devices 
had been detached. 
Xanten stepped from the office out into the hangar. The 
spaceship had been disabled, put 
out of commission. Xanten looked along the neat rows of parts. 
Certain savants of various castles 
were expert in the theory of 
space-time transfer; S. X. Rosenhox of Maraval had even derived 
a set of equations which, if translated into machinery, eliminated 
the troublesome Hamus Effect. 
But not one gentleman, even were 
he so oblivious to personal honor 
as to touch a hand to a tool, 
would know how to replace, connect and tune the mechanisms 
heaped upon the hangar floor. 
When had the malicious work 
been done? Impossible to say. 
Xanten returned to the office, 
stepped back out into the twilight, walked to the next hangar. 
Again no Meks; again the spaceship had been gutted of its control mechanisms. Xanten pro
27 
ceeded to the third hangar, where 
conditions were the same. 
At the fourth hangar he discerned the faint sounds of activity. Stepping into the office, 
looking through the glass wall 
into the hangar, he found Meks 
working with their usual economy of motion, in a near silence 
which was uncanny. 
Xanten, already uncomfortable because of skulking through 
the forest, became enraged by 
the cool destruction of his property. He strode forth into the 
hangar. Slapping his thigh to attract attention he called in a 
harsh voice, “Return the components to place! How dare you 
vermin act in such a manner?” 
f | 'he Meks turned about their 
blank countenances, studied 
him through black beaded lensclusters at each side erf thenheads. 
“What?” Xanten bellowed. 
“You hesitate?” He brought forth 
his steel whip, usually more of a 
symbolic adjunct then a punitive 
instrument, and slashed it against 
the ground. “Obey! This ridiculous revolt is at its end!” 
The Meks still hesitated, and 
events wavered in die balance. 
None made a sound, though messages were passing among them, 
appraising the circumstances, establishing a consensus. Xanten 
could allow them no such leisure. 
28 
He marched forward, wielding 
the whip, striking at the only are* 
where the Meks felt pain: the 
ropy face. “To your duties,” he 
roared. “A fine maintenance crew 
are you! A destruction crew is 
more like it!” 
The Meks made their soft 
blowing sound which might mean 
anything. They fell back, and 
now Xanten noted one standing 
at the head of the companionway 
leading into the ship: a Mek 
larger than any he had seen before and one in some fashion different. This Mek was aiming a 
pellet gun at his head. With an 
unhurried flourish Xanten whipped away a Mek who had leapt 
forward with a knife, and without 
deigning to aim fired at and destroyed the Mek who stood on 
the companionway, even as the 
slug sang past his head. 
The other Meks were nevertheless committed to an attack. All 
surged forward. Lounging disdainfully against the hull, Xanten shot them as they came, moving his head once to avoid a 
chunk of metal, again reaching to 
catch a throw-knife and hurl it 
into the face of him who had 
thrown it. 
The Meks drew back, and Xanten guessed that they had agreed 
on a new tactic: either to withdraw for weapons or perhaps to 
confine him within the hangar. 
In any event no more could be 
accomplished here. He made 
play with the whip and cleared 
an avenue to the office. With 
tools, metal bars and forgings 
striking the glass behind him, he 
sauntered through the office and 
out into the night. He did not 
look behind. 
The full moon was rising, a 
great yellow globe casting a 
smoky saffron glow, like an antique lamp. Mek eyes were not 
well adapted for night seeing, and 
Xanten waited by the door. Presently Meks began to pour forth, 
and Xanten hacked at their necks 
as they came. 
The Meks drew back inside the 
hangar. Wiping his blade Xanten strode off the way he had 
come, looking neither right nor 
left. He stopped short. The night 
was young. Something tickled his 
mind : the recollection of the Mek 
who had fired the pellet gun. He 
had been larger, possibly a darker bronze, but, more significantly, he had displayed an indefinable poise, almost authority — 
though such a word, when used 
in connection with the Meks, 
was anomalous. On the other 
hand, someone must have planned the revolt, or at least originated the concept of a revolt in 
the first place. 
It might be worthwhile to extend the reconnaissance, though 
his primary information had been 
secured. 
THE LAST CASTLE 
X anten turned back and crossed the landing area to the 
barracks and garages. Once more, 
frowning in discomfort, he felt 
the need for discretion. What 
times these were when a gentleman must skulk to avoid such as 
the Meks! He stole up behind 
the garages, where a half-dozen 
power-wagons* lay dozing. 
Xanten looked them over. All 
were of the same sort, a metal 
frame with four wheels and an 
earth-moving blade at the front. 
Nearby must be the syrup stock. 
Xanten presently found a bin 
containing a number of containers. He loaded a dozen on a nearby wagon and slashed the rest 
with his knife, so that the syrup 
gushed across the ground. The 
Meks used a somewhat different 
formulation; their syrup would 
be stocked at a different locale, 
presumably inside the barracks. 
Xanten mounted a power-wagon, twisted the ‘awake’ key, tapped the ‘Go’ button, pulled a 
lever which set the wheels into 
reverse motion. The power-wag
• Power-wagons, like the Meks, were 
originally swamp-creatures from Etamin 
9. They were great rectangular slabs 
of muscle, slung Into a rectangular 
frame and protected from sunlight, insects and rodents by a synthetic pelt. 
Syrup sacs communicated with their 
digestive apparatus, wires led to motor 
nodes in the rudimentary brain. The 
muscles were clamped to rocker arms 
which actuated rotors and drive-wheels. 
The power-wagons were economical, 
long-lived and docile, and so they were 
principally used for heavy cartage 
earth-moving, heavy-tillage, and other 
arduous jobs. 
on lurched back. Xanten halted 
it and turned it so that it faced 
the barracks. He did likewise 
with three others, then set them 
all in motion, one after the other. 
They trundled forward. The 
blades cut open the metal wall 
of the barracks, the roof sagged. 
The power-wagons continued, 
pushing the length of the interior, 
crushing all in their way. 
Xanten nodded in profound 
satisfaction, returned to the 
power-wagon he had reserved for 
his own use. Mounting to the 
seat, he waited. No Meks issued 
from the barracks. Apparently 
they were deserted, with the entire crew busy at the hangars. 
Still, hopefully, the syrup stocks 
had been destroyed. Many might 
perish by starvation. 
From the direction of the hangars came a single Mek, evidently 
attracted by the sounds of destruction. Xanten crouched on 
the seat and as it passed, coiled 
his whip around the stocky neck. 
He heaved; the Mek spun to the 
ground. 
Xanten leapt down, seized its 
pellet-gun. Here was another of 
the larger Meks, and now Xanten saw it to be without a syrup 
sac, a Mek in the original state. 
Astounding! How did the creature survive? Suddenly there 
were many new questions to be 
asked; hopefully a few to be an30 
swered. Standing on the creature’s head, Xanten hacked away 
the long antenna quills which 
protruded from the back of th« 
Meks’ scalp. It was now insulated, alone, on its own resources;, 
a situation certain to reduce thel 
most stalwart Mek to apathy. 
“Up!” ordered Xanten. “Into 
the back of the wagon!” He 
cracked the whip for emphasis. 
The Mek at first seemed disposed to defy him, but after « 
blow or two obeyed. Xanten 
climbed into the seat, started the 
power-wagon, directed it to the 
north. The Birds would be unable to carry both himself and 
the Mek — or in any event they 
would cry and complain so raucously that they might as well be 
believed at first. They might or 
might not wait until the specified hour of tomorrow’s sunset 
As likely as not they would sleep 
the night in a tree, awake in a 
surly mood and return at once 
to Castle Hagedom. 
All through the night the 
power wagon trundled, with 
Xanten on the seat and his captive huddled in the rear. 
'T'he gentlefolk of the castles, 
for all their assurance, disliked to wander the countryside 
by night, by reason of what some 
derided as superstitious fear. 
Others cited travelers benighted 
beside mouldering ruins and their 
subsequent visions: the eldritch 
music they had heard, or the 
whimper of moon-mirkins, or the 
far horns of spectral huntsmen. 
Others had seen pale lavender 
and green lights, and wraiths 
which ran with long strides 
through the forest; and Hode 
Abbey, now a dank tumble, was 
notorious for the White Hag and 
the alarming toll she exacted. 
A hundred such cases were 
known. While the hard-headed 
scoffed, none needlessly traveled 
the countryside by night. Indeed, 
if truly ghosts haunt the scenes 
of tragedy and heartbreak, then 
the landscape of Old Earth must 
be home to ghosts and specters 
beyond all numbering; especially 
that region across which Xanten 
rolled in the power-wagon, where 
every rock, every meadow, every 
vale and swale was crusted thick 
with human experience. 
The moon rose high. The 
wagon trundled north along an 
ancient road, the cracked concrete slabs shining pale in the 
moonlight. Twice Xanten saw 
flickering orange lights off to the 
side, and once, standing in the 
shade of a cypress tree, he 
thought to see a tall quiet shape, 
silently watching him pass. The 
captive Mek sat plotting mischief, Xanten well knew. Without its quills it must feel deTHE LAST CASTLE 
personified, bewildered, but Xanten told himself that it would not 
do to doze. 
The road led through a town, 
certain structures of which yet 
stood. Not even the Nomads took 
refuge in these old towns, fearing either miasma or perhaps the 
redolence of grief. 
The moon reached the zenith. 
The landscape spread away in a 
hundred tones of silver, black 
and gray. Looking about, Xanten thought that for all the notable pleasures of civilized life, 
there was yet something to be 
said for the spaciousness and simplicity of Nomadland . The 
Mek made a stealthy movement 
Xanten did not so much as turn 
his head. He cracked his whip 
in the air. The Mek became 
quiet. 
\ 11 through the night the 
power- wagon rolled along the 
old road, with the moon sinking 
into the west. The eastern horizon glowed green and lemonyellow, and presently, as the pallid moon disappeared over the 
distant line of the mountains the 
sun came up. 
At this moment, Xanten spied 
a drift of smoke off to the right. 
He halted the wagon. Standing 
up on the seat he craned his neck 
to spy a Nomad encampment 
about a quarter-mile distant. He 
could distinguish three or four 
dozen tents of various sizes, a 
dozen dilapidated power-wagons. 
On the hetman’s tall tent he 
thought to see a black ideogram 
which he thought he recognized. 
If so, this would be the tribe 
which not long before had trespassed on the Hagedom domain, 
and which O.Z. Garr had repulsed. 
Xanten settled himself upon 
the seat, composed his garments, 
set the power-wagon in motion 
and guided it toward the camp. 
A hundred black-cloaked men, 
tall and lean as ferrets, watched 
his approach. A dozen sprang 
forward and whipping arrows to 
bows aimed them at his heart. 
Xanten turned them a glance of 
supercilious inquiry, drove the 
wagon up to the hetman’s tent, 
halted. He rose to his feet. “Hetman,” he called. “Are you 
awake?” 
The hetman parted the canvas 
which closed off his tent, peered 
out and after a moment came 
forth. Like the others he wore a 
garment of limp black cloth, 
swathing head and body alike. 
His face thrust through a square 
opening: narrow blue eyes, a 
grotesquely long nose, a chin 
long, skewed and sharp. 
Xanten gave him a curt nod. 
“Observe this.” He jerked his 
thumb toward the Mek in the 
back of the wagon. The hetman 
flicked aside his eyes, studied the 
32 
Mek a tenth -second, returned to 
a scrutiny of Xanten. “His kintl 
have revolted against the gentlemen,” said Xanten. “In fact they 
massacre all the men of Earth, 
Hence we of Castle Hagedom 
make this offer to the Nomads. 
Come to Castle Hagedom! We 
will feed, clothe and arm you. 
We will train you to discipline 
and the arts of formal warfare. 
We will provide the most expert 
leadership within our power. We 
will then annihilate the Meks, 
expunge them from Earth. After 
the campaign, we will train you 
to technical skills, and you may 
pursue profitable and interesting 
careers in the service of the 
castles.” 
The hetman made no reply 
for a moment. Then his weath-l 
ered face split into a ferocious 
grin and he spoke in a voice 
which Xanten found surprisingly 
well-modulated. “So your beasts 
have finally risen up to rend you! 
A pity they forebore so long! 
Well, it is all one to us. You are 
both alien folk and sooner or 
later your bones must bleach together.” 
Xanten pretended incomprehension. “If I understand you 
aright, you assert that in the face 
of alien assault, all men must 
fight a common battle; and then, 
after the victory, cooperate still 
to their mutual advantage; am I 
correct?” 
GAIAXY 
T he hetman’s grin never wavered. “You are not men. 
Only we of Earth soil and Earth 
water are men. You and your 
weird slaves are strangers together. We wish you success in your 
mutual slaughter.” 
“Well then,” declared Xanten, 
“I heard you aright after all. Appeals to your loyalty are ineffectual, so much is clear. What of 
self-interest then? The Meks, 
failing to expunge the gentlefolk 
of the castles, will turn upon the 
Nomads and kill them as if they 
were so many ants.” 
“If they attack us, we will war 
on them,” said the hetman. 
“Otherwise let them do as they 
will.” 
Xanten glanced thoughtfully 
at the sky. “We might be willing 
even now, to accept a contingent 
of Nomads into the service of 
Castle Hagedorn, this to form a 
cadre from which a larger and 
more versatile group may be 
formed.” 
From the side another Nomad 
called in an offensively jeering 
voice: “You will sew a sac on our 
backs where you can pour your 
syrup, hey?” 
Xanten replied in an even 
voice, “The syrup is highly nutritious and supplies all bodily 
needs.” 
“Why then do you not consume it yourself?” 
Xanten disdained reply. 
THE LAST CASTLE 
The hetman spoke. “If you 
wish to supply us weapons, we 
will take them, and use them 
against whomever threatens us. 
But do not expect us to defend 
you. If you fear for your lives, 
desert your castles and become 
Nomads.” 
“Fear for our lives?” exclaimed 
Xanten. “What nonsense! Never! 
Castle Hagedom is impregnable, 
as is Janeil, and most of the other 
castles as well.” 
The hetman shook his head. 
“Any time we choose we could 
take Hagedom, and kill all you 
popinjays in your sleep.” 
“What?” cried Xanten in outrage. “Are you serious?” 
“Certainly. On a black night 
we would send a man aloft on a 
great kite and drop him down 
on the parapets. He would lower 
a line, haul up ladders and in fifteen minutes the castle is taken.” 
Xanten pulled at his chin. “Ingenious, but impractical. The 
Birds would detect such a kite. 
Or the wind would fail at a critical moment . All this is beside the point. The Meks fly no 
kites. They plan to make a display against Janeil and Hagedorn and then, in their frustration, they will go forth and hunt 
Nomads.” 
The hetman moved back a 
step. “What then? We have survived similar attempts by the 
men of Hagedorn. Cowards all! 
Hand to hand, with equal weapons, we would make you eat the 
dirt like the contemptible dogs 
you are.” 
Xanten raised his eyebrows in 
elegant disdain. "I fear that you 
forget yourself. You address a 
clan chief of Castle Hagedom. 
Only fatigue and boredom restrain me from punishing you 
with this whip.” 
“Bah,” said the hetman. He 
crooked a finger to one of his 
archers. "Spit this insolent lordling.” 
'T'he archer discharged his arA row, but Xanten had been 
expecting some such act He 
fired his energy gun, destroying 
arrow, bow, and the archer’s 
hands. He said, “I see I must 
teach you common respect for 
your betters; so it means the 
whip after all.” Seizing the hetman by the scalp, he coiled the 
whip smartly once, twice, thrice 
around the narrow shoulders. 
“Let this suffice. I cannot compel you to fight, but at least I 
can demand decent respect from 
scuttling dung beetles.” He leapt 
to the ground and, seizing the 
hetman, pitched him into the 
back of the wagon alongside the 
Mek. Then, backing the powerwagon around, he departed the 
camp without so much as a 
glance over his shoulder, the 
thwart of the seat protecting his 
34 
back from the arrows of the hetman’s stunned subjects. 
The hetman scrambled erect, 
drew his dagger. Xanten turned 
his head slightly. "Take care! 
Or I will tie you to die wagon, 
and you shall run behind in the 
dust.” 
The hetman hesitated, made 
a spitting sound between his 
teeth, drew back. He looked 
down at his blade, turned it over, 
sheathed it with a grunt. “Where 
do you take me?” 
Xanten halted the wagon. “No 
farther. I merely wished to leave 
your camp with dignity, without 
dodging and ducking a hail of 
arrows. You may alight. I take it 
you still refuse to bring your men 
into the service of Castle Hagedorn?” 
The hetman once more made 
the spitting sound between his 
teeth. ‘When the Meks have destroyed the castles, we shall destroy the Meks. Then Earth will 
be cleared of star-things for all 
time!” 
“You are a gang of intractable 
savages. Very well, alight, return 
to your encampment. Reflect 
well before you again show disrespect to a Castle Hagedom 
clan chief.” 
“Bah,” muttered the hetman. 
Leaping down from the wagon, 
he stalked back down the track 
toward his camp. He did not look 
back. 
VI 
A bout noon Xanten came to 
Far Valley, at the edge of 
the Hagedorn lands. 
Nearby was a village of Expiationists: malcontents and neurasthenics in the opinion of castle 
gentlefolk, and a curious group 
by any standards. A few had held 
enviable rank; certain others 
were savants of recognized edudition; but others yet were persons of neither dignity nor reputation, subscribing to the most 
bizarre and extreme of philosophies. All now performed toil, 
no different from that relegated 
to the Peasants, and all seemed 
to take a perverse satisfaction 
in what by castle standards was 
filth, poverty and degradation. 
As might be expected, their 
creed was by no means homogenous. Some might better have 
been described as ‘nonconformists’, and others still, a minority, 
argued for a dynamic program. 
Between castle and village was 
little intercourse. Occasionally 
the Expiationists bartered fruit 
or polished wood for tools, nails, 
medicaments; or the gentlefolk 
might make up a party to watch 
the Expiationists at their dancing 
and singing. Xanten had visited 
the village on many such occasions and had been attracted by 
the artless charm and informality of the folk at their play. Now, 
THE LAST CASTLE 
passing near the village, Xanten 
turned aside and followed a lane 
which wound between tall blackberry hedges and out upon a little common, where goats and cattle grazed. Xanten halted the 
wagon in the shade, saw that the 
syrup sac was full. He looked 
back at his captive. “What of 
you? If you need syrup, pour 
yourself full. But no, you have 
no sac. What then do you feed 
upon? Mud? Unsavory fare. I 
fear none here is rank enough 
for your taste. Ingest syrup or 
munch grass, as you will ; only do 
not stray overfar from the wagon, for I watch with an intent 
eye.” 
The Mek, sitting hunched in a 
comer, gave no signal that it 
comprehended. Nor did it move 
to take advantage of Xanten’s 
offer. 
Xanten went to a watering 
trough. Holding his hands under 
the trickle which issued from a 
lead pipe, he rinsed his face, then 
drank a swallow or two from his 
cupped hand. 
Turning, he found that a dozen folk of the village had approached. One he knew well, a 
man who might have become 
Godaiming, or even Aure, had 
he not become infected with expiationism. 
Xanten performed a polite salute. “A. G. Philidor. It is I, 
Xanten.” 
“Xanten, of course. But here I 
am A. G. Philidor no longer; 
merely Philidor.” 
Xanten bowed. “My apologies. 
I have neglected the full rigor of 
your informality.” 
“Spare me your wit,” said Philidor. “Why do you bring us a 
shorn Mek? For adoption, perhaps?” This last alluded to the 
gentlefolk practice of bringing 
over-tally babies to the village. 
“Now who flaunts his wit? But 
you have not heard the news?” 
“News arrives here last of all. 
The Nomads are better informed.” 
“Prepare yourself for surprise. 
The Meks have revolted against 
the castles. Halcyon and Delora 
are demolished, and all killed; 
perhaps others by this time.” 
Philidor shook his head. “I am 
not surprised.” 
“Well, then, are you not concerned?” 
Philidor considered. “To this 
extent. Our own plans, never very 
feasible, become more far-fetched than ever.” 
“It appears to me,” said Xanten, “that you face grave and immediate danger. The Meks surely' intend to wipe out every vestige of humanity. You will not 
escape.” 
Philidor shrugged. “Conceivably the danger exists . We will 
take counsel and decide what to 
do.” 
“I can put forward a proposal 
which you may find attractive,” 
said Xanten. “Our first concern, 
of course, is to suppress the revolt. There are at least a dozen 
Expiationist communities, with 
an aggregate population of two 
or three thousand — perhaps 
more. I propose that we recruit 
and train a corps of highly disciplined troops, supplied from the 
Castle Hagedorn armory, led by 
Hagedorn’s most expert military 
theoreticians.” 
philidor stared at him incredulously. “You expect us, the 
Expiationists, to become your 
soldiers?” 
‘Why not?” asked Xanten ingeniously. “Your life is at stake 
no less than ours.” 
“No one dies more than once.” 
Xanten in his turn evinced 
shock. “What? Can this be a 
foriher gentleman of Hagedom 
speaking? Is this the face a man 
of pride and courage turns to 
danger? Is this the lesson of history? Of course not! I. .need not 
instruct you in this; you are as 
knowledgeable as I.” 
Philidor nodded. “I know that 
the history of man is not his technical triumphs, his kills, his victories. It is a composite : a mosaic 
of a trillion pieces, the account of 
each man’s accommodation with 
his conscience. This is the true 
history of the race.” 
Xanten made an airy gesture. 
«A. G. Philidor, you over-simplify grievously. Do you consider 
me obtuse? There are many 
kinds of history. They interact. 
You emphasize morality. But the 
ultimate basis of morality is survival. What promotes survival Is 
good, what induces mortef action 
is bad.” 
‘Well spoken!” declared Philidor. “But let me propound a parable. May a nation of a million 
beings destroy a creature who 
otherwise will infect all with a 
fatal disease? Yes, you will say. 
Once more. Ten starving beasts 
hunt you, that they may eat. Will 
you kill them to save your life? 
Yes, you will say again, though 
here you destroy more than you 
save. Once more: a man inhabits 
a hut in a lonely valley. A hundred spaceships descend from the 
sky, and attempt to destroy him. 
May he destroy these ships in 
self-defense, even though he is 
one and they are a hundred thousand? Perhaps you say yes. What 
then if a whole world, a whole 
race of beings, pits itself against 
this single man? May he kill all? 
What if the attackers are as human as himself? What if he were 
the creature of the first instance, 
who otherwise will infect a world 
with disease? You see, there is 
no area where a simple touchstone avails. We have searched 
and found none. Hence, at the 
THE LAST CASTLE 
risk of sinning against Survival, 
we — I, at least; I can only speak 
for myself — have chosen a morality that at least allows me 
calm. I kill — nothing. I destroy 
nothing.” 
“Bah,” said Xanten contemptuously. “If a Mek platoon entered this valley and began' to 
kill your children, you would not 
defend them?” 
Philidor compressed his lips, 
turned away. Another man spoke. 
“Philidor has defined morality. 
But who is absolutely moral? 
Philidor — or I, or you — might 
in such a case desert his morality.” 
Philidor said, “Look about you. 
Is anyone here you recognize?” 
X anten scanned the group. 
Nearby stood a girl of extraordinary beauty. She wore a 
white smock and in the dark hair 
curling to her shoulders she wore 
a red flower. Xanten nodded. “I 
see the maiden O. Z. Garr wished 
to introduce into his menage at 
tiie castle.” 
“Exactly,” said Philidor. “Do 
you recall the circumstances?” 
“Very well indeed,” said Xanten. “There was vigorous objection from the Council of Notables 
— if for no other reason than the 
threat to our laws of population 
control. O. Z. Garr attempted to 
sidestep the law in this fashion. 
‘I keep Phanes,’ he said. ‘At times 
I maintain as many as six, or 
even eight, and no one utters a 
word of protest. I will call this 
girl a Phane and keep her among 
the rest.’ I and others protested. 
There was almost a duel on this 
matter. O. Z. Garr was forced to 
relinquish the girl. She was given 
into my custody and I conveyed 
her to Far Valley.” 
Philidor nodded. “All this is 
correct. Well — we attempted to 
dissuade Garr. He refused to be 
dissuaded, and threatened us with 
his hunting force of perhaps thirty Meks. We stood aside. Are we 
moral? Are we strong or weak?” 
“Sometimes it is better,” said 
Xanten, “to ignore morality. Even though O. Z. Garr is a gentleman and you are but Expiationists . Likewise in the case of 
the Meks. They are destroying 
the castles, and all the men of 
earth. If morality means supine 
acceptance, then morality must 
be abandoned!” 
Philidor gave a sour chuckle. 
“What a remarkable situation! 
The Meks are here, likewise Peasants and Birds and Phanes, all 
altered, transported and enslaved 
for human pleasure. Indeed, it is 
this fact that occasions our guilt, 
for which we must expiate. And 
now you want us to compound 
this guilt!” 
“It is a mistake to brood overmuch about the past,” said Xanten. “Still, if you wish to pre38 
serve your option to brood, I suggest that you fight Meks now, or 
at the very least take refuge in 
the castle.” 
“Not I,” said Philidor. “Perhaps others may choose to do so.” 
“You will wait to be killed?” 
“No. I and no doubt others 
will take refuge in the remote 
mountains.” 
Xanten clambered back aboard 
the power-wagon. “If you change 
your mind, come to Castle Hagedom.” 
He departed. 
The road continued along the 
valley, wound up a hillside, crossed a ridge. Far ahead, silhouetted 
against the sky, stood Castle Hagedorn. 
VII 
X anten reported to the council. 
“The spaceships cannot be used. The Meks have rendered 
them inoperative. Any plan to 
solicit assistance from the Home 
Worlds is pointless.” 
“This is sorry news,” said Hagedorn with a grimace. “Well 
then — so much for that.” 
Xanten continued. “Returning 
by power-wagon I encountered a 
tribe of Nomads. I summoned the 
hetman and explained to him the 
advantages of serving Castle Hagedom. The Nomads, I fear, lack 
both grace and docility. The het
GALAXY 
man gave so surly a response that 
I departed in disgust. 
“At Far Valley I visited the 
Expiationist village, and made a 
similar proposal, but with no great 
success. They are as idealistic as 
the Nomads are churlish. Both 
are of a fugitive tendency. The 
Expiationists spoke of taking refuge in the mountains. The Nomads presumably will retreat into 
the steppes.” 
Beaudry snorted. “How will 
flight help them? Perhaps they 
gain a few years — but eventually the Meks will find every last 
one of them; such is their methodicity.” 
“In the meantime,” O. Z. Garr 
declared peevishly, “we might 
have organized them into an efficient combat corps, to the benefit of all. Well, then, let them 
perish! We are secure.” 
“Secure yes,” said Hagedom 
gloomily. “But what when the 
power fails? When the lifts break 
down? When air circulation cuts 
off so that we either stifle or 
freeze? What then?” 
O. Z. Garr gave his head a grim 
shake. “We must steel ourselves 
to undignified expedients, with 
as good a grace as possible. But 
the machinery of the castle is 
sound, and I expect small deterioration or failure for conceivably five or ten years. By that 
time anything may occur.” 
Claghorn, who had been leanTHE LAST CASTLE 
ing indolently back in his seat, 
spoke at last: “Essentially this 
is a passive program. Like the 
defection of the Nomads and Expiationists, it looks very little 
beyond the immediate moment.” 
O. Z. Garr spoke in a voice 
carefully polite. “Claghorn is well 
aware that I yield to none in 
courteous candor, as well as optimism and directness: in short, 
the reverse of passivity. But I 
refuse to dignify a stupid little 
inconvenience by extending it 
serious attention. How can he label this procedure ‘passivity’? 
Does the worthy and honorable 
head of the Claghorns have a 
proposal which more effectively 
maintains our status, our standards, our self-respect?” 
/claghorn nodded slowly, with 
^ a faint half-smile which O. 
Z. Garr found odiously complacent. “There is a simple and effective method by which the 
Meks might be defeated.” 
“Well then!” cried Hagedom. 
“Why hesitate? Let us hear it!” 
Claghorn looked around the 
red velvet-covered table, considered the faces of all: the dispassionate Xanten, Beaudry, with 
his burly, rigid, face muscles 
clenched in an habitual expression unpleasantly like a sneer; 
old Isseth, handsome, erect and 
vital as the most dashing cadet; 
Hagedom troubled, glum, his in
39 
ward perplexity all too evident; 
the elegant Garr; Overwhele, 
til inking savagely of the inconveniences of the future; Aure, 
toying with his ivory tablet, either bored, morose or defeated; the 
others displaying various aspects 
of doubt, foreboding, hauteur, 
dark resentment, impatience; and 
in the case of Floy, a quiet smile 
— or as Isseth later characterized 
it, an imbecilic smirk — intended 
to convey his total disassociation 
from the entire irksome matter. 
Claghorn took stock of the 
faces, and shook his head. “I 
will not at the moment broach 
this plan, as I fear it is unworkable. But I must point out that 
under no circumstances can Castle Hagedom be as before, even 
should we survive the Mek attack.” 
“Bah!” exclaimed Beaudry. 
“We lose dignity, we become ridiculous, by even so much as discussing the beasts.” 
Xanten stirred himself. “A distasteful subject, but remember! 
Halcyon is destroyed, and Delora and who knows what others? 
Let us not thrust our heads in the 
sand! The Meks will not waft 
away merely because we ignore 
them.” 
“In any event,” said O. Z. 
Garr, “Janeil is secure and we are 
secure. The other folk, unless 
they are already slaughtered, 
might do well to visit us during 
40 
the inconvenience, if they can 
justify the humiliation of flight 
to themselves. I myself believe 
that the Meks will soon come to 
heel, anxious to return to their 
posts.” 
Hagedom shook his head 
gloomily. “I find this hard to 
believe. Very well then, we shall 
adjourn.” 
'"T''he radio communications system was the first of the castle’s vast array of electrical and 
mechanical devices to break 
down. 
The failure occurred so soon 
and so decisively that certain of 
the theoreticians, notably I. K. 
Harde and Uegus, postulated 
sabotage by the departing Meks. 
Others remarked that the system 
had never been absolutely dependable, that the Meks themselves had been forced to tinker 
continuously with the circuits, 
that the failure was simply a 
result of bad engineering. Harde 
and Uegus inspected the unwieldy 
apparatus, but the cause of failure was not obvious. After a halfhour of consultation they agreed 
that any attempt to restore the 
system would necessitate complete re-design and re-engineering, with consequent construction 
of testing and calibration devices, 
and the fabrication of a complete 
new family of components. “This 
is manifestly impossible,” stated 
Uegus in his report to the council. “Even the simplest useful 
system would require several 
technician-years. There is not 
even one single technician to 
hand. We must therefore await 
the availability of trained and 
willing labor.” 
“In retrospect,” stated Isseth, 
the oldest of the clan chiefs, “it 
is clear that in many ways we 
have been less than provident. No 
matter that the men of the Home 
Worlds are vulgarians! Men of 
shrewder calculation than our 
own would have maintained inter-world connection.” 
“Lack of ‘shrewdness’ and ‘providence’ were not the deterring 
factors,” stated Claghorn. “Communication was discouraged simply because the early lords were 
unwilling that Earth should be 
overrun with Home- World parvenus. It is as simple as that.” 
Isseth grunted, and started to 
make a rejoinder, but Hagedom 
said hastily, “Unluckily, as Xanten tells us, the spaceships have 
been rendered useless. While certain of our number have a profound knowledge of the theoretical considerations, again who is 
there to perform the toil? Even 
were the hangars and spaceships 
themselves under our control.” 
O. Z. Garr declared, “Give me 
six platoons of Peasants and six 
power- wagons equipped with 
high-energy cannon, and I’ll reTHE LAST CASTLE 
Mek
gain the hangars. No difficulties 
there!” 
Beaudry said, “Well, here’s a 
start, at least. I’ll assist in the 
training of the Peasants, and 
though I know nothing of cannon operation, rely on me for 
any advice I can give.” 
Hagedorn looked around the 
group, frowned, pulled at his 
chin. “There are difficulties to 
this program. First, we have at 
hand only the single powerwagon in which Xanten returned 
from his reconnaissance. Then 
what of our energy cannons? Has 
anyone inspected them? The 
Meks were entrusted with maintenance, but it is possible, even 
likely, that they wrought mischief here as well. O. Z. Garr, you 
are reckoned an expert military 
theoretician. What can you tell 
us in this regard?” 
“I have made no inspection to 
date,” stated O. Z. Garr. “Today the ‘Display of Antique Tabards’ will occupy us all until the 
‘Hour of Sundown Appraisal’*.” 
He looked at his watch. “Perhaps now is as good a time as 
any to adjourn, until I am able 
• 'Display of Antique Tabards’: ‘Hour 
of Sundown Appraisal’: the literal sense 
of the first term was yet relevant; that 
of the second had become lost and the 
phrase was a mere formalism, connoting that hour of late afternoon when 
visits were exchanged, wines, liqueurs 
and essences tasted: in short, a time of 
relaxation and small talk before the 
more formal convivialities of dining. 
to provide detailed information 
in regard to the cannons.” 
H agedorn nodded his heavy 
head. “The time indeed 
grows late. Your Phanes appear 
today?” 
“Only two,” replied O. Z. Garr. 
“The Lazule and the Eleventh 
Mystery. I can find nothing suitable for the Gossamer Delights 
nor my little Blue Fay, and the 
Gloriana still requires tutelage. 
Today B. Z. Maxelwane’s Variflors should repay the most attention.” 
“Yes,” said Hagdom. “I have 
heard other remarks to this effect. 
Very well then, until tomorrow. 
Eh, Claghom, you have something to say?” 
“Yes, indeed,” said Claghorn 
mildly. “We have all too little 
time at our disposal. Best that we 
make the most of it. I seriously 
doubt the efficacy of Peasant 
troops; they are like rabbits 
against wolves. What we need, 
rather than rabbits, are panthers.” 
“Ah, yes,” said Hagedorn vaguely. “Yes indeed.” 
“Where, then, are panthers to 
be found?” Claghorn looked inquiringly around the table. “Can 
no one suggest a source? A pity. 
Well then, if panthers fail to 
appear, I suppose rabbits must 
do. Let us go about the business 
of converting rabbits into panthers, and instantly. I suggest 
that we postpone all fetes and 
ipectacles until the shape of our 
future is more certain.” 
Hagedorn raised his eyebrows, 
opened his mouth to speak, closed it again. He looked intently at 
Claghorn to ascertain whether 
or not he joked. Then he looked 
dubiously around the table. 
Beaudry gave a rather brassy 
laugh. “It seems that erudite 
Claghorn cries panic.” 
O. Z. Garr stated: “Surely, in 
all dignity, we cannot allow the 
impertinence of our servants to 
cause us such eye-rolling alarm. 
I am embarrassed even to bring 
the matter forward.” 
“I am not embarrassed,” said 
Claghom, with the full-faced 
complacence which so exasperated O. Z. Garr. “I see no reason 
why you should be. Our lives are 
threatened, in which case a trifle 
of embarrassment, or anything 
else, becomes of secondary importance.” 
O. Z. Garr rose to his feet, performed a brusque salute in Claghom’s direction, of such a nature 
as to constitute a calculated affront. Claghom, rising, performed a similar salute, this so grave 
and overly complicated as to invest Garr’s insult with burlesque 
overtones. Xanten, who detested 
O. Z. Garr, laughed aloud. 
O. Z. Garr hesitated, then, sensing that under the circumstances 
taking the matter further would 
THE LAST CASTLE 
be regarded as poor form, strode 
from the chamber. 
T ie Viewing of Antique Tabards, an annual pageant of 
Phanes wearing sumptuous garments took place in the Great 
Rotunda to the north of the central plaza. 
Possibly half of the gentlemen, but less than a quarter of 
the ladies, kept Phanes. These 
were creatures native to the caverns of Albireo Seven’s moon: a 
docile race, both playful and affectionate, which after several 
thousand years of selective breeding had become sylphs of piquant 
beauty. Clad in a delicate gau~e 
which issued from pores behind 
their ears, along their upper arms, 
down their backs, they were the 
most inoffensive of creatures, anxious always to please, innocently 
vain. Most gentlemen regarded 
them with affection, but rumors 
sometimes told of ladies drenching an especially hated Phane in 
tincture of ammonia, which matted her pelt and destroyed her 
gauze forever. 
A gentleman besotted by a 
Phane was considered a figure 
of fun. The Phane, though so 
carefully bred as to seem a delicate girl, if used sexually became crumpled and haggard, with 
gauzes drooping and discolored, 
and everyone would know that 
such and such a gentleman had 
misused his Phane. In this regard, at least, the women of the 
castles might exert their superiority. They did so by conducting themselves with such extravagant provocation that the Phanes 
in contrast seemed the most ingenious and fragile of nature 
sprites. Their life-span was perhaps thirty years, during the last 
ten of which, after they had lost 
their beauty, they encased themselves in mantles of gray gauze 
and performed menial tasks in 
boudoirs, kitchens, pantries, nurseries and dressing rooms. 
The Viewing of Antique Tabards was an occasion more for 
the viewing of Phanes than the 
tabards, though these, woven of 
Phane-ga uze, were of intricate 
beauty in themselves. 
The Phane owners sat in a 
lower tier, tense with hope and 
pride, exulting when one made 
an especially splendid display, 
plunged into black depths when 
the ritual postures were performed with other than grace and elegance. During each display highly formal music was plucked from 
a lute by a gentleman from a 
clan different to that of the Phane 
owner. The owner never played 
the lute to the performance of his 
own Phane. The display was 
never overtly a competition and 
no formal acclamation was allowed, but all watching made up 
their minds as to which was the 
44 
most entrancing and graceful of 
the Phanes, and the repute of the 
owner was thereby exalted. 
The current Viewing was delayed almost half an hour by 
reason of the defection of the 
Meks, and certain hasty improvisations had been made necessary. But the gentlefolk of Castle Hagedom were in no mood to 
be critical and took no heed of 
the occasional lapses as a dozen 
young Peasant bucks struggled 
to perform unfamiliar tasks. The 
Phanes were as entrancing as ever, bending, twisting, swaying to 
plangent chords of the lute, fluttering their fingers as if feeling 
for raindrops, crouching suddenly, gliding, then springing upright 
straight as wands, finally bowing 
and skipping from the platform. 
T T alfway through the program 
a Peasant sidled awkwardly 
into the Rotunda, and mumbled 
in an urgent manner to the cadet 
who came to inquire his business. 
The cadet at once made his way 
to Hagedorn’s polished jet booth. 
Hagedom listened, nodded, spoke 
a few terse words and settled 
calmly back in his seat as if the 
message had been of no consequence, and the gentlefolk of the 
audience were reassured. 
The entertainment proceeded. 
O. Z. Garr’s delectable pair made 
a fine show, but it was generally 
felt that Lirlin, a young Phane 
belonging to Isseth Floy Gazuneth, for the first time at a formal 
showing, made the most captivating display. 
The Phanes appeared for a last 
time, moving all together through 
a half-improvised minuet. Then 
they performed a final half-gay, 
half-regretful salute and departed 
the rotunda. For a few moments 
more the gentlemen and ladies 
would remain in their booths, sipping essences, discussing the display, arranging affairs and assignations. Hagedom sat frowning, twisting his hands. 
Suddenly he rose to his feet. 
The rotunda instantly became silent. 
“I dislike intruding an unhappy 
note at so pleasant an occasion,” 
said Hagedom. “But news has 
just been given to me, and it is 
fitting that all should know. Janeil Castle is under attack. The 
Meks are there in great force, 
with hundreds of power-wagons. 
They have circled the castle with 
a dike which prevents any effective use of tiie Janeil energy-cannon. 
“There is no immediate danger to Janeil, and it is difficult to 
comprehend what the Meks hope 
to achieve, the Janeil walls being 
all of two hundred feet high. 
“The news nevertheless is somber, and it means that eventually we must expect a similar investment — though it is even 
THE LAST CASTLE 
more difficult to comprehend how 
Meks could hope to inconvenience us. Our water derives from 
four wells sunk deep into the 
earth. We have great stocks of 
food. Our energy is derived from 
the sun. If necessary, we could 
condense water and synthesize 
food from the air — at least I 
have been so assured by our 
great biochemical theoretician 
X. B. Ladisname. Still — this is 
the news. Make of it what you 
will. Tomorrow the Council of 
Notables will meet.” 
VIII 
{4TX7ell, then,” said Hagedom 
' ’ to the council, “for once 
let us dispense with formality. 
O. Z. Garr: what of our cannon?” 
O. Z. Garr, wearing the magnificent gray and green uniform of 
the Overwhele Dragoons, carefully placed his morion on the table, 
so that the panache stood erect. 
“Of twelve cannon, four appear 
to be functioning correctly. Four 
have been sabotaged by excision 
of the power-leads. Four have 
been sabotaged by some means 
undetectable to careful investigation. I have commandeered a 
half-dozen Peasants who demonstrate a modicum of mechanical 
ability, and have instructed them 
in detail. They are currently engaged in splicing the leads. This 
is the extent of my current infor
45 
mation in regard to the cannon.” 
“Moderately good news,” said 
Hagedom. “What of the proposed 
corps of armed Peasants?” 
“The project is under way. A. 
F. Mull and I. A. Berzelius are 
now inspecting Peasants with a 
view to recruitment and training. 
I can make no sanguine projection as to the military effectiveness of such a corps, even if 
trained and led by such as A. F. 
Mull, I. A. Berzelius and myself. 
The Peasants are a mild ineffectual race, admirably suited to 
the grubbing of weeds, but with 
no stomach whatever for fight
* 99 
mg. 
Hagedom glanced around the 
council. “Are there any other suggestions?” 
Beaudry spoke in a harsh angry voice, “Had the villains but 
left us our power-wagons, we 
might have mounted the cannon 
aboard! The Peasants are equal 
to this, at least. Then we could 
roll to Janeil and blast the dogs 
from the rear.” 
“These Meks seem utter 
fiends!” declared Aure. “What 
conceivably do they have in 
mind? Why, after these centuries, 
must they suddenly go mad?” 
“We all ask ourselves the 
same,” said Hagedorn. “Xanten, 
you returned from reconnaissance 
with a captive: have you attempted to question him?” 
“No,” said Xanten. “Truth to 
46 
tell, I haven’t thought of him 
since.” 
“Why not attempt to question 
him? Perhaps he can provide a 
clue or two.” 
Xanten nodded assent. “I can 
try. Candidly I expect to learn 
nothing.” 
“Claghom, you are the Mek 
expert,” said Beaudry. “Would 
you have thought the creatures 
capable of so intricate a plot? 
What do they hope to gain? Our 
castles?” 
4 4'T'hey are certainly capable 
of precise and meticulous 
planning,” said Claghorn. “Their 
ruthlessness surprises me — more, 
possibly, than it should. I have 
never known them to covet our 
material possessions, and they 
show no tendency toward what 
we consider the concomitants of 
civilization: fine discriminations 
of sensation and the like. I have 
often speculated — I won’t dignify the conceit with the status 
of a theory — that the structural 
logic of a brain is of rather more 
consequence than we reckon with. 
Our own brains are remarkable 
for their utter lack of rational 
structure. Considering the haphazarded manner in which our 
thoughts are formed, registered, 
indexed and recalled, any single 
rational act becomes a miracle. 
Perhaps we are incapable of rationality. Perhaps all thought is 
a set of impulses generated by 
one emotion, monitored by another, ratified by a third. In contrast the Mek brain is a marvel 
of what seems careful engineering. It is roughly cubical and 
consists of microscopic cells interconnected by organic fibrils, 
each a monofilament molecule of 
negligible electrical resistance. 
Within each cell is a film of silica, 
a fluid of variable conductivity 
and dielectric properties, a cusp 
of a complex mixture of metallic 
oxides. The brain is capable of 
storing great quantities of information in an orderly pattern. No 
fact is lost, unless it is purposely 
forgotten, a capacity which the 
Meks possess. The brain also 
functions as a radio transceiver, 
possibly as a radar transmitter 
and detector, though this again 
is speculation. 
“Where the Mek brain falls 
short is in its lack of emotional 
color. One Mek is precisely like 
another, without any personality 
differentiation perceptible to us. 
This, clearly, is a function of their 
communicative system. It would 
be unthinkable for a unique personality to develop under these 
conditions. They served us efficiently and — so we thought — 
loyally, because they felt nothing 
about their condition, neither 
pride in achievement, nor resentment, nor shame. Nothing whatever. They neither loved us nor 
THE LAST CASTLE 
hated us. Nor do they now. It is 
hard for us to conceive this emotional vacuum, when each of us 
feels something about everything. 
We live in a welter of emotions. 
They are as devoid of emotion 
as an ice-cube. They were fed, 
housed, maintained in a manner 
they found satisfactory. Why did 
they revolt? I have speculated at 
length, but the single reason 
which I can formulate seems so 
grotesque and unreasonable that 
I refuse to take it seriously. If 
this after all is the correct explanation . .” His voice drifted 
away. 
“Well?” demanded O. Z. Garr 
peremptorily. “What then?” 
“Then — it is all the same. 
They are committed to the destruction of the human race. My 
speculation alters nothing.” 
H agedorn turned to Xanten. 
“All this should assist you in 
your inquiries.” 
“I was about to suggest that 
Claghorn assist me, if he is so 
inclined,” said Xanten. 
“As you like,” said Claghom, 
“though in my opinion the information, no matter what, is irrelevant. Our single concern 
should be a means to repel them 
and to save our lives.” 
“And — save the force of ‘panthers’ you mentioned at our previous session — you can conceive 
of no subtle weapon?” asked 
Hagedorn wistfully. “A device 
to set up electrical resonances 
in their brains, or something similar?” 
“Not feasible,” said Claghom. 
“Certain organs in the creatures’ 
brains function as overload 
switches. Though it is true that 
during this time they might not 
be able to communicate.” After 
a moment’s reflection he added 
thoughtful: “Who knows? A. G. 
Bernal and Uegus are theoreticians with a profound knowledge 
of such projections. Perhaps they 
might construct such a device, or 
several, against a possible need.” 
Hagedorn nodded dubiously, 
and looked toward Uegus. “Is 
this possible?” 
Uegus frowned. “ ‘Construct*? 
I can certainly design such an 
instrument. But the components 
— where? Scattered through the 
storerooms helter-skelter, some 
functioning, others not. To 
achieve anything meaningful I 
must become no better than an 
apprentice, a Mek.” He became 
incensed, and his voice hardened. 
“I find it hard to believe that I 
should be forced to point out this 
fact! Do you hold me and my 
talents then of such small 
worth?” 
Hagedorn hastened to reassure 
him. “Of course not! I for one 
would never think of impugning 
your dignity.” 
“Never!” agreed Claghom. 
“Nevertheless, during this present emergency, we will find indignities imposed upon us by 
events, unless now we impose 
them upon ourselves.” 
“Very well,” said Uegus, a 
humorless smile trembling at his 
Bps. “You shall come with me 
to the storeroom. I will point out 
the components to be brought 
forth and assembled, you shall 
perform the toil. What do you 
say to that?” 
“I say yes, gladly, if it will be 
of real utility. However, I can 
hardly perform the labor for a 
dozen different theoreticians. Will 
any others serve beside myself?” 
No one responded. Silence was 
absolute, as if every gentleman 
present held his breath. 
Hagedorn started to speak, but 
Claghom interrupted. “Pardon, 
Hagedorn, but here, finally, we 
are stuck upon a basic principle, 
and it must be settled now.” 
Hagedorn looked desperately 
around the council. “Has anyone 
relevant comment?” 
“Claghorn must do as his innate 
nature compels,” declared O. Z. 
Garr in the silkiest of voices. “I 
cannot dictate to him. As for 
myself, I can never demean my 
status as a gentleman of Hagedom. This creed is as natural to 
me' as drawing breath ; if ever it is 
compromised I become a travesty 
of a gentleman, a grotesque mask 
of myself. This is Castle Hage
CALAXY 
dorn, and we represent the culmination of human civilization. 
Any compromise therefore becomes degradation; any expedient diminution of our standards 
becomes dishonor. I have heard 
the word ‘emergency’ used. What 
a deplorable sentiment! To dignify the rat-like snappings and 
gnashings of such as the Meks 
with the word ‘emergency’ is to 
my mind unworthy of a gentle- \ 
man of Hagedorn!” 
A murmur of approval went 
around the council table. 
C laghom leaned far back in his 
seat, chin on his chest, as if 
in relaxation. His clear blue eyes 
went from face to face, then returned to O. Z. Garr whom he 
studied with dispassionate interest. “Obviously you direct your 
words to me,” he said. “I appreciate their malice. But this is a 
small matter.” He looked away 
from O. Z. Garr, to stare up at 
the massive diamond and emerald chandelier. “More important 
is the fact that the council as a 
whole, in spite of my earnest 
persuasion, seems to endorse your 
viewpoint. I can urge, expostulate, insinuate no longer, and I 
will now leave Castle Hagedorn. 
I find the atmosphere stifling. I 
trust that you survive the attack 
of the Meks, though I doubt that 
you will. They are a clever resourceful race, untroubled by 
THE LAST CASTLE 
qualms or preconceptions, and 
we have long underestimated 
their quality.” 
Claghom rose from his seat, 
inserted the ivory tablet into its 
socket. “I bid you all farewell" 
Hagedorn hastily jumped to hi* 
feet, held forth his arms imploringly. “Do not depart in anger, 
Claghorn! Reconsider! We need 
your wisdom, your expertise.” 
“Assuredly you do,” said Claghom. “But even more you need 
to act. upon the advice I have already extended. Until then we 
have no common ground, and any 
further interchange is futile and 
tiresome.” He made a brief allinclusive salute and departed the 
chamber. 
Hagedorn slowly resumed his 
seat. The others made uneasy 
motions, coughed, looked up at 
the chandelier, studied their ivory 
tablets. O. Z. Garr muttered 
something to B. F. Wyas who sat 
beside him, who nodded solemnly. Hagerdon spoke in a subdued 
voice : “We will miss the presence 
of Claghorn, his penetrating if 
unorthodox insights ... We have 
accomplished little. Uegus, perhaps you will give thought to the 
projector under discussion. Xanten, you were to question the captive Mek. O. Z. Garr, you undoubtedly will see to the repair of 
the energy cannon . Aside from 
these small matters, it appears 
that we have evolved no general 
IX 
plan of action, to help either ourselves or Janeil.” 
Marune spoke. “What of the 
other castles? Are they still extant? We have had no news. I 
suggest that we send Birds to 
each castle, to learn their condition.” 
Hagedom nodded. “Yes, this is 
a wise motion. Perhaps you will 
see to this, Marune?” 
“I will do so.” 
“Good. We will now adjourn 
for a time.” 
nphe Birds were dispatched by 
Marune of Aure and one by 
one returned. Their reports were 
similar: 
“Sea Island is deserted. Marble columns are tumbled along 
the beach. Pearl Dome is collapsed. Corpses float in the Water 
Garden.” 
“Maraval reeks of death. Gentlemen, Peasants, Phane — all 
dead. Alas! Even the Birds have 
departed!” 
“Delora: a ros ros ros! A dismal scene! No sign of life to be 
found!” 
“Alume is desolate. The great 
wooden door is smashed. The 
eternal Green Flame is extinguished.” 
“There is nothing at Halycon. 
The Peasants were driven into a 
pit.” 
“Tuang: silence.” 
“Mominglight : death.” 
r J' , hree days later, Xanten constrained six Birds to a lift 
chair. He directed them first on 
a wide sweep around the castle, 
then south to Far Valley. 
The Birds aired their usual 
complaints, then bounded down 
the deck in great ungainly hops 
which threatened to throw Xanten immediately to the pavement. 
At last gaining the air, they flew 
up in a spiral. Castle Hagedorn 
became an intricate miniature 
far below, each House marked by 
its unique cluster of turrets and 
eyries, its own eccentric roof line, 
its long streaming pennon. 
The Birds performed the prescribed circle, skimming the crags 
and pines of North Ridge. Then, 
setting wings aslant the upstream, 
they coasted away toward Far 
Valley. 
Over the pleasant Hagedorn 
domain flew the Birds and Xanten: over orchards, fields, vineyards, Peasant villages. They 
crossed Lake Maude with its pavilions and docks, the meadows 
beyond where the Hagedom cattle and sheep grazed, and presently came to Far Valley, at the 
limit of Hagedom lands. 
Xanten indicated where he 
wished to alight. The Birds, who 
would have preferred a site closer to the village where they could 
have watched all that transpired, 
grumbled and cried out in wrath 
and set Xanten down so roughly 
that had he not been alert the 
shock would have pitched him 
head over heels. 
Xanten alighted without elegance but at least remained on 
his feet. “Await me here!” he ordered. “Do not stray; attempt no 
flamboyant tricks among the liftstraps. When I return I wish to 
see six quiet Birds, in neat formation, lift-straps untwisted and 
untangled. No bickering, mind 
you! No loud caterwauling, to attract unfavorable comment! Let 
all be as I have ordered!” 
The Birds sulked, stamped 
their feet, ducked aside their 
necks, made insulting comments 
just under the level of Xanten’s 
hearing. Xanten turned with a 
final glare of admonition and 
walked down the lane which led 
to the village. 
The vines were heavy with 
ripe blackberries and a number 
of the girls of the village filled 
baskets. Among them was the 
girl O. Z. Garr had thought to 
pre-empt for his personal use. 
As Xanten passed, he halted and 
performed a courteous salute. 
“We have met before, if my recollection is correct.” 
r T“'he girl smiled, a half-rueful, 
-*• half-whimsical smile. “’Your 
recollection serves you well. We 
met at Hagedom, where I was 
THE LAST CASTLE 
taken a captive. And later, when 
you conveyed me here, after 
dark, though I could not see your 
face.” She extended her basket. 
“Are you hungry? Will you eat?” 
Xanten took several berries. In 
the course of the conversation he 
learned that the girl’s name was 
Glys Meadowsweet, that her parents were not known to her, but 
were presumably gentlefolk of 
Castle Hagedom who had exceeded their birth tally. Xanten 
examined her even more carefully than before but could see 
resemblance to none of the Hagedom families. “You might derive from Castle Delora. If there 
is any family resemblance I can 
detect, it is to the Cosanzas of 
Delora — a family noted for the 
beauty of its ladies.” 
“You are not married?” she 
asked artlessly. 
“No,” said Xanten, and indeed 
he had dissolved his relationship 
with Araminta only the day before. “What of you?” 
She Shook her head. “I would 
never be gathering blackberries 
if I were. It is work reserved for 
maidens. Why do you come to 
Far Valley?” 
“For two reasons. The first to 
see you.” Xanten heard himself 
say this with surprise. But it was 
true, he realized with another 
small shock of surprise. “I have 
never spoken with you properly 
and I have always wondered if 
you were as charming and gay as 
you are beautiful.” 
The girl shrugged and Xanten 
could not be sure whether she 
were pleased or not, compliments 
from gentlemen sometimes setting the stage for a sorry aftermath. “Well, no matter. I came 
also to speak to Claghom.” 
“He is yonder,” she said in a 
voice toneless, even cool, and 
pointed. “He occupies that cottage.” She returned to her blackberry picking. Xanten bowed, 
proceeded to that cottage the 
girl had indicated. 
/claghom, wearing loose kneelength breeches of gray homespun, worked with an axe chopping faggots into stove-lengths. 
At the sight of Xanten he halted 
his toil, leaned on the axe, mopped his forehead. “Ah, Xanten. I 
am pleased to see you. How are 
the folk of Castle Hagedom?” 
“As before. There is little to 
report, even had I come to bring 
you news.” 
“Indeed, indeed?” Claghom 
leaned on the axe handle, surveyed Xanten with a bright blue 
gaze. 
“At our last meeting,” went 
on Xanten, “I agreed to question 
the captive Mek. After doing so 
I am distressed that you were 
not at hand to assist, so that you 
might have resolved certain ambiguities in the responses.” 
“Speak on,” said Claghom. 
“Perhaps I shall be able to do so 
now.” 
“After the council meeting I 
descended immediately to the 
storeroom where the Mek was 
confined. It lacked nutriment; I 
gave it syrup and a pail of water, 
which it sipped sparingly, then 
evinced a desire for minced clams. 
I summoned kitchen help and 
sent them for this commodity 
and the Mek ingested several 
pints. As I have indicated, it Was 
an unusual Mek, standing as tall 
as myself and lacking a syrup 
sac. I conveyed it to a different 
chamber, a storeroom for brown 
plush furniture, and ordered it 
to a seat. 
“I looked at the Mek and it 
looked at me. The quills which 
I removed were growing back; 
probably it could at least receive 
from Meks elsewhere. It seemed 
a superior beast, showing neither 
obsequiousness nor respect, and 
answered my questions without 
hesitation. 
“First I remarked: ‘The gentlefolk of the castles are astounded 
by the revolt of the Meks. We 
had assumed that your life was 
satisfactory. Were we wrong?’ 
“ ‘Evidently.’ I am sure that 
this was the word signaled, 
though never had I suspected the 
Meks of wit of any sort. 
“ “Very well then,’ I said. ‘In 
what manner?’ 
“ ‘Surely it is obvious. We no 
longer wished to toil at your behest. We wished to conduct our 
fives by our own traditional standards.’ 
“The response surprised me. I 
was unaware that the Meks possessed standards of any kind, 
much less traditional standards.” 
Claghom nodded. “I have been 
similarly surprised by the scope 
of the Mek mentality.” 
“I reproached the Mek: ‘Why 
kill? Why destroy our lives in order to augment your own?’ As 
soon as I had put the question I 
realized that it had been unhap. pily phrased. The Mek, I believe, realized the same; however, 
in reply he signaled something 
very rapidly which I believe was : 
*We knew we must act with decisiveness. Your own protocol 
made this necessary. We might 
have returned to Etamin Nine, 
but we prefer this world Earth, 
and will make it our own, with 
our own great slipways, tubs and 
basking ramps.’ 
C t r T~'his seemed clear enough, 
but I sensed an adumbration extending yet beyond. I 
said, ‘Comprehensible. But why 
kill, why destroy? You might 
have taken yourself to a different 
region. We could not have molested you.’ 
“ ‘Infeasible, by your own 
thinking. A world is too small for 
THE LAST CASTLE 
two competing races. You intended to send us back to Etamin 
Nine.’ 
“ ‘Ridiculous!* I said. “Fantasy, 
absurdity. Do you take me for 
a mooncalf?* 
“ ‘No,’ the creature insisted. 
‘Two of Castle Hagedom’s notables were seeking the highest 
post. One assured us that, if 
elected, this would become his 
life’s aim.* 
“ ‘A grotesque misunderstanding,’ I told him. ‘One man, a lunatic, can not speak for all men!’ 
“ ‘No? One Mek speaks for all 
Meks. We think with one mind. 
Are not men of a like sort?’ 
“ “Each thinks for himself. The 
lunatic who assured you of this 
tomfoolery is an evil man. But 
at least matters are clear. We do 
not propose to send you to Etamin Nine. Will you withdraw 
from Janeil, take yourselves to a 
far land and leave us in peace?’ 
“ ‘No. Affairs have proceeded 
too far. We will now destroy all 
men. The truth of the statement 
is clear: one world is too small 
for two races.’ 
“ ‘Unluckily then, I must kill 
you,’ I told him. ‘Such acts are 
not to my liking, but, with opportunity, you would kill as many 
gentlemen as possible.’ At this 
the creature sprang upon me, and 
I killed it with an easier mind 
than had it sat staring. 
“Now you know all. It seems 
that either you or O. Z. Garr stimulated the cataclysm. O. Z. 
Garr? Unlikely. Impossible. 
Hence, you, Claghom, you! have 
this weight upon your soul!” 
Claghorn frowned down at the 
axe. “Weight, yes. Guilt, no. Ingenuousness, yes; wickedness, 
no.” 
Xanten stood back. “Claghom, 
your coolness astounds me! Before, when rancorous folk like O. 
Z. Garr conceived you a lunatic—” 
“Peace, Xanten!” exclaimed 
Claghorn irritably. “This extravagant breast-beating becomes 
maladroit. What have I done 
wrong? My fault is that I tried 
too much. Failure is tragic, but 
a phthisic face hanging over the 
cup of the future is worse. I 
meant to become Hagedom, I 
would have sent the slaves home. 
I failed, the slaves revolted. So 
do not speak another word. I am 
bored with the subject. You can 
not imagine how your bulging 
eyes and your concave spine oppress me.” 
“Bored you may be,” cried 
Xanten. “You decry my eyes, 
my spine — but what of the thousands dead?” 
“How long would they live in 
any event? Lives are as cheap as 
fish in the sea. I suggest that you 
put by your reproaches and devote a similar energy to saving 
yourself. Do you realize that a 
means exists? You stare at me 
blankly. I assure you that what I 
say is true, but you will never 
learn the means from me.” 
Ct/'Maghom,” said Xanten, “I 
flew to this spot intending to blow your arrogant head 
from your body — ” But Claghom, no longer heeding, had returned to his wood-chopping. 
. “Claghom!” cried Xanten. 
“Xanten, take your outcries 
elsewhere, if you please. Remonstrate with your Birds.” 
Xanten swung on his heel, 
marched back down the lane. The 
girls picking berries looked at 
him questioningly and moved 
aside. Xanten halted, looked up 
and down the lane. Glys Meadowsweet was nowhere to be seen. 
In a new fury he continued. He 
stopped short. On a fallen tree a 
hundred feet from the Birds sat 
Glys Meadowsweet, examining a 
blade of grass as if it had been an 
astonishing artifact of the past. 
The Birds for a marvel had actually obeyed him and waited in 
a fair semblance of order. 
Xanten looked up toward the 
heavens, kicked at the turf. He 
drew a deep breath and approached to Glys Meadowsweet. He 
noted that she had tucked a 
flower into her long loose hair. 
After a second or two she looked up and searched his face. 
“Why are you so angry?” 
Xanten slapped his thigh, seated himself beside her. “ ‘Angry*? 
No. I am out of my mind with 
frustration. Claghom is as obstreperous as a sharp rock. He 
knows how Castle Hagedom can 
be saved but he will not divulge 
his secret.” 
Glys Meadowsweet laughed — 
an easy merry sound, like nothing Xanten had ever heard at 
Castle Hagedom. “Secret? When 
even I know it?” 
“It must be a secret,” said 
Xanten. “He will not tell me.” 
“Listen. If you. fear the Birds 
will hear it, I will whisper.” She 
spoke a few words into his ear. 
Perhaps the sweet breath befuddled Xanten’s mind. But the 
explicit essence of the revelation 
failed to strike home into his consciousness. He made a sound of 
sour amusement. “No secret 
there. Only what the prehistoric 
Scythians termed ‘bathos’. Dishonor to the gentlemen! Do we 
dance with the Peasants? Do we 
serve the Birds essences and discuss with them the sheen of our 
Phanes?” 
“ ‘Dishonor’ then?” She jumped to her feet. “Then it is also dishonor for you to talk to me, to 
sit here with me, to make ridiculous suggestions!” 
“I made no suggestions!” protested Xanten. “I sit here in all 
decorum — ” 
“Too much decorum, too much 
THE LAST CASTLE 
honor!” With a display of passion which astounded Xanten, 
Glys Meadowsweet tore the flower from her hair, hurled it at the 
ground. “There. Hence!” 
“No,” said Xanten in sudden 
humility. He bent, picked up the 
flower, kissed it, replaced it in 
her hair. “I am not over-honorable. I will try my best” He put 
his arms on her shoulders, but 
she held him away. 
“Tell me,” she inquired with 
a very mature severity, “do you 
own any of those peculiar insectwomen?” 
“I? Phanes? I own no Phanes.” 
With this Glys Meadowsweet 
relaxed and allowed Xanten to 
embrace her, while the Birds 
clucked, guffawed and made 
vulgar scratching sounds with 
their wings. 
X 
T he summer waned. On June 
30 Janeil and Hagedom celebrated the Fete of Flowers, 
even though the dike was rising 
high around Janeil. 
Shortly after, Xanten flew six 
select Birds into Castle Janeil 
by night and proposed to the 
council that the population be 
evacuated by Bird-lift — as many 
as possible, as many who wished 
to leave. The council listened 
with stony faces and without 
comment passed on. 
Xanten returned to Castle Hagedom. Using the most careful 
methods, speaking only to trusted comrades, Xanten enlisted 
thirty or forty cadets and gentlemen to his persuasion, though inevitably he could not keep the 
doctrinal thesis of his program secret. 
The first reaction of the traditionalists was mockery and 
charges of poltroonery. At Xanten’s insistence, challenges were 
neither issued nor accepted by 
his hot-blooded associates. 
On the evening of September 
9 Castile Janeil fell. The news was 
brought to Castle Hagedom by 
excited Birds who told the grim 
tale again and again in voices 
ever more hysterical. 
Hagedom, now gaunt and 
weary, automatically called a 
council meeting; it took note of 
the gloomy circumstances. “We 
then are the last castle! The 
Meks cannot conceivably do us 
harm; they can build dikes 
around our castle walls for twenty years and only work themselves to distraction. We are secure; but yet it is a strange and 
portentous thought to realize 
that at last, here at Castle Hagedorn, live the last gentlemen of 
the race!” 
Xanten spoke in a voice strained with earnest conviction: 
“Twenty years — fifty years — 
what difference to the Meks? 
56 
Once they surround us, once they 
deploy, we are trapped. Do you 
comprehend that now is our last 
opportunity to escape the great 
cage that Castle Hagedom is to 
become?” 
“ “Escape’, Xanten? What a 
word! For shame!” hooted O. Z. 
Garr. “Take your wretched band, 
escape! To steppe or swamp or 
tundra! Go as you like, with your 
poltroons, but be good enough to 
give over these incessant alarms !” 
“Garr, I have found conviction 
since I became a ‘poltroon’. Survival is good morality: I have 
this from the mouth of a noted 
savant.” 
“Bah! Such as whom?” 
“A. G. Philidor, if you must 
be informed of every detail.” 
/^v. Z. Garr clapped his hand to 
^ his forehead. “Do you refer 
to Philidor the Expiationist? He 
Is of the most extreme stripe, an 
Expiationist to out-expiate all the 
rest! Xanten, be sensible, if you 
please!” 
“There are years ahead for all 
of us,” said Xanten in a wooden 
voice, “if we free ourselves from 
file castle.” 
“But the castle is our life!” declared Hagedom. “In essence, 
Xanten, what would we be without the castle? Wild animals? 
Nomads?” 
“We would be alive.” 
O. Z. Garr gave a snort of disGALAXY 
gust, turned away to inspect a 
wall-hanging. Hagedom shook 
his head in doubt and perplexity. 
Beaudry threw his hands up into 
the air. “Xanten, you have the 
effect of unnerving us all. You 
come in here, inflict this dreadful sense of urgency, but why? In 
Castle Hagedom we are as safe 
as in our mother’s arms. What 
do we gain by throwing aside all 
— honor, dignity, comfort, civilized niceties — for no other reason than to slink through the 
wilderness?” 
“Janeil was safe,” said Xanten. 
“Today where is Janeil? Death, 
mildewed cloth, sour wine. What 
we-gain by ‘slinking* is the assurance of survival. And I plan much 
more than simple ‘slinking'.” 
“I can conceive of a hundred 
occasions when death is better 
than life!” snapped Isseth. “Must 
I die in dishonor and disgrace? 
Why may my last years not be 
passed in dignity?” 
Into the room came B. F. Robarth. “Councilmen, the Meks 
approach Castle Hagedom.” 
Hagedom cast a wild look 
around the chamber. “Is there a 
consensus? What must we do?” 
Xanten threw up his hands. 
“Everyone must do as he thinks 
best! I argue no more: I am done. 
Hagedorn, will you adjourn the 
. council so that we may be about 
our affairs? I to my ‘slinking'?” 
“Council is adjourned,” said 
THE LAST CASTLE 
Hagedom, and all went up to 
stand on the ramparts. 
Up the avenue into the castle 
trooped Peasants from the surrounding countryside, packets 
slung over their shoulders. Across 
the valley, at the edge of Bartholomew Forest, was a clot of 
power-wagons and an amorphous 
brown-gold mass: Meks. 
Aure pointed west. “Look — 
there they come, up the Long 
Swale.” He turned, peered east 
“And look, there at Bambridge: 
Meks!” 
By common consent, all swung 
about to scan North Ridge. O. Z. 
Garr pointed to a quiet line of 
brown-gold shapes. “There they 
wait, the vermin! They have penned us in! Well then, let them 
wait!” He swung away, rode the 
lift down to the plaza, crossed 
swiftly to Zumbeld House, where 
he worked the rest of the afternoon with his Gloriana, of whom 
he expected great things. 
'T'he following day the Meks 
formalized the investment. 
Around Castle Hagedom a great 
circle of Mek activity made itself 
apparent: sheds, warehouses, barracks. Within this periphery, just 
beyond the range of the energy 
cannon, power-wagons thrust up 
mounds of dirt. 
During the night these mounds 
lengthened toward the castle; 
similarly the night after. At last 
the purpose of the mounds became clear: they were a protective cover above passages or tunnels leading toward the crag on 
which Castle Hagedorn rested. 
The following day several of 
the mounds reached the base of 
the crag. Presently from the far 
end began to flow a succession of 
power-wagons loaded with rubble. They issued, dumped their 
loads and once again entered the 
tunnels. 
Eight of these above-ground 
tunnels had been established. 
From each trundled endless loads 
of dirt and rock, gnawed from the 
crag on which Castle Hagedorn 
sat. To the gentlefolk who crowded the parapets the meaning of 
58 
tile work at last became clear. 
“They make no attempt to 
bury us,” said Hagedorn. “They 
merely mine out the crag from 
below us!” 
On the sixth day of the siege, 
a great segment of the hillside 
shuddered, slumped, and a tall 
pinnacle of rock reaching almost 
up to the base of the walls collapsed. 
“If this continues,” muttered 
Beaudry, “our time will be less 
than that of Janeil.” 
“Come then,” called O. Z. Garr 
in sudden energy. “Let us try our 
energy cannon. We’ll blast open 
their wretched tunnels, and what 
will the rascals do then?” He 
went to the nearest emplacement, 
shouted down for Peasants to remove the tarpaulin. 
Xanten, who happened to stand 
nearby, said, “Allow me to assist 
you.” He jerked away the tarpaulin. “Shoot now, if you will.” 
O. Z. Garr stared at him uncomprehendingly, then leapt forward, swiveled the great projector about so that it aimed at a 
mound. He pulled the switch; the 
air crackled in front of the ringed 
snout, rippled, flickered with purple sparks. The target area 
steamed, became black, then dark 
red, then slumped into an incandescent crater. But the underlying earth, twenty feet in thickness, afforded too much insulation; the molten puddle became 
white-hot but failed to spread or 
deepen. The energy cannon gave 
a sudden chatter, as electricity 
short- circuited through corroded 
insulation. The cannon went 
dead. 
O. Z. Garr inspected the mechanism in anger and disappointment. Then, with a gesture of 
repugnance, he turned away. The 
cannons were clearly of limited 
effectiveness. 
Two hours later, on the east 
side of the crag, another great 
sheet of rock collapsed, and just 
before sunset, a similar mass 
sheared from the western face, 
where the wall of the castle rose 
almost in an uninterrupted line 
from the cliff below. 
At midnight Xanten and those 
of his persuasion, with their children and consorts, departed Castle Hagedorn. Six teams of Birds 
shuttled from the flight deck to 
a meadow near Far Valley, and 
long before dawn had transported 
the entire group. 
There were none to bid them 
farewell. 
XI 
A week later another section of 
the east cliff fell away, taking a length of rock-melt buttress 
with it. At the tunnel mouths the 
piles of excavated rubble had become alarmingly large. 
The terraced south face of the 
THE LAST CASTLE 
crag was the least disturbed; the 
most spectacular damage having 
occurred to east and west. Suddenly, a month after the initial 
assault, a great section of the terraces slumped forward, leaving 
an irregular crevasse which interrupted the avenue and hhrled 
down the statues of former notables emplaced at intervals along 
the avenue’s balustrade. 
Hagedorn called a council 
meeting. “Circumstances,” he 
said in a wan attempt at facetiousness, “have not bettered 
themselves. Our most pessimistic 
expectations have been exceeded. 
A dismal situation! I confess that 
I do not relish the prospect of 
toppling to my death among all 
my smashed belongings.” 
Aure made a desperate gesture. 
“A similar thought haunts me! 
Death — what of that? All must 
die! But when I think of my precious belongings I become sick. 
My books trampled! My fragile 
vases smashed! My tabards ripped! My rugs buried! My Phanes 
strangled! My heirloom chandeliers flung aside! These are my 
nightmares.” 
“Your possessions are no less 
precious than any others,” said 
Beaudry shortly. “Still they have 
no life of their own; when we 
are gone, who cares what happens 
to them?” 
M a rune winced. “A year ago 
I put down eighteen dozen flasks 
of prime essence; twelve dozen 
Green Rain; three each of Balthazar and Faidor. Think of 
these, if you would contemplate 
tragedy!” 
“Had we only known!” groaned Aure. “I would have — I 
would have . .” His voice trailed 
away. 
O. Z. Garr stamped his foot in 
impatience. “Let us avoid lamentation at all costs! We had a 
choice, remember? Xanten beseeched us to flee; now he and 
his like go skulking and foraging 
through the north mountains with 
the Expiationists. We chose to 
remain, for better or worse, and 
unluckily the ‘worse’ is occurring. 
We must accept the fact like gentlemen.” 
To this the council gave melancholy assent. Hagedorn 
brought forth a flask of priceless 
Rhadamanth, and poured with a 
prodigality which previously 
would have been unthinkable. 
“Since we have no future — to our 
glorious past!” 
HHhat night disturbances were 
noted here and there around 
the ring of Mek investment; 
flames at four separate points, a 
faint sound of hoarse shouting. 
On die following day it seemed 
that die tempo of activity had 
lessened a trifle. 
But during the afternoon a vast 
segment of the east cliff fell 
60 
away. A moment later, as if after 
majestic deliberation, the tall 
east wall split off, toppled, leaving the backs of six great houses 
exposed to the open sky. 
An hour after sunset a team 
of Birds settled to the flightdeck. Xanten jumped from the 
seat. He ran down the circular 
staircase to the ramparts, came 
down to the plaza by Hagedorn’s 
palace. 
Hagedorn, summoned by a 
kinsman, came forth to stare at 
Xanten in surprise. “What do 
you do here? We expected you 
to be safely north with the Expiationists!” 
“The Expiationists are not 
safely north,” said Xanten. “They 
have joined the rest of us. We are 
fighting.” 
Hagedorn’s jaw dropped. 
“Fighting? The gentlemen are 
fighting Meks?” 
“As vigorously as possible.” 
Hagedorn shook his head in 
wonder. “The Expiationists too? 
I understood that they had planned to flee north.” 
“Some have done so, including 
A. G. Philidor. There are factions 
among the Expiationists just as 
here. Most are not ten miles distant. The same with the Nomads. 
Some have taken their powerwagons and fled. The rest kill 
Meks with fanatic fervor. Last 
night you saw our work. We fired 
four storage warehouses, destroy
GALAXY 
ed syrup tanks, killed a hundred 
or more Meks, as well as a dozen 
power-wagons. We suffered losses, which hurt us, because there 
are few of us and many Meks. 
This is why I am here. We need 
more men. Come fight beside 
us!” 
Hagedorn turned, motioned to 
the great central plaza. “I will 
call forth the folk from their 
Houses. Talk to everyone.” 
T he Birds, complaining bitterly at the unprecedented toil, 
worked all night, transporting 
gentlemen, who, sobered by the 
imminent destruction of Castle 
Hagedorn, were now willing to 
abandon all scruples and fight for 
their lives. The staunch traditionalists still refused to compromise 
their honor, but Xanten gave 
them cheerful assurance; “Remain here then, prowling the castle like so many furtive rats. 
Take what comfort you can in 
the fact that you are being protected ; the future holds little else 
for you.” 
And many who heard him 
stalked away in disgust. 
Xanten turned to Hagedorn. 
“What of you? Do you come or 
do you stay?” 
Hagedorn heaved a deep sigh, 
almost a groan. “Castle Hagedorn is at an end. No matter 
what the eventuality. I will come 
with you.” 
THE LAST CASTLE 
ryVhe situation suddenly had altered. The Meks, established 
in a loose ring around Castle 
Hagedorn, had calculated upon 
no resistance from the countryside and little from the castle. 
They had established their barracks and syrup depots with 
thought only for convenience and 
none for defense; raiding parties, 
consequently, were able to approach, inflict damages and withdraw before sustaining serious 
losses of their own. Those Meks 
posted along North Ridge were 
harassed almost continuously and 
finally were driven down with 
many losses. The circle around 
Castle Hagedorn became a cusp; 
then two days later, after the 
destruction of five more syrup 
depots, the Meks drew back even 
farther. Throwing up earthworks 
before the two tunnels leading 
under the south face of the crag, 
they established a more or less 
tenable defensive position, but 
now instead of beleaguering, 
they became the beleaguered, 
though still fighting. 
Within the area thus defended 
the Meks concentrated their remaining syrup stocks, tools, weapons, ammunition. The area outside the earthworks was floodlit 
after dark and guarded by Meks 
armed with pellet guns, making 
any frontal assault impractical. 
For a day the raiders kept to 
the shelter of the surrounding or
61 
chards, appraising the new situation. Then a new tactic was attempted. Six light carriages were 
improvised and loaded with bladders of a light inflammable oil, 
with a fire grenade attached. To 
each of these carriages ten Birds 
were harnessed, and at midnight 
sent aloft, with a man for each 
carriage. Flying high, the Birds 
then glided down through the 
darkness over the Mek position, 
where the fire bombs were dropped. 
The area instantly seethed with 
flame. The syrup depot burnt; 
the power -wagons, awakened by 
the flames, rolled frantically back 
and forth, crushing Meks and 
stores, colliding with each other, 
adding vastly to the terror of the 
flames. The Meks who survived 
took shelter in the tunnels. Certain of the floodlights were extinguished and, taking advantage 
of the confusion, the men attacked the earthworks. 
After a short bitter battle, the 
men killed all the sentinels and 
took up positions commanding 
the mouths of the tunnels, which 
now contained all that remained 
of the Mek army. It seemed as 
if the Mek uprising had been put 
down. 
XII 
nphe flames died. The human 
warriors — three hundred 
men from the castle, two hundred 
Expiationists and about three 
hundred Nomads — gathered 
about the tunnel mouth and, during the balance of the night, considered methods to deal with the 
immured Meks. 
At sunrise those men of Castle 
Hagedorn whose children and 
consorts were yet within the castle went to bring them forth. With 
them, upon their return, came a 
group of castle gentlemen : among 
them Beaudry, O. Z. Garr, Isseth, 
and Aure. They greeted their onetime peers, Hagedorn, Xanten, 
Claghom and others, crisply, but 
with a certain austere detachment, which recognized that loss 
of prestige incurred by those who 
fought Meks as if they were 
equals. 
“Now what is to happen?” 
Beaudry inquired of Hagedorn. 
“The Meks are trapped but you 
can’t bring them forth. Not impossibly they have syrup stored 
within for the power-wagons. 
They may well survive for 
months.” 
O. Z. Garr, assessing the situation from the standpoint of a military theoretician, came forward 
with a plane of action. “Fetch 
down the cannon — or have your 
underlings do so — and mount 
them on power-wagons. When 
the vermin are sufficiently weak, 
roll the cannon in and wipe out 
all but a labor force for the cas
GALAXY 
tie. We formerly worked four 
hundred, and this should suffice.” 
“Ha!” exclaimed Xanten. “It 
gives me great pleasure to inform 
you that this will never be. If 
any Meks survive they will repair the spaceships and instruct 
us in the maintenance and we 
will then transport them and 
Peasants back to their native 
worlds.” 
“How then do you expect us 
to maintain our lives?” demanded Garr coldly. 
“You have the syrup generator. Fit yourself with sacs and 
drink syrup.” 
C arr tilted back his head stared coldly down his nose. 
“This is your voice, yours alone, 
and your insolent opinion. Others 
are to be heard from. Hagedorn, 
is this your philosophy, that 
civilization should wither?” 
“It need not wither,” said Hagedorn, “provided that all of us 
— you as well as we — toil for 
it. There can be no more slaves. 
I have become convinced of 
this.” 
O. Z. Garr turned on his heel, 
swept back up the avenue into 
the castle, followed by the most 
traditional -minded of his comrades. A few moved aside and 
talked among themselves in low 
tones, with one or two black looks 
for Xanten and Hagedorn. 
THE LAST CASTLE 
From the ramparts of the castle came a sudden outcry; “The 
Meks! They are taking the castle! They swarm up the lower 
passages! Attack, save us!” 
The men below stared up in 
consternation. Even as they looked the castle portals swung shut. 
“How is this possible?” demanded Hagedorn. “I swear all 
entered the tunnels!” 
“It is only too clear,” said 
Xanten bitterly. “While they undermined, they drove a tunnel 
up to the lower levels!” 
Hagedorn started forward as if 
he would charge up the crag 
alone, then halted. “We must 
drive them out! Unthinkable that 
they pillage our castle!” 
“Unfortunately,” said Claghorn, “the walls bar us as effectually as they did the Meks.” 
“We can send up a force by 
Bird-car! Once we consolidate, 
we can exterminate them!” 
Claghorn shook his head. 
“They can wait on the ramparts 
and flight-deck and shoot down 
the Birds as they approach. Even 
if we secured a foothold there 
would be great bloodshed : one 
of us killed for every one of them. 
And they still outnumber us three 
or four to one.” 
Hagedorn groaned. “The 
thought of them revelling among 
my possessions, strutting about 
in my clothes, swilling my essences — it sickens me!” 
“Listen!” said Claghom. From 
on high they heard the hoarse 
yells of men, the crackle of energy-cannon. “Some of them, at 
least, hold out on the ramparts!” 
Xanten went to a nearby 
group of Birds who were for once 
awed and subdued by events. 
“Lift me up above the castle, 
out of range of the pellets, but 
where I can see what the Meks 
do!” 
“Care, take care!” croaked 
one of the Birds. “Ill things occur at the castle.” 
“Never mind! Convey me up, 
above the ramparts!” 
'T'he Birds lifted him, swung in 
a great circle around the 
crag and above the castle, sufficiently distant to be safe from 
the Mek pellet-guns. 
Beside those cannon which yet 
operated stood thirty men and 
women. Between the great Houses, the rotunda and the palace, 
everywhere the cannon could not 
be brought to bear, swarmed 
Meks. The plaza was littered 
with corpses: gentlemen, ladies 
and their children — all those 
who had elected to remain at 
Castle Hagedorn. 
At one of the cannon stood 
O. Z. Garr. Spying Xanten he 
gave a shout of hysterical rage, 
swung up the cannon, fired a bolt. 
The Birds, screaming, tried to 
swerve aside, but the bolt 
64 
smashed two. Birds, car, Xanten, 
fell in a great tangle. By some 
miracle, the four yet alive caught 
their balance and a hundred feet 
from the ground, with a frenzied 
groaning effort, they slowed 
their fall, steadied, hovered an 
instant, sank to the ground. 
Xanten staggered free of the 
tangle. Men came running. “Are 
you safe?” called Claghom. 
“Safe, yes. Frightened as well!” 
Xanten took a deep breath, went 
to sit on an outcrop of rock. 
“What’s happening up there?” 
asked Claghom. 
“All dead,” said Xanten, “all 
but a score. Garr has gone mad. 
He fired on me.” 
“Look! Meks on the ramparts!” 
cried A.L. Morgan. 
“There!” cried someone else. 
“Men! They jump! . No, they 
are flung!” 
Some were men, some were 
Meks whom they had dragged 
with them; with awful slowness 
they toppled to their deaths. No 
more fell. Castle Hagedorn was 
in the hands of the Meks. 
Xanten considered the complex silhouette, at once so familial and so strange. “They can’t 
hope to hold out. We need only 
destroy the sun-cells, and they 
can synthesize no syrup.” 
“Let us do it now,” said Claghom, “before they think of this 
and man the cannon! Birds!” 
He went off to give the orders, 
GALAXY 
and forty Birds, each clutching 
two rocks the size of a man’s 
head, flapped up, circled the 
castle and presently returned to 
report the sun-cells had been destroyed. 
Xanten said, “All that remains 
is to seal the tunnel entrances 
against a sudden eruption, which 
might catch us off guard — then 
patience.” 
“What of the Peasants in the 
stables — and the Phanes?” asked 
Hagedorn in a forlorn voice. 
Xanten gave his head a slow 
shake. “He who was not an Expiationist before must become 
one now.” 
Claghom muttered, “They can 
survive two months at most — 
no more.” 
But two months passed, and 
three months, and four months. 
Then one morning the great portals opened, a haggard Mek 
stumbled forth. 
He signaled: “Men: we starve. 
We have maintained your treasures. Give us our lives or we destroy all before we die.” 
Claghom responded : “These 
are our terms. We give you your 
lives. You must clean the castle, 
remove and bury the corpses. 
You must repair the spaceships 
and teach us all you know regarding them. We will then transport you to Etamin Nine.” 
“The terms you offer are accepted.” 
THE LAST CASTLE 
F ive years later Xanten and 
Glys Meadowsweet, with 
their two children, had reason to 
travel north from their home 
near Sande River. They took occasion to visit Castle Hagedorn, 
where now lived only two or 
three dozen folk, among them 
Hagedorn. 
He had aged, so it seemed to 
Xanten. His hair was white; his 
face, once bluff and hearty, had 
become thin, almost waxen. 
Xanten could not determine his 
mood. 
They stood in the shade of a 
walnut tree, with castle and crag 
looming above them. “This is 
now a great museum,” said Hagedom. “I am curator, and this 
will be the function of all the 
Hagedorns who come after me, 
for there is incalculable treasure 
to guard and maintain. Already 
the feeling of antiquity has come 
to the castle. The Houses are 
alive with ghosts. I see them often, especially on the nights of 
the fetes . Ah, those were the 
times, were they not, Xanten?” 
“Yes indeed,” said Xanten. He 
touched the heads of his two 
children. “Still, I have no wish 
to return to them. We are men 
now, on our own world, as we 
never were before.” 
Hagedorn gave a somewhat regretful assent. He looked up at 
the vast structure, as if now were 
the first occasion he had laid eyes 
on it. “The folk of the future — 
what will they think of Castle 
Hagedorn? Its treasures, its 
books, its tabards?” 
“They will come, they will 
marvel,” said Xanten. “Almost 
as I do today.” 
“There is much at which to 
marvel. Will you come within, 
Xanten? There are still flasks of 
noble essence laid by.” 
“Thank you no,” said Xanten. 
“There is too much to stir old 
memories. We will go our way, 
and I think that we will do so 
immediately.” 
Hagedorn nodded sadly. “I understand very well. I myself am 
often given to reverie these days. 
Well then, good-by, and journey 
home with pleasure.” 
“We will do so, Hagedorn. 
Thank you and good-by,” said 
Xanten, and turned away from 
Castle Hagedorn, toward the 
world of men. — JACK VANCE 
EARTHBLOOD 
He was raised as a freak in the slums of 
a galaxy owned by aliens — because he 
was that contemptible creature, a Man! 
Don't miss this thrilling novel by sciencefictions' most exciting new writing team I 
by Keith Laumer 
and Rosel G. Brown 
In the same issue: In the Temple of Mars, by Fred Saberhagen; 
The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress, by Robert A. Heinlein; and many 
more! Don't miss the big April issue of IF, on sale at all newsstands now! 
^ idudryd 
U ntil I find Rudyard Kipling’s 
model for style and plot 
structure, I have to assume he 
really was that rare bird, the 
innovator. Any attempt to assign 
him a fairly high order of creative accomplishment has got to 
have the backing of science-fiction readers, since so many of our 
best storytellers work as if they 
had absorbed a great deal from 
him. There is Heinlein, there is 
Poul Anderson, there are any 
number of lesser luminaries — 
there is Kipling himself, and 
very much like Cordwainer 
Smith, too, in “As Easy as ABC,” 
though more like Heinlein in 
“With the Night Mail,” or like 
Avram Davidson in “Wireless.” 
Honest craftsmen, all, and givers 
of value for money; names any 
reader is happy to see blurbed on 
a magazine cover. Dune (Chilton; 
394 text pages, several appendices, a glossary, a biographical 
dictionary and a map, $5.95) is 
Frank Herbert’s bid to have his 
name stand among them. 
Herbert is that exasperating 
creature, the writer of great 
promise. In the 1950’s he wrote 
Under Pressure, subsequently 
titled The Dragon in The Sea and 
21st-Century Sub in various editions. In that hypnotically fascinating book, he displayed a variety of uncommon gifts: intelligence, sophistication, a capacity 
for research and the ability to 
write clean prose as an unobtrusive but effective vehicle for a 
cleanly told story. Good as it 
was. Under Pressure would have 
benefitted by having both its 
opening and closing chapters edited down ruthlessly; other than 
that, there was nothing to quarrel 
with. Once he was under weigh 
with his real story, and clear up 
to the point where his submarine 
voyagers were home and the 
prose had nearly run out, he sustained a narrative drive any 
storyteller of any time or tradition would have admired. 
His approach then was rather 
similar to that which Alistair 
MacLean was just beginning to 
promulgate in the world of suspense literature — hit ’em with 
everything but the kitchen sink, 
then give ’em the sink, and when 
they raise their heads, drop the 
plumber on ’em. It was fast, very 
20th century pragmatic style: 
“Said the captain: ‘There’s a 
smell of carrion in the reactor 
room.’ Broke in the navigator: 
‘We’re aground!’ ” In context, this 
was daringly direct technique, 
used with a magnificent disdain 
for the first novelist’s usual bugaboo, self-consciousness. 
On reading Under Pressure in 
first publication, all that another 
writer for the same market could 
think about was that next time 
Herbert would obviously solve 
his one remaining problem — 
his inability to start a story on 
the first page and end it on the 
last — and then look out, Charlie. 
And then Herbert caught The 
Disease. The Disease, harking 
back to Para. 1, is what happens 
to a writer if he draws wrong con68 
elusions from the fact that Kipling also managed to publish 
“The Army of a Dream.” 
We do not see our own mistakes, and we do not profit from 
the mistakes of others; we seek 
profit by trafficking according to 
what we think we saw. Frank 
Herbert is back, with the same 
intelligence, sophistication and 
knack for doing his homework. 
He has shaken off his seemingly 
interminable fascination with the 
story-ized lecture. Clinging to the 
Kipling template, it is as if he 
had finally paged forward to the 
greener years in his set of the 
Complete Works. There is not 
one moment, one character in 
Dune that speaks of Frank Herbert’s time and what could have 
been done about it but was left 
undone. From first to last, the 
book is concerned with the time 
of Paul Atreides, yclept Muad’Dib, hight The Prophet of Dune, 
Emperor of the Universe and bastard son of Duke Leto. 
The time lives. It breathes, it 
speaks, and Herbert has smelt it 
in his nostrils. If the little foureyed clerk of Victoria’s day could 
or can see what was in Herbert’s 
marrow when he first conceived 
Dune perfect in his mind, that 
easily wounded mouth would 
have quirked and those narrow 
shoulders would have drooped a 
little before the congratulations 
came out. 
But we are not yet the omnipathetic departed, and we have 
to simply read the words. What 
we find, dulling the fine creation 
and shrouding it as surely but not 
as stingingly as the storms of 
Paul’s Arrakis, are the words — 
the twisting, sub-plotted, ravelled edge of unhemmed selvage at 
the margins of the strong whole 
cloth. Herbert has chucked MacLeanism, he has chucked Kipling’s mistake; but instead of seeing his own mistake he has elaborated it. Being intelligent and 
sophisticated, he has made the 
elaboration most enjoyable. But 
if he thinks — if you think — that 
the reason Dune turns flat and 
tails off at the end is because even 
fmir hundred pages cannot encompass it properly, please consider instead the possibility that 
200 pages would have sufficed 
even for an epic. The odyssey 
is not that long. Nor Beowulf, 
' nor the narrative of the New 
Testament. 
M ost of you have surely read 
it by now, or parts of it — I 
can count on the fingers of one 
hand the interesting books I had 
not read by the time the reviews 
hit print, and why should you be 
any different? So you know that 
it is the story of the child of 
scorn, outcast among his own 
people, raised by desert wolves, 
product of a mystical union long 
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 
ago foretold, who comes from the 
hinterland as Messiah with legends and fierce beasts at his beck, 
to reclaim not only his own stolen 
heritage and the reputation of 
his mother but also the lost birthright of all the downtrodden 
everywhere. Robert Heinlein 
would call it the Little Tailor 
story, I believe; whatever you 
call it, it is the stulf of legend. 
Herbert has dressed it with fantastic industry. The sandworld of 
Arrakis is detailed down to every 
last bit of its ecology; the society 
of the desert-dwelling Fremen 
is convincingly described to its 
minutiae — the amount Herbert 
had to know and transmit about 
their local adaptations of the universal Semitic language (and 
what he had to know about the 
universal language, and linguistics in general) is worth at least 
one Ph.D. and the Chair of Philology at a ’ good New England 
college. The universal society, 
which hangs on Arrakis continued production of melange for 
the CHOAM Company and the 
Spacers’ Guild to live on — to 
say nothing of the age-old protomessianic activities of the Bene 
Gesserit — are almost as closely 
detailed. (The appendices, which 
set it all forth in expository prose, 
are not to be believed unless 
seen and marvelled at). To this, 
add bard Gurney Halleck’s instant willingness to snatch off a 
strain on the baliset ad libitum 
and ex tempore; the tortured 
Wellington Yeuh, the two Mentats, the various slithy toves of 
House Harkonnen, and even the 
industrious Princess Irulan . 
But what comes of all these 
people? In the disaster that seems 
to destroy House Atriedes — and 
casts Paul and Jessica out upon 
the desert, and at last gets the 
story back into motion after a 
skillfully elaborated but zeromomentum hiatus following 
Chapter One — Gurney and Thufir Hawat, the Atreides mentat, 
are cast adrift from the dead 
Duke Leto and seemingly from 
their allegiance to House Atreides. They almost instantly acquire new allegiances, reserving 
only the right to kill Jessica, 
whom they mistake for a traitress. They are elaborately set in 
motion on new courses, just as if 
each were the hero of another 
story altogether; the wordage is 
effective, but meanwhile time is 
fleeting, the story of Paul Muad’Dib is dissipating. 
When at last this pair of subplots ties back into the story of 
Paul and moves forward along 
a truly tragic course after tens 
of thousands of words as they 
raise their knives to strike Jessica down, Paul steps out from 
behind the hangings and says: 
“No, fellows, it was all a mistake,” and they say “Oh — ’scuse 
70 
me, Ma’am,” and go away. They 
are, in a word, blown. From the 
time of the Harkonnonen raid on 
Arrakis, they move the story forward not a millimicron, not a tittle. Herbert was juggling too 
many people, too many sub-plots. 
Clearly, too, he had made the 
reader too many promises he 
was not able to keep when it 
came time to pay off, whatever 
his original plan. 
The thudding anti-climaxes 
of Hawat’s and Halleck’s failure 
to do anything dramatic — even 
wet their pants — when push 
comes to shove with Jessica, are 
by no means the most glaring 
cases of this. As the book begins 
to exhaust Herbert’s sheer ability 
to transcribe his idea, one thihg 
after another is tossed off lamely. Shaddam IV, Emperor of the 
Universe, arrives on Arrakis only 
because Herbert has not yet developed a way for Paul to force 
the Spacers’ Guild to transport 
him in chase of the master quarry. At least, I could see no other 
reason for such a transcendent 
monarch to pitch his tent on the 
only dangerous ground in all 
Creation. When Shaddam’s fall 
comes, it comes almost casually — after all, Herbert has known 
for months, perhaps years, what 
his payoff scene will be, and he 
has had much time to grow bored with it. What a light puff of 
breeze it takes to collapse the 
Imperial dynasty, and how quickly it is all told, compared to the 
many pages in which Paul and 
Jessica simply walk, their footfalls, fearful of awakening the 
sandworms, no lighter than the 
dry rustle with which a galactic 
society is overthrown. 
It is all there, mind you — all 
that matters, anyway. But it is 
told, in the end, not shown, and 
truly effective villains suddenly 
simper and melt; fierce men and 
cunning statesmen and seeresses, 
all bend before this new Messiah, 
who, sad to say, has the milkwhite pallor of the wan Christ 
that 2000 years of religiosity have 
chromolithographed for us, and 
none of the bum and brawn of 
the carpenter of Galilee. Too 
much time was spent in showing 
us the boy and his playmate/ 
tutors; too much time was spent 
in showing us his mother. She 
is noble and tight-lipped, but in 
fact she is an essentially foolish 
creature who collapses at the 
first true challenge. Nevertheless, 
she continues to be discussed as 
if she were important for some 
intrinsic worth of her own personality, though, true, she also 
does nothing after all those words 
of build-up toward one short 
scene. 
But he could have saved it; he 
could have, if he hadn’t — incredibly— had Paul’s infant son 
killed offstageO') Paul and 
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 
Chani, his leman, recover beautifully. They go off into the universal dawn hand-in-hand, as if 
the child of the Messiah were 
nothing more than something a 
pair of adolescents had left on 
the grass and now would deny if 
called to claim it; as if any child 
were no more than that. You can 
make a lot of mistakes in a book, 
in a career, in a life, and still 
come out pretty well when the 
average is totted up. But it seems 
to me that you cannot be so busy 
saving a world that you cannot 
hear an infant shriek. 
N ow Rick Raphael cannot carry Herbert’s shoes when it 
comes to prose or creating people; in fact, there has been fortunately little prose and dialogue 
like that in Code Three (Simon 
& Schuster, $3.95) since Arcot, 
Wade and Morey. I forget whether it was Damon Knight or Jim 
Blish who first remarked on the 
painful banter that passes for wit 
and humor in this kind of story 
about technicians: 
“Hey,” Clay called out, “I’ve 
got a real hot doll in Toronto, and 
I’ll gladly sell her phone number for a proper price.” 
“Wouldn’t want to hurt you, 
Clay,” the other officer replied. 
“If I called her up and took her 
out, she’d throw rocks at you 
the next time you drew the run. 
It’s all for your own good.” 
Quod erat demonstrandum, he 
averred learnedly, a disclaiming 
grin creasing his broad- jawed 
face as his blunt-fingered, competent hands began dealing with 
the fouled ribbon. 
Oddly enough, unless there is 
some great conspiracy — and 
that’s not impossible — real airmen and astronauts really do talk 
to each other that way. At least, 
they do if we are to believe such 
pseudodocumentary novelists as 
Hank Searls and such reporters 
as ex-Planet letterhack Martin 
Caidin, who are forever quoting 
them thus in such books as The 
Big X, Thunderbirds and Everything But the Flak. This subschool of literature — the interchangeable novel and biography 
of the 20th century engine-driver, 
sometimes slopping over into 
something like sf but really like 
the Gus Wilson’s Model Garage 
stories — has been making good 
money of late ( The Pilgrim Project, Marooned) and it was only 
a matter of time before someone 
tried technocentric procedural fiction on the science-fiction magazines. Of all the attempts, I think 
Raphael’s stories of the throughway police of the future are the 
most successful, and they are 
what is gathered here, out of 
three pieces. 
In the future here given, all 
North America is laced by great 
highways — fixed, not rolling — 
72 
on which ordinary civilians drive 
cars capable of 500 mph and 
more. Obviously, some sort of 
super-cop and super-car are required to keep these incompetents from killing in droves. Most 
of the time, this is accomplished 
with such cars as Beulah, crewed by such trios as Sergeant Ben 
Martin, Trooper Clay Ferguson 
and Medical - Surgical Officer 
Kelly Lightfoot, the latter a girl 
of curious description. (See farther). Beulah is an accident ward, 
fire engine, jail, armored car, 
wrecker and pursuit vehicle all 
in one; she cruises on ten-day 
patrols, her crew sleeping and 
eating on board, on eleven-month 
tours of duty. In the first third 
of the book, she chases down a 
pair of bank robbers ducking on 
and off the transcontinental road, 
pursuing over great distances and 
at enormous speeds. In the second third, she deals with an attempt to fix a speeding ticket. 
These simple threads of story 
are followed along in documentary fashion; we are told every 
detail of Beulah’s equipment, we 
have explained to us the political 
situation — no single nation could 
afford to support the roads required to contain the constantly 
faster cars being turned out by 
industry, and thus there is a 
North American Thruway Authority — and while the main 
thread is being spun, we are 
shown numerous day-to-day occurrences, each of them quite 
real-sounding, all apparently 
worked out in keen detail on the 
basic postulate. We are shown 
the relationships between crew as 
instrument of duty and crew as 
individuals — Ben Martin is the 
daddy, Clay is the young son 
sowing his wild oats, Kelly Lightfoot is remarkably like Clarissa 
MacDougal in the presence of the 
Laird. Whom to hold to account 
for the fact that all this is repeated, from third to third, as 
the novelettes are pasted together? Nobody, I suppose — it seems 
to be inherent in the genre that 
all the switches get read off repeatedly, and what the hell, 
maybe the reader doesn’t remember from one page to the 
next. 
Whom do we go to for redress 
against the following sort of 
prose? 
“. creating impossible situations toward uniform safety control.” 
“Within the five-mile-wide 
bands of the thruways — all federally owned land by each of the 
three nations — ” 
“. designed almost identically from models on the moon 
run — 
“The olive-skinned red head 
grinned at him . (I told you 
she was curiously described). 
u . ... a complete dispensary, 
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 
one that would have made . 
even the light-surgery rooms of 
earlier-day hospitals proud.” 
That’s all within the first dozen pages, mind you — after a 
while, the mind numbs, or one 
realizes one is in an alternate universe. The latter possibility seems 
likely r though Raphael keeps 
tripping over the assertion that 
somehow you can get Grandma 
to drive 500 mph but you can’t 
build a plane she’d feel safe — 
and be safer — handling, I don’t 
believe it for a second. And the 
notion of Canada and Mexico 
having so much surplus capital 
that they can not only support 
their own Thruway portions but 
can pitch in to help out Old Yankee Imperialismo, thus making 
the Thruways possible . Somehow, the social revolution Raphael would need to explain this 
is not to be found in these pages. 
And how to explain that in all 
that roadbed, there was not room 
for some control device that 
would at least touch a charged 
wand to a powerplant and short 
out the ignition? Is it feasible to 
declare repeatedly that rising 
speed capabilities for grandma s 
car are to be met by raising speed 
limits? 
Is it, in the last analysis, logical to even consider building a 
new police car, known as The 
Bomb, capable of speeds in excess of 1200 mph? One, I doubt 
the engineering that will permit 
it to rise twenty feet on on its air 
cushions and yet not become truly 
airborne at that forward velocity. 
A loaf of white bread would have 
considerable lift capabilities at 
that speed, and the smooth contour of the Bomb — Raphael 
causes me to visualize it as a B-47 
fuselage — ought actually to bristle with spoilers, JATO units 
pointed up and forward, drag 
chute cubbies and, most certainly, parachute ejection seat tracks 
for the hapless crew. 
And yet — and yet this unworkable monster in this unworkable world does, at last, draw 
real blood. Ben Martin, married 
to Kelly Lightfoot in the final 
third, dies testing it (He — that 
is, Raphael — gives all the wrong 
reasons, but he too knows it won’t 
work, and hopes “they” will hurry up soon with the not foolproof, terribly dumb family car 
Raphael plans to foist on the 
civilians he can’t get to drive airplanes). He dies because except 
for himself and Clay Ferguson, 
who like all patrolmen have gotten the equivalent of graduate 
degrees before being allowed on 
the force, all other patrolmen are 
either ignorant or psychotic, by 
Raphael’s own description of 
them, except when they utter 
man-to-man dialogue. But he 
does die, and it is a shocking 
thing despite Kelly’s Susan Hay74 
ward reaction. Mind you, now, 
Beulah, Ferguson, Lightfoot, the 
Thruways and Authority are the 
heroes of this story; they could 
not exist in their dedication and 
cameraderie without the motorist, and they all depend on each 
other for life itself. Now: 
“She’s right,” Ferguson said 
bitterly, “it wasn’t fair to kill 
him so that the stupid lemmings 
could be held back from the sea 
for an instant. The miserable 
rotten, driving lemmings.” He 
spat into the dirt. 
You know what Raphael was 
trying to do, all along, all that 
weary, painful way? He was trying to say something; move 
somebody, show somebody. Now, 
I can’t presume to say what that 
something and somebody might 
be. But Ferguson’s response is 
180 degree away from what the 
good hero of the engine-driver 
novel should do. He is stripping 
himself of all the defenses these 
heroes put up; he is trampling 
the Errol Flynn tradition that 
you risk your neck for fun, the 
Heinlein tradition that the roads 
must roll because civilization 
needs them, the C. S. Forrester 
tradition that you do your duty 
’cause you’re steadfast but stupid. He has turned his back on 
Nevil Shute, and on Venus Equilateral, and for all I know is 
speaking for Boskone. 
Of course, in all those years 
of education it never occurred to 
him to patrol 500 mph highways 
in a 750 mph VTOL aircraft version of Beulah, so perhaps he, like 
Grandma, is a creature of curious 
inhibitions and neurotic reflexes. 
But it was nice — it was real, 
with the crack of reality, when 
he opened up like that; it is too 
much to hope for a plain state
ment from Raphael, but a truth 
of some kind . that turned out 
to be possible. Which makes 
Code Three — of all the unlikely 
contenders — more genuinely a 
realized story on its own terms 
than Dune is on its terms. We 
are talking about two different 
sets of standards, of course, but, 
still . 
— ALGIS BUDRYS 
★ ★ ★ ★ ★ 
FORECAST 
Hardly a month goes by without some fresh and revelatory breakthrough in the cracking of the DNA-RNA genetic code. If we cannot 
right now, at this moment in time, control our own genetic chemistry 
enough to shape our bodies — and brains! — into the exact form we 
wish, certainly we can say, right now, that that time is in the foreseeable 
future. Assume it is here. Assume we can rebuild a fertilized ovum, almost 
at the moment of conception, according to any genetic blueprint we like. 
What do we do with that power? 
In the next Galaxy Frank Herbert begins a two-part serial that traces 
out some of those answers for us. In his world life is shaped o a p'on; 
death is not so much a termination of a life as the withdrawal from the 
market of a no longer competitive artifact; power lies in the hands ot 
thousands of individuals, any one of whom can destroy any other person 
alive on the earth - or all of them. The title is Heisenberg's Eyes, and 
we think you'll put it right up there with such other famous Frank Herbert 
classics as Dune and The Dragon in the Sea. 
What else? The last of Robert Silverberg's 'Blue Fire" novelettes, to 
begin with; this one called Open the Sky Hayden Howard s The Eskimo 
Invasion. Shorts to fill; Willy Ley's column; Algis Budrys attent, ongetting book reviews. We also have on hand a handsome selectwhy 
Paul Anderson, Jack Vance, Keith Laumer, Gordon R. Dickson, James 
Blish and Norman L. Knight to choose from over the next few issues 
to name but a few — so it looks like a pretty good year 
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 
The Crystal Prison 
by FRITZ LEIBER 
The Old People knew what was best 
for the kids of forty and under. Too 
bad the children didn't appreciate it! 
44 A /T y Great Granny will trade 
three balls of gray string, 
big as grapefruit,” Jack said to 
the girl. He was an 18-year-old 
boy — in Oldlands you didn’t become a young man or woman until 30, or a voter until 65. The 
new antibiotics, carcinophages 
and cell-restorers had upped life 
expectancy to 350 years. Jack 
had a narrow sunny face and 
brown crew-cut hair, but he looked plump because he was wearing a suit lined with thick foam 
rubber, so he wouldn’t break a 
bone or a priceless chair if he 
bumped anything, and colored 
white, so any dirt he got on it 
would show. A month ago he had 
discovered in the 3-foot-deep 
swimming pool that it floated 
beautifully, but Great Granny 
had given him the- treatment of 
“You’re worrying me into a heart 
attack before I’m 200.” Around 
his neck was a silver dollar with 
a glistening listen-whisper jutting 
up by his jaw. 
4 CAT y Great Great Aunt will 
trade her two string-balls, 
one red, one green, for them,” 
Candy replied. “They’re big as 
the Temple oranges of Holy 
Florida and the green has a gold 
thread in it.” At 17, Candace had 
long black hair and a slim face 
like amused moonlight, but you 
could hardly see it because of 
the black burnoose her Great 
Great Aunt made her wear 
against sunburn and to assure 
she’d reach 30 properly modest. 
She had once tried to give up 
wearing it indoors, outside her 
bedroom. But only once. “Little 
girls of 17 are not to be seen, 
especially their legs.” You could, 
however, see the gleam of her 
silver collar. 
“That’s trading 300 yards for 
about 70,” Jack objected, 
prompted by his listen-whisper. 
“How many knots have your 
string-balls got hidden in them?” 
Candy demanded, prompted by 
hers. 
“1,327,” Jack admitted. “Granny had me count.” 
While their mouths were saying these things, their eyes were 
saying something else. It was 
strange. 
4 C A Tine have only 19,” Candy 
-LV.L sneered. “No deal, unless 
you throw in the broken birdcage 
... or some tea bags.” 
“My knots are all square knots 
” Jack began, but then his listen-whisper blatted audibly. 
“You’re possessions-mad, 
Grace! That would violate senior citizens’ fair-trading laws.” 
“You and your dirty string, all 
knots!” Candy’s blatted back. 
The teen-agers faced each other across a road wide enough for 
two oldsters’ electric wheelchairs 
to pass. Behind each of them 
was a large handcart piled high 
with choice oldster treasures arranged very neatly. From their 
collars silver wires trailed back 
past de-thorned bushes up deinsected tidy green hills to two 
sweet cottages, smothered in artificial flowers, which smiled at 
each other like camouflaged 
tanks across the narrow road. Behind each cottage stood a larger 
storage barn. 
Some progressive oldsters let 
their youngsters play and run errands and record diet-and-health 
gossip and do trading deals on 
collars only radio-linked to home. 
THE CRYSTAL PRISON 
But wired collars seemed wisest 
to most, including Jack’s and 
Candy’s guardians. True, a girl 
had recently been strangled when 
her wire snagged in a tree she 
was climbing and she slipped. But 
she shouldn’t have been climbing 
the tree. You always had to pay 
a price for safety and freedom 
from worry. 
Besides, although the Oldlands 
police snagged 99 of 100 runaway 
youngsters headed for Freeshore, 
there was always that risk too. 
The close-clipped vacuumed 
landscape was dotted at 100yard intervals with 125-foot gray 
pillars like the trunks of giant 
pines identically lightning-blasted. 
Although the sun shone brightly and the blue sky was gay with 
cirrus clouds, the air was somewhat stuffy, very still, and smelled just a touch of old newspapers, sour milk and soap. This 
was because of the invisible glasstic roof Which was supported by 
the pillars and kept out of Oldlands all dangerous weather, including draughts. 
44 '|~\on’t gape and dawdle, 
k~) Jack,” his listen-whisper prompted. 
He said to Candy, “I’ve got 
all 2,396 back issues of Garbage 
Art and Junk Beautiful.” 
“I’ve got them too,” she retorted. “Your Gran just wants 
more storage space.” 
“Liar,” Jack said. His hand 
held at his side, he crooked a finger at the girl. They pulled their 
carts closer together and knelt 
down in front of them, so they 
were hidden from the cottages. 
“What are you doing, Candace?” her listen-whisper demanded. “Don’t block the road, 
boy,” was Great Granny’s contribution. 
“About those tea bags,” the 
girl said quickly toward Jack. “I 
have 57 copies of the Geriatric 
Observer and Daily Diet to trade 
— just the sort of newspaper to 
spread over plastic tablecloth 
covers to keep them from getting 
dull.” 
“Well,” Jack replied loudly, 
“I have 63 tea bags — used, of 
course, but dried out nicely.” He 
wasn’t looking at Candy, he was 
letting down a large hinged door 
in the bottom of his cart. 
“Those might be acceptable,” 
Candy bargained. “My Great 
Great Aunt seldom uses fresh 
tea bags. The used ones make her 
feel more saving." She said this 
reverently, but her lips were 
laughing, especially when she saw 
the wrinkled gray tea bags neatly 
lined up on a shelf of Jack’s cart, 
like mummified mice. Then her 
eyes became wild with excitement as Jack drew a life-size 
figure out of the false bottom of 
his cart and sat it beside him. 
78 
She clapped a hand over her 
mouth to keep from exclaiming 
and she wagged the other hand 
and her eyes implored. 
Jack snatched an antique aluminum coughdrop box from a 
pocket in his bump-proof white 
suit. From it he quickly took a 
bumblebee on a two-inch thread 
with a square of Stick-Tite tape 
at the other end, which he rapidly stuck to his collar just by the 
whisper -listen. The bee buzzed 
madly and its wings rattled 
against the silver metal. 
“Oh, a bee!” Candy squealed 
in terror, leaning forward so 
that her listen-whisper was close 
to Jack’s. 
“It must have got in from the 
Freeshore through the Killing 
Wall,” Jack shrilled frightenedly. 
Both of them were grinning. 
“Lovely bee,” Candy said with 
her lips as it buzzed close to 
them. 
From the cottages up the hills 
came faintly the sound of windows being slammed shut. 
TT er voice masked to the listen whispers by the buzzing, 
Candy whispered, “Oh, she’s 
beautiful, Jack. I wouldn’t have 
made her nearly as beautiful.” 
She was referring to the robot 
duplicate of herself sitting by 
Jack and dressed in pearl-gray 
sweater, slacks and sandals. 
“No, you wouldn’t,” Jack 
GALAXY 
whispered back gruffly. “And 
you would have been wrong, so 
that’s why I had to build her.” 
“Can I hear her talk?” 
•‘Yes, once, but then you got 
to work fast,” Jack said curtly. 
He felt the figure’s side for a 
button under the sweater, then 
pressed. 
The robot Candy blinked her 
eyes and smiled — a little sadly, 
Candy fancied — and nodded her 
head and softly said, “Yes.” 
“That’s about all her vocabulary,” Jack admitted, “except 
for repeating things people tell 
her.” 
“ ‘Yes’ is the only word she’ll 
need with G-G Aunty,” Candy said. “Her repeat-talk will 
let her do trading and dietgossip.” She was already turned 
away and letting down a door in 
the bottom of her cart. Jack 
reached in his secret compartment for what looked like a thick 
green rug, rolled up tight. Then 
he looked at the robot, dressed 
almost identically to the first, 
which Candy had produced. 
“Hey, I’m not that good-looking,” he objected, his eyes a bit 
dreamy. At that moment the 
bumblebee stung him on the 
chin, but he hardly winced. 
“Says you,” Candy replied 
smugly. 
“You remember to steal your 
key?” Jack growled, holding out 
his hand. 
THE CRYSTAL PRISON 
Candy wrinkled her nose and 
dropped a silver key in his palm, 
then turned around. 
“I made him look just like 
you,” she said. “I’ll admit I 
couldn’t have installed the servomotors and batteries without 
your help.” 
“I couldn’t have done the cybernetic circuits without yours, 
Jack said. By that time her silver 
collar had been unlocked from 
her neck and snapped around her 
robot’s. The robot-Candy looked 
unhappy at that. Silly, Candy 
told herself, robots can’t feel. 
Then she had Jack’s key and 
was fitting it into the tiny keyhole in the back of his collar. 
I n a lull in the bee’s buzzing, 
Jack’s whisper-listen blatted 
quaveringly, “Jack, my boy, can 
you speak?” “Yes,” Jack and his 
robot replied simultaneously. 
“Are you dead, son?” the emotional voice went on. “Yes,” the 
robot-jack responded, but Jack 
overrode that with, “No, Great 
Granny, but that awful bee is 
still menacing us,” whereupon 
the bee buzzed madly again as if 
on cue. “Good boy,” Jack called 
to it. His collar was around his 
robot’s neck now. 
Candy whipped off her black 
burnoose while Jack lost time 
squirming out of his white antibump suit. For a moment all 
four were dressed alike in gray 
and looked like two pairs of 
identical twins. Then it was 
Candy’s robot who was dressed 
like an Arab girl, black-cloaked 
and hooded, while with some difficulty they wormed the cumbersome foam-rubber suit onto the 
Jack robot. 
Candy looked at the two silver 
keys in her hand. Somewhere 
down the road a siren sounded 
faintly. She slipped one key each 
into the pockets of the two robots. 
Jack frowned and almost said 
something, but instead captured 
the bumblebee, still straining for 
freedom, in the antique coughdrop box. “Not until Freeshore, 
old boy,” he told the insect. 
“Are you holding out, Candace?” G-G Aunty demanded 
from the whisper-listen and then 
at the robot’s reply, “Good, just 
keep your hood shut. It won’t be 
much longer — we’ve called the 
police.” 
“It can’t sting you through the 
rubber. Cover your face with 
your arms, boy, and pray,” 
Great Granny contributed. 
The siren sounded again, much 
closer now, reverberating against 
the invisible glasstic sky. 
“Come on!” Jack whispered 
sharply, grabbing up the green 
cylinder. Together he and Candy 
wormed their way, like soldiers 
infiltrating, between the bushes, 
away from the cottages and the 
siren, until they had some con80 
cealment behind them and a wide 
long lawn ahead. Then he unrolled the cylinder until it looked 
exactly like a thick green rug 
about 6 feet by 4 and the same 
color as the grass. In one corner 
was a gray metal square set with 
two buttons and a joystick. 
Jack hit one of the buttons 
and the carpet stiffened flat and 
hard. 
“It’s a bomb, Candy!” Jack 
cheered softly. “An electronic 
cyclone. Crawl aboard.” 
' As they did that, Jack explained, “Dad smuggled it to me 
through a friend of his who’s a 
free trader.” 
J ack’s widowed father and Candy’s divorced mother had 
both had, separately, to leave 
Oldlands for Freeshore many 
years before. They had tried to 
take their children with them, 
but there had been a custody 
fight and as generally happens in 
the Oldlands courts, the oldest 
litigants had won out — especially 
in this case because neither Jack’s 
father nor Candy’s mother were 
yet of voting age; Candy’s mother had been under thirty — a 
child. And because rich Oldlands 
almost always won out in the 
courts against money-poor Freeshore. 
When he and Candy were 
stretched side by side, Jack hit 
the second button. The green car
GALAXY 
pet lifted four inches and hovered. Air sucked in at the .front 
end of the carpet hissed down 
through a million tiny holes. 
The strange ship rocked a little, 
not much. 
Just then a bullet-snouted blue 
police car nosed into sight on the 
road behind them, traveling at 
least 35 miles an hour. With a 
final blast of its siren, it carefully braked to a stop between 
the junk carts. Up from it stood 
four spry oldsters in blue, their 
heads hooded with mesh like 
beekeepers’. One held in his heavily gauntleted hands an insect 
spray, the second an insect rifle, 
the third a pinpoint death-ray. 
The fourth lifted a bullhorn to 
his masked mouth. His voice 
rang from the glasstic sky: “Bee 
at targe! Bee at large! Where’s 
the person around here reported 
a bee at large?” 
Then he looked down. “Oh, 
was it you kids?” 
Jack and Candy gripped hands 
and grinned at each other as they 
heard their robots answer together, “Yes.” This was instantly 
followed by the listen-whispers 
on the silver rings blatting, 
“We’ll tell you all about it, officers. Come home, Candace. 
Come home, Jack,” and by another two obedient calls of 
“Yes.” 
Then Jack pulled back on the 
joystick, and the carpet leaned 
THE CRYSTAL PRISON 
forward, air hissed from the back 
end too, and it went skimming 
off across the green lawn. It lifted over the bushes and arrowed 
between the gray pillars and 
swung wide of the senior citizens’ dormitories and cottages 
that kept whipping into view. 
He said in her ear. “You know, 
111 miss Great Granny.” 
“And I’ll miss G-G Auntie,” 
she replied. “They weren’t really bad, just terribly scared and 
lonely.” 
He nodded. “And maybe a 
little possessive too,” he added, 
almost doubtfully. 
She said, “I’m bothered about 
our robots. We thought they’d 
just fool G-G and G-Gran long 
enough to let us get to Freeshore. But now I think they’ll go 
on fooling them forever. And then 
— I know this is foolish — they’ll 
be as unhappy as we were.” 
He said, “If they ever do grow 
minds, they can escape to Freeshore too. You left them their 
keys.” 
And then there was only the 
rusing wind and the flashing pillars and the dizzying lawns and 
musty cottages as they sped, faster and faster, toward Freelands 
and wild bees and wild spiders 
and wild tigers, and firecrackers 
and loud jazz and the open life 
and open sky and danger and 
spaceships and the stars.. 
—FRITZ LEIBER 
Millions worshipped the man who 
had been martyred. What would 
they do now that he was revived?
Illustrated by MORROW
SFGRAM_START_SILVERBERG
I 
Lazarus was trusting and 
without guile. But the men whose 
hearts were hard came upon him 
and slew him in the night, and 
fed his body to the converter so 
that not even 'a molecule remained. And when Vorst learned 
of their deed, he wept and said, 
I wish you had slain me instead, 
for now you have given him an 
immortality he can never lose. 
— The Book of Lazarus 
M ars Monotrack One, the 
main line, ran from east 
to west like a girdle of concrete 
flanking the planet’s western 
hemisphere. To the north lay the 
Lake District with its fertile 
fields; to the south, closer to the 
equator, was the belt of throbbing compressor stations that had 
done so much to foster the miracle. The discerning eye could 
still make out the old craters and 
gouges of the landscape, hidden 
now under a dusting of sawtooth 
grass and occasional forests of 
pine. 
The gray concrete pylons of 
the monotrack marched to the 
horizon. Spurs carried the line 
to the settlements of the outlands, and they were always adding new spurs as the new settlements sprouted. Logistically, it 
might have been simpler to have 
all the Martians live in One Big 
City. But the Martians were not 
that sort of people. 
Spur 7Y was being added now, 
advancing in ungainly bounds 
toward the new outpost of Beltram Lakes. Already the pylon 
foundations had gone up threequarters of the way from Mono 
One to the settlement. A vast 
pylon-layer was working its way 
through the countryside, gobbling up sand from ten yards 
down and spewing out concrete 
slabs that it stapled into the 
ground. Gobble, splew, staple, 
and move on — gobble, spew, 
staple. The machine moved rapidly, guided by a neatly homeostatic brain that kept it on course. 
Behind it came the other machines to lay track between the 
pylons and string the utility lines 
that would follow the same route. 
The Martian settlers had many 
miracles at their command, but 
them, not yet, and so the lines 
microwave kickover of usable 
electric power wasn’t one of 
had to get strung. 
The monotrack system was intended for heavy-duty transportation. The Martians used quickboats, like everybody else, for 
getting themselves from place to 
place. But the slim little vehicles 
weren’t much use in the shipment 
of construction materials, and 
this was a planet under construction. Now that the reconstruction 
phase was over, the Terraformers were gone. Mars was a bosky 
dell, here in this year of Grace 
2152, and now the task was to 
plant a civilization on the finally 
hospitable planet. The Martians 
numbered in the millions, now. 
They had passed their frontiersman stage and were settling 
down to enjoy the pleasures of a 
good commercial boom. And the 
monotrack marched on, mile after mile, skirting the seas, rimming the lakes and rivers. 
rr^he dogwork was done by 
clever machines, but men 
rode herd on the machinery. You 
never could tell when the homeostasis would slip ever so slightly 
and your pylon-layer would go 
berserk. It had happened a few 
days ago, and somehow the cutoff relays and been blanked out 
of the circuit, and before anyone could do anything there were 
sixteen miles of pylons crisscrossing Holliman Lake — eight hundred feet under water. Martians 
hate wastefulness. The machines 
had shown that they were not entirely trustworthy, and thereafter they were watched. 
Watching over the construction of this particular spur of 
Monotrack One was a lean, sunbronzed man of sixty-eight 
named Paul Weiner, who had 
good political connections, and 
a plump redhaired man named 
Hadley Donovan, who did not 
Redheads were rare on Mars for 
the usual statistical reasons. 
Plump men were rare too, but 
not so rare as they once had been. 
Life was softer these days, and 
so were the younger Martians. 
Hadley Donovan was amused 
by the antics of his gun-toting 
elders, with their formal etiquette, their theatrically taut 
bodies, their sense of high personal importance. Perhaps it had 
been necessary to wear those 
poses in the pioneer days on 
Mars, Donovan thought, but all 
that had been over for thirty 
years. He had allowed himself 
the luxury of a modest paunch. 
He knew that Paul Weiner felt 
contempt for him. 
The feeling was mutual. 
The two men sat side by side 
in a landcrawler, edging through 
the roadless landscape twenty 
miles ahead of the pylon-layingrig. Transponders bleeped at appropriate intervals; on the control board in front of them,
colors came and went in an evanescent flow. Weiner was supposed
to be monitoring the doings of 
the construction rig behind them; 
Donovan was checking out the 
planned route of the track, hunting for pockets of subsurface 
mushiness that the pylon-builder 
would not be clever enough to 
evaluate. 
Donovan was trying to do both
jobs at once. He didn’t dare 
let a political appointee like 
Weiner have any real responsibility in the work. Weiner was 
the nephew of Nat Weiner, who 
stood high in ruling councils, was 
a hundred-and-some years old, 
and went to Earth every few 
years to have the Vorsters pluck 
out his pancreas or his kidneys 
or his carotid arteries and implant handy artificial substitutes. 
Nat Weiner was going to live forever, probably, and he was gradually filling the entire civil service up with members of his family. And Hadley Donovan, trying to oversee a job that really 
required two men’s full attention, 
felt vague desperation as he 
scanned his own board and covertly glanced over at Weiner’s 
every thirty seconds or so. 
Something was glowing purple 
on the Anomaly Screen. Donovan 
wondered about it, but he was too 
busy with his own part of the 
job to mention it, and then Weiner was drawling, “I got something 
peculiar over here, Donovan. 
What do you make of it, Freeman?” 
Donovan kicked the crawler to 
a halt and studied the board. 
“Underground rock vault, looks 
like. Three-four miles off the 
track.” 
“Think we ought to take a 
look?” 
“Why bother?” Donovan 
asked. “The track won’t come 
anywhere near it.” 
“You aren’t curious? Might be 
a treasure vault left by the Old 
Martians.” 
Donovan didn’t dignify that 
with a reply. 
“What do you think it is, 
then?” Weiner asked. “Maybe 
it’s a cave carved by a underground stream. You think so? All 
that sub-surface water Mars had 
before they Terraformed it? Rivers flowing under the desert?” 
Feeling the needles, Donovan 
said, “It’s probably just a crawlspace left by the Terraforming 
engineers. I don’t see why — oh, 
hell. All right. Let’s go investigate. Shut the whole project 
down for half an hour. What do 
I care?” 
He began throwing switches. 
It was a foolish, pointless interruption, but the older man’s 
curiosity had to be satisfied. 
Treasure cave! Underground 
stream! Donovan had to admit 
that he couldn’t think of any ra86 
tional reason why there’d be such 
a pocket of open Space underground here. Geologically, it 
didn’t make much sense. 
They cut across to it. It turned 
out to be about twenty feet down, 
with undisturbed-looking grass 
growing above it. Some doserange pinging confirmed that the 
vault was about ten feet long, a 
dozen feet wide, eight or nine feet 
deep. Donovan was convinced 
that it had been left by the Terraformers. But it wasn’t on the 
charts, at any rate. He summoned 
a dig-robot and put it to work. 
I n ten minutes the roof of the 
vault lay bare : a slab of green 
fusion-glass. Donovan shivered a 
little. Weiner said, “I think we 
got ourselves a grave here.” 
“Let’s leave it. This isn’t our 
business. We’ll report it and — ” 
“What do we have here?” 
Weiner asked, and slipped his 
hand into an opening. He seemed 
to be caressing something within. 
Quickly he drew his hand back 
as a yellow glow spread over the 
top of the vault 
A voice said, “May the blessing 
of eternal harmony be on you, 
friends. You have come to the 
temporary resting-place of Lazarus. Qualified medical assistance 
will revive me. I ask your help. 
Please do not attempt to open 
this vault except with qualified 
medical assistance.” 
Silence. 
The voice said again, “May 
the blessing of eternal harmony 
be on you, friends. You have 
come to the temporary — ” 
“A voice-cube,” Donovan murmured. 
“Look!” Weiner gasped, and 
pointed to the clearing vaultroof. The glass, lit from below, 
was transparent now. Donovan 
peered down into a rectangular 
vault. A thin, hawk-faced man 
lay on his back in a nutrient bath, 
feed-lines connected to his limbs 
and trunk. It was something like 
a Nothing Chamber, but far 
more elaborate. The sleeper 
wore a smile. Arcane symbols 
were inscribed on the walls of 
the chamber. Donovan recognized them as Harmonist symbols. That Venusian cult. He felt 
a stab of confusion. What had 
they stumbled on here? “The 
temporary resting-place of Lazarus,” the voice-cube said. Lazarus was the prophet of the Harmonists. To Donovan, all of these 
religions were equally inane. He 
would have to report this discovery, now, and there would be 
delay in the construction project, and he himself would be 
pushed unwantedly into prominence, and — 
And none of it would ever 
have happened if Weiner had 
been dozing off as usual. Why 
had he noticed the anomaly?
“We better tell somebody 
about this,” Weiner said. “I think 
it’s important.” 
II 
I n a small jungle-fringed building on Venus, eight men who 
were not men faced a ninth. 
All wore the cyanotic blue 
skins of Venus, though only 
three had been born with those 
skins. The others were surgical 
products, Earthmen converted to 
Venusians. Not just their bodies 
had been converted, either. The 
six changed ones had all been 
Vorsters at one time in their 
spiritual development — that is, 
followers of the influential religious and political movement formally known as the Brotherhood 
of the Immanent Radiance. The 
Vorsters were the most powerful 
figures on Earth. But this was 
not Earth but Venus, and Venus 
was in the hands of a Vorster 
heresy, the Harmonists, sometimes called the Lazarites after 
their martyred founder, David 
Lazarus. Lazarus, the prophet of 
Transcendent Harmony, had 
been put to death by Vorster 
underlings seventy years before. 
Now, to the consternation of his 
followers — 
“Brother Nicholas, may we 
have your report?” asked Christopher Mondschein, the head of 
the Harmonists on Venus. 
Nicholas Martell, a slender, 
dogged man in early middle age, 
stared at his eight colleagues 
wearily. In the last few days he 
had little sleep, and many profound jolts to his equilibrium. 
Martell had made the round trip 
to Mars to check on the astonishing report that had flashed to 
the three planets not long before. 
He said, “It’s exactly as the 
news story had it. Two workmen 
coming upon a vault while supervising the construction of a 
monotrack spur.” 
“You saw the vault?” asked 
Mondschein. 
“I saw the vault. They’ve got 
it cordoned.” 
“What about Lazarus?” 
“There was a figure inside the 
vault. It matched the image of 
Lazarus in Rome. It resembled 
all the portraits. The vault’s a 
sort of Nothing Chamber, and 
the figure is hooked up inside. 
The Martian authorities have 
checked the circuitry of the vault 
and they say that it’s likely to 
blow sky-high if anybody tampers with it.” 
( (, \ nd the figure,” persisted a 
hollow-faced man named 
Emory. “The figure is Lazarus?” 
“Looks like Lazarus,” Martell 
said. “You must remember I 
never saw Lazarus in the flesh. I 
wasn’t bom yet when he died. It 
he died.” 
“Don’t say that,” Emory 
snapped. “This is a hoax. Lazarus 
died, all right. He was fed to the 
converter. There’s nothing left of 
him but loose protons and electrons and neutrons.” 
“So it says in our Scripture,” 
declared Mondschein warily. He 
closed his eyes a moment. He 
was the oldest man present; he 
had been on Venus almost sixty 
years, and had built this branch 
of the movement to its present 
dominant position. He said, 
“There is always the possibility 
that our text is corrupt.” 
“No!” The outburst came from 
Embry, young and conservative. 
“How can you say that?” 
Mondschein shrugged. “The 
early years of our movement, 
Brother, are shrouded in doubt. 
We know there was a Lazarus, 
that he worked with Vorst at 
Santa Fe, that he quarreled with 
Vorst over procedure and was 
assassinated, or at least put out 
of the way. But all that was a 
long time ago. There’s no one 
left in the movement ' that was 
directly associated with Lazarus. 
We aren’t as longlived as the 
Vorsters, you know. So if it happened that Lazarus wasn’t stuffed 
into a converter, but simply carried off to Mars in suspended 
animation and plugged into a 
Nothing Chamber for sixty or 
seventy years — ” 
There was silence in the room. 
Martell gave Mondschein a ridelong glance of distress. It was 
Emory who finally said, “What 
if he’s revived and claims to be 
Lazarus? What happens to the 
movement?” 
Mondschein replied, “We’ll 
face that when we get to it. According to Brother Nicholas, 
there seems to be some doubt as 
to whether the vault can be 
opened at all.” 
“That’s correct,” Martell said. 
“If it’s wired to explode when 
tampered with — ” 
“Let’s hope it is,” put in Brother Claude, who had not spoken. 
“For our purposes, the best Lazarus is a martyred Lazarus. We 
can keep the tomb as a shrine, 
and send pilgrimages there, and 
perhaps get the Martians interested. But if he comes back to 
life, and begins to upset things — ” 
“What is in that vault is not 
Lazarus,” Emory said. 
M ondschein stared at him in 
amazement. Emory seemed 
ready to crack apart. 
“Perhaps you’d better rest a 
while,” Mondschein suggested. 
“You’re taking this much too 
much to heart” 
Martell said, “It’s a disturbing 
business, Christopher. If you had 
seen that figure in the vault — 
he looks so angelic, so confident 
of resurrection — ” 
Emory groaned. Mondschein
furrowed his brow a moment, and 
in response the door opened and 
one of the native Venusians entered, one of the espers the Harmonists had been collecting so 
long on Venus. 
“Brother Emory is tired, Neerol,” Monschein said. 
The Venusian nodded. His 
hand closed on Emory’s wrist, 
dark purple against deep indigo. 
A nexus formed; there was a 
momentary neutral flow; sluices 
opened somewhere within Emory’s brain. Emory relaxed. The 
Venusian led him from the room. 
Mondschein looked round at 
the others. “We have to operate 
under the assumption,” he said, 
“that the genuine body of David 
Lazarus has turned up on Mars, 
that our book is in error about 
his fate, and that there’s at least 
the possibility that the body in 
that vault can be brought to life. 
The question is, how are we going to react?” 
Martell, who had seen the 
vault and who would never be 
quite the same, said, “You know 
I’ve always been skeptical of the 
charismatic value of the Lazarus 
story. But I see this as operating 
to our advantage. If we can gain 
possession of the vault, and make 
it the symbolic center of our 
movement — something to capture the public imagination — ” 
“Exactly,” Claude said. “It’s 
always been our big selling point 
that we’ve got a mythos. The 
competition’s got Vorst and his 
medical miracles, Santa Fe and 
all that, but nothing to stir the 
heart. We’ve had the martyrdom 
of Lazarus, and it’s helped us 
take control of Venus, which the 
Vorsters never were able to do. 
And now, with Lazarus himself 
come forth from the dead — ” 
“You miss the point,” said 
Mondschein thinly. “What turned 
up on Mars doesn’t tally with 
the myth. Lazarus isn’t supposed 
to be resurrected in the flesh. He 
was blasted to atoms. Suppose 
archaeologists found that Christ 
had really been beheaded, not 
crucified? Suppose it came to 
light that Mohammed never set 
foot in Mecca? We’ve been 
caught with our mythology 
askew — if this is really Lazarus. 
It could destroy us. It could 
wreck all we’ve built” 
III 
'"p'hirty miles from the quaint 
A old city of Santa Fe, the 
sprawling laboratories of the 
Noel Vorst Center for the Biological Sciences rose within a ring 
of dark mountains. 
The Center was the headquarters of the Brotherhood’s scientific arm, and the mainspring of 
the entire movement. Here whirling knives and lashing lasers 
transformed living creatures in90 
to alien flesh. Here technicians 
laboriously manipulated genes. 
Here families of espers submitted 
to an endless round of experiments, and bionics men prodded 
their subjects mercilessly toward 
a new realm of existence. The 
Center was a mighty maohine, 
bristling with purposefulness. 
Inconceivably old men were 
at the heart of the machine. 
The core of the movement was 
the domed building near the 
main auditorium, Where Noel 
Vorst lived when at Santa Fe. 
Vorst, the Founder, acknowledged a century and a quarter of 
life. There were those who said 
that he was dead, that the Vorst 
who occasionally appeared at the 
chapels of the Brotherhood was 
a robot, a simulacrum. Vorst 
himself found this amusing. More 
of him was metal than flesh, at 
this point, but he was undeniably alive, with no immediate 
plans for dying. If he had planned to die, he never would have 
gone to the trouble of founding 
the Brotherhood of the Immanent Radiance. There had been 
hard years at first; it is not 
pleasant to be deemed a crackpot. 
Among those who had deemed 
Vorst a crackpot in those days 
was his present second-in-command, the Hemispheric Coordinator, Reynolds Kirby. Kirby, a 
minor official in the U.N. in the 
time before the international tentacles of the Vorster movement 
had made the U.N. unnecessary, 
had stumbled into the Brotherhood at a time of personal stress, 
looking for something to cling to 
in a storm. That had been in 
2077. He was still clinging, seventy-five years later. By now he 
was virtually Vorst’s alter ego, 
an adjunct of the Founder’s souL 
The Founder had been less
than candid with Kirby 
about this Lazarus enterprise, 
though. For the first time in 
many years, Vorst had held the 
details of a project entirely to 
himself. Some things could not be 
shared. When they were matters 
concerning David Lazarus, Vorst 
held them in pectore, unable to 
take even Kirby into his confidence. 
The Founder sat cradled in a 
webfoam net that spared him 
most of gravity’s pull. Once he 
had been a vigorous, dynamic 
giant of a man, and when he had 
to he could wear that set of attributes even now, but he preferred comfort. It was necessary 
to spare his strength. His plan 
had fulfilled itself well, but he 
knew that without his guiding 
presence it might all yet come to 
nothing. 
Kirby sat before him, thinlipped, grizzled, his body like 
Vorst’s a patchwork of artificial
organs. The Vorster laboratories 
no longer needed such clumsy devices to prolong youth. Within 
the last generation, they had 
managed to stimulate regeneration from within, the body’s own 
rebirth, always the most preferable way. Kirby had come along 
too early for that; so had Vorst. 
For them, organ replacement 
was the road to conditional immortality. With luck, they might 
last two or three centuries, undergoing periodic overhauls. Younger men, those who had joined the 
movement in the last forty years, 
might hope for several hundred 
years more than that. Some now 
living, Vorst knew, would never 
die. 
Vorst said, “About this Lazarus 
thing — ” 
His voice came from a vocoder 
box. The larynx had gone sixty 
years ago. The effect was naturalistic enough, though. 
“We can infiltrate our men,” 
Kirby said. “I can work through 
Nat Weiner. We’ll get a bomb 
clapped onto that vault and give 
Mr. Lazarus his eternal repose.” 
“No.” 
“No?” 
“Of course not,’ Vorst said. He 
lowered the shutters that lubricated his eyes. “Nothing must 
happen to that vault or the man 
who’s in it. We’ll infiltrate, all 
right. You’ll have to use your 
pull with Weiner. But not to de92 
stroy. We’re going to bring Lazarus back to life.” 
“We’re — ” 
“As a gift to our friends the 
Harmonists. To show our enduring affection for our brothers in 
the Oneness.” 
Kirby said. Muscles 
^ ^ roiled in his fleshless face, 
and Vorst could see him making 
adrenal adjustments, trying to 
stay calm in the face of this assault on his sense of logic. “This 
is the prophet of the heretics,” 
Kirby said quietly. “I know that 
you’ve got your reasons for encouraging their growth in certain 
places, Noel. But to give them 
back their prophet — it doesn’t 
make sense.” 
Vorst tapped a stud in his 
desk. A compartment opened and 
he drew forth the Book of Lazarus, the heretic scripture. Kirby 
seemed a little startled to find 
it here, in the stronghold of the 
movement. 
“You’ve read this, haven’t 
you?” Vorst asked. 
“Of course.” 
“It’s enough to make you 
weep. How my shameless underlings hunted down this great and 
good man David Lazarus and 
did away with him. One of the 
most blasphemous acts since the 
Crucifixion, eh? The blot on our 
record. We’re the villains in the 
Lazarus story. Now here’s Laz
arus, pickled on Mars for the last 
seventy years. Not physically annihilated after all, despite what 
this book says. Fine. Splendid! 
We throw all the resources of 
Santa Fe into the task of restoring him to life. The grand ecumenical gesture. Surely you know 
that it’s my hope to re-unite the 
sundered branches of our movement.” 
Kirby’s eyes flickered brilliantly. “You’ve been saying that for 
sixty or seventy years, Noel. Ever 
since the Harmonists split away. 
But do you mean it?” 
“I’m sincere in all things,” said 
Vorst lightly. “Of course I’d take 
them back. On my terms, naturally — but they’d be welcome. 
We all serve the same ends in 
different ways. Did you ever 
know Lazarus?” 
“Not really. I wasn’t very important in the Brotherhood when 
he died.” 
“I forget that,” Vorst said. “It’s 
hard for me to keep everyone 
positioned in his temporal matrix. I keep sliding forward and 
backward. But certainly: you 
were coming to the top as Lazarus was moving away. I respected that man, Kirby. I grieved 
when he died, wrongheaded as 
he was. I intend to redeem the 
Brotherhood from its stain by 
bringing Lazarus back to life. 
He’s appropriately named, 
wouldn’t you say?”
T^irby picked up a bright metallic sphere from the desk, 
a paperweight of some sort, and 
fingered it. Vorst waited. He 
kept the sphere there so that his 
visitors could handle it and discharge their tensions into it; he 
knew that for many who came 
before him an interview with 
Vorst was like a trip to the top 
of Mount Sinai to hear the Law. 
And only very highest command 
had access to the Founder, too. 
Vorst found it charming. He 
watched Reynolds Kirby struggling with himself. 
At length Kirby — the only man 
on the whole planet who could 
use Vorst’s first name to him — 
said thickly, “Dammit, Noel, 
what kind of a game are you 
playing?” 
“Game?” 
“You sit there with that grin 
on your lips, telling me you’re 
going to revive Lazarus, and I 
can see you juggling world-lines 
like billiard-balls, and I don’t 
know what it’s all about. What’s 
your motive? Isn’t this man better off dead?” 
“No. Dead he’s a symbol. Alive 
he can be manipulated. That’s 
all I’ll say.” Vorst’s blazing eyes 
found Kirby’s troubled ones and 
held them. “Do you think I’m 
senile at last, perhaps? That I’ve 
held the plan in my mind so long 
that it’s rotted in there? I know 
what I’m doing! I need Lazarus 
alive, or — or I wouldn’t have begun this. Get in touch with Nat 
Weiner. Gain possession of the 
vault, I don’t care how. We’ll do 
our work on Lazarus here at 
Santa Fe.” 
“All right, Noel. Whatever you 
say.” 
“Trust me.” 
“What else can I do?" 
K irby wheeled himself out of 
the room. Vorst, relaxing, 
fed hormones to his blood stream 
and closed his eyes. 
The world wavered. For an instant he found himself drifting, 
and it was 2071 all over again, 
and he was building cobalt-60 
reactors in a sordid basement 
and renting little rooms as chapels for his cult. He recoiled, and 
was whirled forward, dizzyingly, 
toward the border of now and a 
little beyond it. Vorst was a lowgrade esper, his skills humble indeed, but occasionally his mind 
did strange things. He looked toward the brink of tomorrow and 
desperately anchored himself. 
With a decisive jab of his 
fingers Vorst opened his deskcommunicator and spoke briefly 
to an interne in the burnout 
ward, without identifying himself. Yes, the Founder was told, 
there was an esper on the verge 
of burnout. No, she wasn’t likely 
to survive. 
“Get her ready,” Vorst said. 
“The Founder’s going to visit 
her.” 
Vorst’s assistants clustered 
round, readying him for his journey. The old man refused to accept immobility, and insisted on 
leading the most active kind of 
existence possible. A drop-shaft 
took him to ground level, and 
then, sheltered by the cavalcade 
of flunkies that accompanied him 
everywhere, the Founder crossed 
the main plaza of the compound 
and entered the burnout ward. 
Half a dozen sick espers, segregated by thick walls and shielded by protective members of their 
own kind, lay at the verge of 
death. There were always those 
for whom the powers proved 
overwhelming, those who eventually seized more voltage than 
they could handle, and were destroyed. From the very beginning 
Vorst had concentrated on saving them, for he hated waste of 
any sort, and these were the espers he needed most badly. The 
salvage record was good, nowadays. But not good enough. 
Vorst knew why the burnouts 
happened. The ones who went 
were the floaters, insecurely anchored in their own time. They 
drifted back, forth, seesawing 
from past to present, unable to 
control their movements, building up a charge of temporal force 
that ultimately blasted their 
minds. It was a dizziness of the 
‘time-sense, a deadly vertigo. 
Vorst himself had felt flashes of 
it. For ten years, nearly a century ago, he had considered himself insane, until he understood. 
He had seen the edges of time, 
a vision of futurity that had shattered him and remade him. And 
that, he knew, had been only a 
hint of what the real espers experienced. 
The burnout case was young
and female and Oriental: a 
fatal combination, it seemed. A 
good eighty per cent of the burnouts were of Mongoloid stock, 
generally adolescent girls. Those 
who had the trait didn’t last far 
into adulthood. This one must 
have been about sixteen, though 
it was hard to tell; she could 
have been anywhere from twelve 
to twenty-five. She lay twisting 
on the bed, her body almost bare, 
clawing at the bedclothes in her 
agony. Sweat gleamed on her 
yellow-brown skin. She arched 
her back, grimaced, fell back. Her 
breasts revealed by the disarray 
of her robe, were like a child’s. 
Blue-clad Vorsters, awed by 
the presence of the Founder, 
flanked the bed. Vorst said, 
“She’ll be gone in an hour, won’t 
she?” 
Someone nodded. Vorst moved 
himself closer to the bed. He 
seized the girl’s arm in his wizened fingers. Another esper step
ped in, placed one hand on Vorst, 
the other on the girl, providing 
the link that Vorst required. Suddenly he was in contact with the 
dying girl. 
Her brain was on fire. She jolted backward and forward in 
time, and Vorst jolted with her, 
drawn along as a hitchhiker. 
Light flared in his mind, as 
though lightning danced about 
him. Yesterday and tomorrow 
became one. His thin body quivered like a buffeted reed. Images 
danced like demons, shadowy 
figures out of the past, dark avatars of tomorrow. Tell me, tell 
me, tell me, Vorst implored! 
Show me the path! He stood at 
the threshold of knowledge. For 
seventy years he had moved step 
by step this way, using the contorted and tortured bodies of 
these burnouts as his bridges to 
tomorrow, pulling himself forward by his own bootstraps along 
the worldline of his great plan. 
Let me see, Vorst begged! 
The figure of David Lazarus 
bestrode the pattern of tomorrow, 
as Vorst knew it would. Lazarus 
stood like a colossus, come forth 
to an unexpected resurrection, 
holding his arms out to the greenrobed brethren of his heresy. 
Vorst shivered. The image wavered and was gone. The frail 
hand of the Founder relaxed. 
“She’s dead,” Vorst said. “Take 
me away.” 
IV 
One old man had given the
word, and another obeyed, 
and a third was approached for 
a favor. Nat Weiner of the Martian Presidium was always willing to oblige his old friend Reynolds Kirby. They had known 
one another for more years than 
they cared to admit, since the 
time that a bumptious young 
Weiner, coming to Earth to swing 
a trade treaty, had made life hectic for the slightly older Kirby 
whom the U.N. had appointed as 
his guide and guardian. 
Weiner, like nearly all Martians was neither Vorster nor 
Harmonist. Martians had little 
use for cults, and steered a neutral and profitable course. On 
Earth, by now, the Vorsters 
amounted to a planetary government, since their influence was 
felt everywhere. It was simple 
good sense for Mars to retain 
open lines to the Vorster high 
command, since Mars had business to do with Earth. Venus, the 
planet of adapted men, was a different case. No one could be too 
sure what went on there, except 
that the Harmonist heresy had 
established itself pretty securely 
in the last thirty or forty years, 
and might one day speak for 
Venus as the Vorsters spoke for 
Earth. Weiner had served a tour 
of duty as Martian Ambassador 
to Venus, and he thought he understood the blueskins fairly well. 
He didn’t like them very much. 
But he was past feeling any 
strong emotion. He had left that 
behind with his hundredth birthday. 
At staggering cost, Reynolds 
Kirby in Santa Fe spoke face-toface with Weiner, and begged a 
favor of him. It was twelve years 
since they had last met — not 
since Weiner’s last visit to the 
rejuvenation centers at Santa Fe. 
It wasn’t customary for unbelievers to be granted the use of the 
rejuvenation facilities there, but 
Kirby had arranged for Weiner 
and a select few of his Martian 
friends to come down for periodic treatments, as a favor. 
"'ITT'einer understood quite 
’ ' clearly that Kirby was silently accepting promissory notes 
for those favors, and that the 
notes would be taken down for 
repayment one of these days. 
That was all right; the important 
thing was to survive. Weiner 
might even have been willing to 
become a Vorster, if he had to, 
in order to have access to Santa 
Fe. But of course that would 
have hurt him politically on 
Mars, where both Vorsters and 
Harmonists were generally looked upon as subversives. This way 
he had the benefits, without the 
risks; and he owed it to his old
friend Kirby. Weiner would go 
quite a distance to repay Kirby 
for that service. 
The Vorster said, “Have you 
seen the alleged Lazarus vault 
yet, Nat?” 
“I was out there two days ago. 
We’ve got a tight security guard 
on it. It was my nephew that 
found it, you know. I’d like to kill 
him.” 
“Why?” 
“All we need is finding the 
Harmonist muck-a-muck out by 
Beltran Lakes. Why couldn’t you 
people have buried him on Venus, where his own people are?” 
“What makes you think we 
buried him, Nat?” 
“Aren’t you the ones who killed him? Or put him into a freeze, 
or whatever you did to him?” 
“It all happened before my 
time,” Kirby said. “Only Vorst 
knows the real story, and maybe 
not even him. But surely it’s Lazarus’s own supporters who tucked him away in that vault, don’t 
you think?” 
“Not at all,” Weiner replied. 
“Why would they get their own 
story garbled? He’s their prophet. 
If they put him there, they should 
have remembered it and preached his resurrection, yes? But they 
were the most surprised ones of 
all when he turned up.” Weiner 
frowned. “On the other hand, the 
message that was recorded with 
him is full of Harmonist slogans. 
And there are Harmonist symbols 
on the vault. I wish I understood. 
Better still: I wish we’d never 
found him. But why are you calling, Ron?” 
“Vorst wants him.” 
“Wants Lazarus?” 
“That’s right. To bring him 
back to life. We’ll take the whole 
vault to Santa Fe and open it 
and revive him. Vorst wants to 
make the announcement tomorrow, all-channel hookup.” 
CC'* Ton can’t Ron. If anybody 
1 gets him, it ought to be 
the Harmonists. He’s their prophet. How can I hand him to you 
boys? You’re the ones who supposedly killed him in the first 
place, and now — ” 
“And now we’re going to revive 
him, which as everyone knows is 
beyond the capabilities of the 
Harmonists. They’re welcome to 
try, if they want, but they simply don’t have our kind of laboratory facilities. We’re ready to 
revive him. Then we’ll turn him 
over to the Harmonists and he 
can preach all he wants. Just let 
us have access to that vault.” 
“You’re asking for a lot,” Weiner said. 
“We’ve given you a lot, Nat.” 
Weiner nodded. The promissory notes had fallen due, he realized. 
He said, ‘The Harmonists will 
have my head for this.” 
“Your head’s pretty tightly attached, Nat. Find a way to give 
us the vault. Vorst will be pretty 
rough on us all if you don’t.” 
Weiner sighed. “His will be 
done.” 
But how, the Martian wondered when contact had broken. 
By force rrtajeure? Hand over the 
vault and to hell with public 
opinion? And if Venus got nasty 
about it? 
There hadn’t been an interplanetary war yet, but perhaps 
the time was ripe. Certainly the 
Harmonists wanted — and had 
every right to have — their own 
founder’s body. Just last week 
that convert Martell, the one who 
had come to Venus to plant a 
Vorster cell and ended up in the 
Harmonist camp, had been here 
to see the vault, Weiner thought, 
and had tentatively sketched out 
a plan for taking possession. Martell and his boss Mondschein 
would explode when they found 
out that the relic of Lazarus was 
being shipped to Santa Fe. 
It would have to be handled 
delicately. 
Weiner’s mind whirred and 
clicked like a computer, presenting and rejecting alternate possibilities, opening and closing one 
circuit after another. It was not 
seniority alone that kept the 
Martian in power. He was agile. 
He had gained considerably in 
craftiness since the night when, a 
drunken young yokel, he ran 
amok in New York City. 
Three hours and a great many
thousand dollars’ worth of 
interplanetary calls later, Weiner had his solution worked out 
satisfactorily. 
The vault was Martian governmental property, as an artifact 
Therefore Mars had an important 
voice in its disposal. However, 
the Martian government recognized the unique symbolic value 
of this discovery, and thus proposed to consult with religious 
authorities of the other worlds. A 
committee would be formed: 
three Harmonists, three Vorsters, 
and three Martians of Weiner’s 
selection. Presumably the Harmonists and Vorsters would look 
out for their own cult’s welfare, 
and the Martians on the committee would maintain an imperturbable neutrality, assuring an impartial judgment. 
Of course. 
The committee would meet to 
deliberate on the fate of the vault. 
The Harmonists, naturally, would 
claim it for themselves. The Vorsters, having made public their 
offer to employ all their superscience to bring Lazarus back to 
life, would ask to be given a 
chance to do so. The Martians 
would weigh all the possibilities. 
Then, Weiner thought, would 
come the vote.
One of the Martians would 
vote with the Harmonists — for 
appearance’s sake. The other two 
would come out in favor of letting 
the Vorsters work on the sleeper, 
under rigorous supervision to prevent any hanky-panky. The fiveto-four vote would give the vault 
to Vorst. 
Mondschein would yelp, of 
course. But the terms of the 
agreement would allow a couple 
of Harmonist representatives to 
get inside the secret labs at Santa 
Fe for a little while, and that 
would soothe them somewhat. 
There would be a little grumbling; but if Kirby kept his word, 
Lazarus would be revived and 
turned over to his partisans. 
And how could the Harmonists 
possibly object to that? 
Weiner smiled. There was no 
problem so knotty that it couldn’t 
be untied. Given a little thought, 
that is. He felt pleased with himself. If he had been forty years 
younger, he might have gone out 
for a roistering celebration. But 
not now. 
V 
UTAon’t go,” Martell said. 
i-' “Suspicious?” Christopher Mondschein asked. “It’s a 
chance to see their setup. I 
haven’t been in Santa Fe since I 
was a boy. Why shouldn’t I go?” 
“There’s no telling what might 
happen to you there. They’d love 
to get their hands on you. You’re 
the kingpin of the whole Venusian movement.” 
“And they’ll lase me to ashes 
with three planets watching, eh? 
Be realistic, Nicholas. When the 
Pope visits Mecca, they take 
good care of him. I’m in no danger in Santa Fe.” 
“What about the espers? 
They’ll scan you.” 
“I’ll have Neerol with me as a 
mindshield,” Mondschein said. 
“They won’t get a thing. I’ll stack 
him up against any esper they 
have. Besides, I have nothing to 
hide from Noel Vorst. You of all 
people ought to realize that. We 
took you in, even though you 
were loaded with Vorster spycommands. It was in our interest 
to tell Vorst how far we had 
gone.” 
Martell took a different approach. “By going to Santa Fe 
you’re putting the blessing of our 
order on this alleged Lazarus.” 
“Now you sound like Brother 
Emory! Are you telling me it’s a 
phony?” 
“I’m telling you that we ought 
to treat it as one. It contradicts 
our own legend of Lazarus. It 
may be a Vorster plant calculated to throw us into confusion. 
What do we do when they hand 
us a walking, talking Lazarus and 
let us try to reshape our entire 
order around him?” 
“It’s a touchy matter, Nicholas. 
We’ve built our faith on the existence of a holy martyr. Now, if 
he’s suddenly unmartyred — ” 
“Exactly. It’ll crush us.” 
“I doubt that,” Mondschein 
said. The old Harmonist touched 
his gills lightly, nervously. “You 
aren’t looking far enough ahead, 
Nicholas. The Vorsters have outmaneuvered us so far, I admit 
They’ve gained possession of this 
Lazarus and they’re about to give 
him back to us. Very embarrassing, but what can we do? However, the next moves are ours. 
If he dies, we simply revise our 
writings a bit. If he lives and tries 
to meddle, we reveal that he’s 
some sort of simulacrum cooked 
up by the Vorsters to do mischief, and destroy him. Score a 
point for us — our original story 
stands and we reveal the Vorsters as sinister schemers.” 
“And if he’s really Lazarus?” 
Martell asked. 
Mondschein glowered. “Then 
we have a prophet on our hands, 
Brother Nicholas. It’s a risk we 
take. I’m going to Santa Fe.” 
✓~\n Earth, the Noel Vorst Center throbbed with morethan-usual activity, as preparations continued for the arrival of 
the cargo from Mars. 
An entire block of the laboratory grounds had been set aside 
for the resuscitation of Lazarus. 
For the first time since the founding of the Center seventy years 
before, video cameras would be 
allowed to show the worlds a 
little of its inner workings. The 
place would be full of strangers 
— even a delegation of Harmonists. To old-line Vorsters like 
Reynolds Kirby, that was almost 
unthinkable. Furtiveness had become a matter of course for him. 
The command, though, had come 
from Vorst himself, and no one 
could quarrel with the Founder. 
“I believe that it’s time to lift 
the lid a little,” Vorst had said. 
Kirby was doing some lid-lifting of his own as the great day 
drew near. He was troubled by 
certain blanks in his own memory, and by virtue of his rank as 
second - in - command he went 
searching through the Vorster 
archives to fill them in. The trouble was, Kirby could not remember much about David Lazarus’ 
pre-martyrdom career, and he felt 
that it was important to know 
something more than the official 
story. Who was Lazarus, anyway? How had he entered the 
Vorster picture — and how had 
he left it? 
Kirby himself had enrolled in 
2077, kneeling before the Blue 
Fire of a cobalt reactor in New 
York. As a new convert, he had 
not been concerned with the politics of the hierarchy, but simply 
with the values the cult had to
offer: stability, the hope of long 
life, the dream of reaching the 
stars by harnessing the abilities 
of espers. Kirby was willing to 
see mankind explore the other 
solar systems, but he did not 
make that accomplishment the 
central yearning of his life. Nor 
did the chance of immortality — 
the chief bait for millions of Vorster converts — seem all that delicious to him. What drew him 
to the movement, at the age of 
forty, was merely the discipline 
that it offered. His pleasant life 
lacked structure, and the world 
about him was such chaos that 
he fled from it into one synthetic 
paradise after another. Along 
came Vorst offering a sleek new 
belief that snared Kirby totally. 
For the first few months he was 
content to be a worshipper. Soon 
he was an acolyte. And then, his 
natural organizational abilities 
demonstrating themselves, he 
found himself moving rapidly upward in the movement from post 
to post until by the time he was 
eighty he was Vorst’s right hand, 
and very much concerned with his 
own personal survival. 
According to the official story, 
the martyrdom of David Lazarus 
had taken place in 2090. Kirby 
had been a Vorster for thirteen 
years then and was a District 
Supervisor in charge of thousands 
of Brothers. 
So far as he could remember, 
he had never even heard of Lazarus as of 2090. 
A few years later, the Harmonists, the heretical movement, 
had begun gaining strength, decking themselves in green robes and 
scoffing at the craftily secular 
power-orientation of the Vorsters. They claimed to be followers of the martyred Lazarus, 
but even then, Kirby thought, 
they hadn’t talked much about 
Lazarus. Only afterward, as 
Harmonist power mounted and 
they stole Venus from Vorst, did 
they push the Lazarus mythos 
particularly hard. The whole 
thing had an annoyingly ex-postfacto ring to it. Why is it, Kirby 
wondered, that I who was a contemporary of Lazarus should 
never have heard his name? 
He walked toward the archives 
building. 
It was a milk-white geodesic 
dome, sheeted with some toothy 
fabric that gave it a sharkskin 
surface texture. Kirby passed 
through a tiled tunnel, identified himself to the robot guardians, moved toward and past a 
sphincter-door, and found himself in the olive-green room where 
the records were kept. He activated a query-stud and demanded knowledge. 
LAZARUS, DAVID. 
Drums whirled in the depths 
of the earth. Memory films came
round, offered themselves to the 
kiss of the scanner, and sent 
images floating upward to the 
waiting Kirby. Glowing yellow 
print appeared on the readerscreen. 
A potted biography, scanty and 
inadequate: 
BORN 13 March 2051. 
EDUCATION Primary Secondary Chicago, A.B. Harvard, 
’72, Ph.D. (Anthropology) Harvard ’75. 
PHYSICAL DESCRIPTION 
(1/1/88) 6 ft 3 ins. 179 pounds, 
dark eyes and hair, no dis. scars. 
AFFILIATION Joined Cambridge chapel 4/11/71. Acolyte 
status conferred 7/17/33 . 
There followed a list of the 
successive stages by which Lazarus had risen through the hierarchy, culminating with the simple entry, DEATH 2/9/90. 
That was all. It was a lean, 
spare record, not a word of elaboration, no appended commendations such as Kirby knew festooned his own record, no documentation of his disagreement with 
Vorst. Nothing. It was the sort of 
record, Kirby thought uncomfortably, that anyone could have 
tapped out in five minutes and 
inserted in the archives . yesterday. 
He prodded the memory banks, 
hoping to fish up some added detail about the arch-heretic. He 
found nothing. 
It was not really a valid cause 
for suspicion. Lazarus had been 
dead for a long time, and probably the record-keeping had 
been sketchier in those early 
days. 
But it was upsetting, all the 
same. 
Kirby made his way out of the 
building. Acolytes stared at him 
as though Vorst himself had 
gone striding by. No doubt some 
of them felt the temptation to 
drop to their knees before him. 
If they only knew, Kirby thought 
darkly, how ignorant I am after 
seventy-five years with Vorst. It 
they only knew. 
VI 
The glass vault of David Lazarus, transported intact at
considerable expense from Mars, 
rested in the center of the operating room, under the watchful 
eyes of the video cameras mounted in the walls and ceiling. 
A carefully planted forest of 
equipment surrounded the vault: 
EEGs and EKGs, compressors, 
centrifuges, surgistats, scanners, 
enzyme calibrators, laser scalpels, 
retracters, impacters, thorax rods, 
cerebral tacks, a heart-and-lung 
bypass, kidney surrogates, mortmains, biopticons, elsevirs, a Helium II pressure generator and a 
monstrous, glowering cryostat. 
The display was impressive,
and it was meant to be. Vorster 
science was on display here, and 
every awesome-looking superfluity in the place had its part in 
the orchestration of the effects. 
Vorst himself was not present 
That, too, was part of the orchestration. He and Kirby were 
watching the event from Volt's 
office. The highest-ranking member of the Brotherhood present 
was plump, cheerful Capodimonte, a District Supervisor. Beside him stood Christopher 
Mondschein of the Harmonists. 
Mondschein and Capodimonte 
had known each other briefly 
during Mondschein’s short, spectacularly unsuccessful career as a 
Santa Fe acolyte in 2095. Now, 
though, the Harmonist was a terrifying figure, his changed body 
concealed by a breathing-suit but 
still nightmarish and grotesque. 
A native-born Venusian, looking 
even more bizzare, clung to 
Mondschein like a skin graft. 
The visiting Harmonists seemed 
tense and grim. 
The television commentator 
said, “It’s already been determined that the atmosphere of the 
vault is a mixture of inert gases, 
mainly argon. Lazarus himself 
is in a nutrient bath. Espers have 
detected signs of life. The tumblers of the vault lock were opened yesterday in the present of 
the delegation of Venusian Harmonists. Now the inerts are being 
piped out, and soon the sensitive 
instruments of the surgeons will 
reach the sleeping man and begin 
the infinitely complex process of 
restoring the life-impulses. 
Vorst laughed. 
Kirby said, “Isn’t that what’ll
happen?” 
“More or less. Except the man’s 
as alive as he’ll ever be, right 
now. All they need to do is open 
the vault and yank him out.” 
“That’s not dramatic.” 
“Probably not,” the Founder 
agreed. Vorst folded his hands 
across his belly, feeling the artificials throbbing mildly inside. 
The commentator reeled off acres 
of descriptive prose. The spidery 
array of instruments surrounding 
the vault was in motion now, 
arms and tendrils waving like the 
limbs of some being of many 
bodies. Vorst kept his eyes on 
the altered face of Christopher 
Mondschein. 
He hadn’t really believed that 
Mondschein would return to 
Santa Fe. An admirable person, 
the old man thought. He had 
borne adversity well, considering 
how he had been bamboozled into 
his life’s career forty years ago — 
virtually kidnapped by the Harmonists and turned into a spy 
for them, and packed off to Venus as a missionary after his spy 
mission had been more or less 
successfully completed.
“The vault’s open,” Kirby said. 
“So I observe. Now watch the 
mummy of King Tut rise and 
walk.” 
“You’re very light-hearted 
about this, Noel.” 
“Mmmm,” the Founder said. 
A smile flickered on his thin lips 
a moment. He made minute adjustments to his hormone flow. 
On the screen, the vault opening 
was almost completely obscured 
by the instruments that had dived into the chamber to embrace 
the sleeper. 
Suddenly there was faint motion in the vault. Lazarus stirred! 
The martyr returned! 
“Time for my grand entrance,” 
Vorst murmured. 
A 11 was arranged. A glistening 
tunnel transported him swiftly to the operating room. Kirby 
did not follow. The Founder’s 
chair rolled serenely into the 
room just as the figure of David 
Lazarus groped its way out of 
sixty years of sleep and rose to a 
sitting position. 
A quivering hand pointed. A 
rusty voice strained for coherence. 
“V-V-Vorst!” Lazarus gasped. 
The Founder smiled benevolently, lifted his fleshless arm in 
greeting and blessing. Delicately, 
an unseen hand slipped a control 
rod and the Blue Fire flickered 
along the walls of the room to 
provide the proper theatrical 
touch. Christopher Mondschein, 
his altered face impassive behind 
his breathing-mask, clenched his 
fists angrily as the glow enveloped him. 
Vorst said, "And there is light, 
before and beyond our vision, for 
which we give thanks. 
“And there is heat, for which 
we are humble. 
“And there is power, for which 
we count ourselves blessed .... 
“Welcome to life, David Lazarus. In the strength of the spectrum, the quantum, and the holy 
angstrom, peace, and forgive 
those who did evil to you!” 
Lazarus stood. His hands 
found and grasped the rim of 
his vault. Inconceivable emotions 
distorted his face. He muttered, 
“I — I’ve slept.” 
“Sixty years, David. And those 
who rebuked me and followed 
you have grown strong. See? See 
the green robes? Venus is yours. 
You head a mighty army. Go to 
them, David. Give them counsel. 
I restore you to them. You are 
my gift to your followers. And he 
that was dead came forth . 
loose him, ' and let him go.” 
Lazarus did not reply. Mondschein stood agape, leaning heavily on the Venusian at his side. 
Kirby, watching the screen, felt 
a tingle of awe that washed away 
his skepticism for the moment. 
Even the chatter of the television
commentator was stilled by the 
miracle. 
The glow of the Blue Fire engulfed all, rising higher and higher, like the flames of the Twilight 
reaching toward Valhalla. And in 
the midst of it all stood Noel 
Vorst, the Founder, the First Immortal, serene and radiant, his 
ancient body erect, his eyes 
gleaming, his hands outstretched 
to the man who had been dead. 
All that was missing was the 
chorus of ten thousand, singing 
the Hymn of the Wavelengths 
while a cosmic organ throbbed a 
paean of joy. 
VII 
A nd Lazarus lived, and walked 
among his people again, 
holding converse with them. 
And Lazarus was greatly surprised. 
He had slept — for a moment, 
for the twinkling of an eye. Now 
sinister blue figures surrounded 
him, Venusians, hooded like 
demons against the poisonous air 
of Earth, and hailed him as their 
prophet. All about rose Vorst’s 
metropolis, dazzling buildings 
that testified to the present might 
of the Brotherhood of the Immanent Radiance. 
The chubby Venusian — 
Mondschein, was it? — pressed a 
book into Lazarus’ hands. “The 
Book of Lazarus,” he said. “The 
account of your life and work. 
“And death?” 
“Yes, your death.” 
“You’ll need a new edition 
now,” Lazarus said. He smiled, 
but he was alone in his mirth. 
He felt strong. How had muscles failed to degenerate in his 
long sleep? How was it that he 
could rise and go among men, 
and make vocal cords obey him, 
and his body withstand the strain 
of life? 
He was alone with his followers. In a few days, they would 
take him back to Venus with 
them, where he would have to 
live in a self-contained environment. Vorst had offered to transform him into a Venusian; but 
Lazarus, stunned that such 
things were possible at all, was 
not sure that he cared to become 
a gilled creature. He needed time 
to ponder all this. The world 
he had so unexpectedly re-entered was very different from 
the one he had left. 
S ixty-odd years. Vorst had 
taken over the whole planet 
now, it seemed. 
That was the direction he had 
been heading in, back in the 
Eighties, when Lazarus had begun to disagree with him. Vorst 
had begun with a religio-scientific movement when Lazarus 
had joined it. Hocus-pocus with 
cobalt reactors, a litany of spectrum and electron, plenty of
larded-on spiritualism, but at the 
bottom a bluntly materialistic 
creed whose chief come-on was 
the promise of long (or eternal) 
life. Lazarus had gone for that. 
But soon, feeling his strength, 
Vorst had begun to slide men into 
parliaments, take over banks, 
utilities, hospitals, insurance companies. 
Lazarus had opposed all that 
Vorst had been accessible, then, 
and Lazarus remembered arguing with him against this deviation into finance and power politics. And Vorst had said, The 
plan calls for it.” 
“It’s a perversion of our religious motives.” 
“It’ll get us where we want to 
» • 
go. 
Lazarus had disagreed. Quietly, gathering a few supporters, he 
had established a rival group, 
while still nominally retaining 
his loyalty to Vorst. His apprenticeship with Vorst made him an 
expert on founding a faith. He 
proclaimed the reign of eternal 
harmony, gave his people green 
robes, symbols, reformist fervor, 
prayers, a developing liturgy. He 
could not say that his movement 
had become particularly powerful beside the Vorst machine, but 
at least it was a leading heresy, 
attracting hundreds of new followers each month. Lazarus had 
been looking toward a mission
ary movement, knowing that his 
ideas had a better chance of taking root on Venus and perhaps 
Mars than Vorst’s. 
And on a day in 2090 men in 
blue robes came to him and took 
him away, blanking out his guard 
of espers and stealing him as easily as though he had been a lump 
of lead. After that he knew no 
more, until his awakening in Santa Fe. 
They told him that the year 
was 2152, and that Venus was in 
the hands of his people. 
Mondschein said, “Will you let 
yourself be changed?” 
“I’m not sure yet. I’m considering it.” 
“It’ll be difficult for you to 
function on Venus unless you let 
them adapt you.” 
Perhaps I could stay on 
Earth.” Lazarus suggested. 
“Impossible. You’ve got no 
power base here. Vorst’s generosity will stretch only so far. He 
won’t let you remain here after 
the excitement of your return dies 
down.” 
; ‘You’re right.” Lazarus sighed. 
'‘I’ll let myself be changed, then. 
1 11 come to Venus and see what 
you’ve accomplished.” 
“You’ll be pleasantly surprised,” Mondschein promised. 
Tazarus had already been sufficiently surprised for one incarnation. They left him, and he
studied the scriptures of his faith,
fascinated by the martyr’s role 
they had written for him. A book 
of Harmonist history told Lazarus his own value: where the 
Brotherhood’s religious emotions 
crystallized around the remote, 
forbidding figure of Vorst, the 
Harmonists could safely revere 
their gentle martyr. How awkward it must be for them that 
I’m back, Lazarus thought! 
Vorst did not come to him 
while he rested in the Brotherhood’s hospital. A man named 
Kirby came, though, frosty-faced 
with age, and said he was the 
Hemispheric Coordinator and 
Vorst’s closest collaborator. 
“I joined the Brotherhood before your disappearance,” Kirby 
said. “Did you ever hear of me?” 
“I don’t believe so.” 
“I was only an underling,” 
Kirby said. “I suppose you 
wouldn’t have had reason to hear 
of me. But I hoped your memory 
would be clear, if we ever had 
met. I’ve got all these intervening years to cope with, but you 
can look back across a clean 
slate.” 
“My memory’s fine,” Lazarus 
said evenly. “I’ve got no recollection of you.” 
“Nor I of you. That’s the odd 
thing. If you were so important 
to the movement, why hadn’t I 
heard of you, Lazarus?” 
The resuscitated man shrugGALAXY 
ged. “I can’t tell you that. I was 
there. I worked beside Vorst. I 
had disputes with him. That 
much is beyond question. Eventually I split with him. I founded 
the Harmonists. Then I — disappeared. And here I am. Do you 
have trouble believing in me?” 
‘Terhaps I’ve been tampered 
with,” Kirby said. “I wish I remembered you.” 
Lazarus lay back. He stared at
the green, rubbery walls. 
The instruments monitoring his 
life-processes whirred and clicked. There was an acrid odor in 
the air: asepsis at work. Kirby 
looked unreal. Lazarus wondered 
what sort of maze of pumps and 
trestles held him together beneath 
his thick, warm blue robe. 
Kirby said, “You understand 
that you can’t remain on Earth, 
don’t you?” 
“Of course.” 
“Life will be uncomfortable for 
you on Venus unless you’re 
changed. We’ll do it for you. Your 
own men can supervise the operation. I’ve talked to Mondschein 
about it. Are you interested?” 
“Yes,” Lazarus said. “Change 
me.” 
They came the next day to 
turn him into a Venusian. He resented the public nature of the 
operation, but it was idle to pretend that his life was his own 
any more, anyway. It would take
several weeks, they said, to effect 
the transformation. Once it had 
taken months to do it. They 
would equip him with gills, fit 
him out to breathe the poisonous 
muck that was the atmosphere of 
Venus, and turn him loose. Lazarus submitted. They carved 
him, and put him back together 
again, and readied him for shipment. 
Vorst came to him, featheryvoiced and shrunken, but still a 
commanding figure, and said, 
“You must realize I had no part 
in your kidnapping. It was totally unauthorized — the work of 
zealots.” 
“Of course.” 
“I appreciate diversity of opinion. My way is not necessarily the 
only right way. I’ve felt the lack 
of a dialogue with Venus for 
many years. Once you’re installed 
there, I trust you’ll be willing to 
communicate with me from time 
to time.” 
Lazarus said, “I won’t close my 
mind against you, Vorst. You’ve 
given me life. I’ll listen to what 
you have to say. There’s no reason why we can’t cooperate, so 
long as we respect each other’s 
sphere of interests.” 
“Exactly! Our goal is the same, 
after all. We can join forces.” 
“Warily,” Lazarus said. 
“Warily, yes. But wholeheartedly.” Vorst smiled at him and 
departed. 
r T"he surgeons completed their 
work. Lazarus, now alien to 
Earth, journeyed to Venus with 
Mondschein and the rest of the 
Harmonist retinue. It was in the 
nature of a triumphant homecoming, if one can be said to come 
home to a place where one has 
never been before. 
Green-robed brethren with 
bluish-purple skins greeted him. 
Lazarus saw the Harmonist 
shrines, the holy ikons of his order. They had carried the spiritualistic element further than he 
had ever visualized, practically 
deifying him; but Lazarus did 
not intend to correct that. He 
knew how precarious his position 
was. There were men of entrenched power in his organization who 
secretly might not welcome a 
prophet’s return, and who might 
give him a second martyrdom if 
he challenged their vested interests. Lazarus moved warily. 
“We have made great progress 
with the espers,” Mondschein 
told him. “We’re considerably 
ahead of Vorst’s work in that line, 
so far as we know.” 
“Do you have telekinesis yet?” 
“For twenty years. We’re building the power steadily. Another 
generation — ” 
“I’d like a demonstration.” 
“We have one planned,” Mondschein said. 
They showed him what they 
could do. To reach into a block 
of wood and set its molecules 
dancing in flame — to move a 
boulder through the sky — to 
whisk themselves from place to 
place — yes, it was impressive. It 
defied comprehension. It certainly must be beyond the abilities of 
the Brotherhood on Earth. 
* J^'he Venusian espers cavorted 
for Lazarus, hour after hour. 
Mondschein, sedate and complacent, gleamed with satisfaction, 
spoke of thresholds, levitation, 
telekinetic impetus, fulcrums of 
unity, and other matters that left 
Lazarus baffled but encouraged. 
He who had returned pointed 
to the gray bands of clouds that 
hid the heavens. 
“How soon?” Lazarus asked. 
“We’re not ready for interstellar teleport yet,” Mondschein 
replied. “Not even interplanetary, 
really, though one shouldn’t 
be any harder than the other. 
We’re working on it. Give us 
time. We’ll succeed.” 
“Can we do it without Vorst’s 
help?” Lazarus asked. 
Mondschein’s complacence was 
punctured. “What kind of help 
can he give us? I’ve told you, 
we’re a generation ahead of his 
espers.” 
"And will espers be enough? 
Perhaps he can supply what we’re 
missing. A joint venture — Harmonists and Vorsters collaborating — don’t you think the possi
bilities are worth exploring, 
brother Christopher?” 
Mondschein smiled blandly. 
“Why, yes, yes, of course. Certainly they’re worth exploring. 
It’s an approach we hadn’t considered, I admit, but you give us 
a fresh insight into our problems. I’d like to discuss the matter with you further, after you’ve 
had a chance to settle down 
here.” , . , 
Lazarus accepted Mondschein s 
flow of words graciously. He had 
not, though, been away so long 
that he had forgotten how to 
read the meanings behind the 
meanings. 
He knew when he was being 
humored. 
VIII 
O n Santa Fe, with the unaccustomed invasion of Harmonists at its end. things returned to normal. Lazarus was come 
forth and loose upon the worlds, 
and the television men had retreated, and work went on. The 
tests, the experiments, the probing of the mysteries of life and 
mind — the ceaseless tasks of the 
Vorster inner movement. 
Kirby said, “Was there ever 
really a David Lazarus, Noel?” 
Vorst glowered up at him out 
of a thermoplastic cocoon. Hardly had the surgeons finished with 
Lazarus than they had gone to
work on the Founder, who was 
suffering from an aneurism in a 
twice-reconstituted blood vessel. 
Sensors had nailed the spot, subcutaneous scoops had exposed it, 
microtapes had been slammed 
into place, a network of thread 
and looping polymers replacing 
the dangerous bubble. Vorst was 
no stranger to such surgery. 
He said, “You saw Lazarus 
with your own eyes, Kirby.” 
“I saw something come out of 
that vault and stand up and talk 
rationally. I had conversations 
with it. I watched it get turned 
into a Venusian. That doesn’t 
mean it was real. You could build 
a Lazarus, couldn’t you, Noel?” 
“If I wanted to. But why would 
I want to?” 
“That’s obvious. To get control of the Harmonists.” 
“If I had designs against the 
Harmonists,” Vorst explained patiently, “I would have blotted 
them out fifty years ago, before 
they took Venus. They’re all 
right. That young man, Mondschein — he’s developed nicely.” 
“He isn’t young, Noel. He’s at 
least eighty.” 
“A child.” 
“Will you tell me whether Lazarus is genuine?” 
Vorst’s eyes fluttered in irritation. “He’s genuine, Kirby. Satisfied?” 
“Who put him in that vault?” 
“His own followers, I suppose.” 
Ill 
“Who then forgot all about it?” 
“Well, perhaps my men did it. 
Without authorization. Without 
telling me. It happened a long 
time ago.” Vorst’s hands moved 
in quick, agitated gestures. “How 
can I remember everything? He 
was found. We brought him back 
to life. I gave him to them. 
You’re annoying me, Kirby.” 
TZ"irby realized that he was 
treading a field salted with 
mines. He had pushed Vorst as 
far as Vorst could be pushed, and 
anything further would be disastrous. Kirby had seen other men 
presume too deeply on their 
closeness to Vorst, and he had 
seen that closeness imperceptibly 
withdrawn. 
“I’m sorry,” Kirby said. 
Vorst’s displeasure vanished. 
“You overrate my deviousness, 
Kirby. Stop worrying about Lazarus’ past. Simply consider the 
future. I’ve given him to the Harmonists. He’ll be valuable to 
them, whether they think so now 
or not. They’re p indebted to me. 
I’ve planted a good, heavy obligation on them. Don’t you think 
that’s useful? They owe me 
something now. When the right 
time comes, I’ll cash that in.” 
Kirby remained mute. He sensed that somehow Vorst had altered the balance of power between the two cults; that the 
Harmonists, who had been on a 
112 
rising curve ever since gaining 
possession of Venus and its rich 
lode of espers, had been brought 
to heel. 
But he did not know how it 
had been accomplished. And he 
did not care to try again to learn. 
Vorst was using his communicator. He looked up at Kirby. 
“They’ve got another burnout,” 
he said. “I want to be there, 
Come with me, yes?” 
“Of course,” Kirby said. 
He accompanied the Founder 
through the maze of tubes. They 
emerged in the burnout ward. An 
esper lay dying, a boy this time, 
perhaps Hawaiian, his body jerking as though he were skewered 
on cords. 
Vorst said. “A pity you’ve got 
no esping, Kirby. You’d see a 
glimpse of tomorrow.” 
“I’m too old to regret it now,” 
Kirby said. 
Vorst rolled forward and gestured to a waiting esper. The link 
was made. Kirby watched. What 
was Vorst experiencing, now? The 
Founder’s lips were moving, almost writhing in a kind of sneer, 
pulling back from the gums with 
each twitch of the esper’s body. 
The boy was shuttling along the 
time-track, so they said. To Kirby that meant nothing. And 
Vorst, somehow, was shuttling 
with him, seeing a clouded view 
of the world on the other side 
of the wall of time. 
Now . now . back . 
forth . 
F or a moment, it seemed to 
Kirby that he, too, had joined the linkup and was riding the 
time-track as the esper’s other 
passenger. Was that the chaos of 
yesterday? And the golden glow 
0 f tomorrow? Now — now — 
damn you, you old schemer, what 
have you done to me? — Lazarus, 
rising above all else, Lazarus who 
wasn’t even real, only some android stew cooked up in an underground laboratory at Vorst s 
command, a useful puppet, Kirby thought, Lazarus had grasped tomorrow and was stealing 
it — 
The contact broke. The esper 
was dead. 
“We’ve wasted another one,” 
Vorst muttered. The Founder 
looked at Kirby. “Are you sick?” 
he asked. 
“No. Tired.” 
“Get some rest. Six history 
spools and climb into a relaxer 
tank. We can ease up now. Lazarus is off our hands.” 
Kirby nodded. Someone drew 
a sheet over the dead esper’s 
body. 
In an hour the boy’s neurons 
would be in refrigeration some
★ ★
where in an adjoining building. 
Slowly, walking as if eight centuries and not just one weighed 
upon him, Kirby followed Vorst 
from the room. Night had fallen, 
and the stars over New Mexico 
had their peculiar hard brightness, and Venus, low against the 
mountainous horizon, was the 
brightest of all. 
They had their Lazarus, up 
there. They had lost a martyr, 
and had gained a prophet. And, 
Kirby was beginning to realize, 
the whole tribe of heretics had 
been swept neatly into Vorst s 
pocket. The old man was damnable! 
Kirby huddled down into his 
robe and kept pace, with an effort, as Vorst wheeled himself 
toward his office. His head ached 
from that brief, unfathomable 
contact with the esper. But in ten 
minutes it was slowly beginning 
to get better. 
He thought of going to a chapel 
to pray. But what was the use? 
Why kneel before the Blue Fire? 
He need only go to Vorst for a 
blessing — Vorst, his mentor for 
eight decades. Vorst, who could 
make him feel still like a child. 
Vorst, who had brought Lazarus 
forth from the dead. 
SFGRAM_STOP_SILVERBERG
★ ★ 
THE NIGHT BEFORE 
by GEORGE HENRY SMITH 
With the world on the brink of 
destruction, clearly there was 
only one place to turn for helpl 
/"\n the morning of the night 
before, a flight of jets went 
screaming across the sky like insane banshees in search of human 
blood. 
I woke up feeling as though I 
had been put through a meat 
grinder with dull teeth. I raised 
myself gingerly on one elbow 
but fell back immediately, fighting off the waves of pain and 
nausea of my hangover. I wanted 
to go back to sleep but knew that 
if I did I’d probably dream again, 
and I couldn’t face the kind of 
dreams I’d been having lately. 
Besides, time was running out 
and I had to keep searching the 
streets of Los Angeles until I 
found them. 
I had to find them. I had to 
find them before it happened. 
And when the American ultimatum on Berlin ran out, I had good 
reason to think the balloon was 
going to go up. 
Their existence on Earth was 
only a rumor, a vague, unreliable 
rumor that a ship from outer 
space had landed, its passengers 
come to save Earth from impending atomic war. But the rumor 
had enough force to have caused 
a group of us to search for the 
extraterrestrials for the last 
month. 
Our searching had all been in 
vain, however, until that morning when I lay in bed and stared 
at tlie ceiling. Then it suddenly 
came to me where I would find 
them. 
I had been looking in the 
wrong places. I had gone to observatories and scientific gatherings, expecting them to announce 
themselves there or at least be 
present. But now I realized these 
weren’t the sort of places to look 
in Los Angeles. What, I asked 
myself, was the most notable 
feature of this sprawling city by 
the sea? Its varied cults and 
oddball religions, of course! 
Where else would a stranger to 
this world and this city go to 
make themselves known? It 
would be the most natural thing 
of all to go to the churches. 
So I spent the afternoon and 
early evening in futile quest. I 
made my way from the Church 
of the Great White Brotherhood 
to the Temple of the Green Dolphin and on to the Tabernacle of 
Christian Capitalism, but as 
darkness closed in I was still 
looking. 
And then suddenly I thought 
I had found it. The sign on the 
door said, CHURCH OF THE 
U.F.O., and in smaller printing 
underneath, Hear the Space 
People Speak Tonight. 
I started to enter but found my 
way blocked by a small man 
in a red toga and sandals who 
held a clicking geiger counter out 
in front of him. “The rays . 
the rays,” he muttered, running 
the instrument up and down my 
clothes. “The rays are getting 
worse!” 
“What rays?” I asked, visions 
of strontium - 90 swimming 
through my head. 
“The rays! The zero rays from 
THE NIGHT BEFORE 
their ships! They’re everywhere! 
You can’t see the ships but the 
rays are everywhere . everywhere!” 
“Are they dangerous?” I asked. 
“Dangerous? Dangerous?” He 
looked at me wildly. “What do 
you mean dangerous?” 
His way of repeating everything was disconcerting. “I mean 
are the rays harmful?” I said. 
“Harmful? Harmful?” He giggled and hurried away. 
I walked on into the building, 
looking around for any signs of 
zero rays, but finding nothing 
except a little dust and a 
thin young man wearing hornrimmed glasses was speaking to 
a group of about thirty people. 
I found a seat and listened to 
him talk. 
“Captain Linda-Ray, a beautiful young woman from the planet 
Solacon, which is on the other 
side of the sun from Earth and 
can’t be seen from here, took me 
on a four-hour trip to her lovely 
world. The ship in which we 
traveled operated on solar emanations from the bodies of the Solaconians and went at a speed in 
excess of ten thousand miles an 
hour.” 
Very odd, I thought, and 
scratched my chin in puzzlement. 
“Captain Linda-Ray introduced me to the Supreme Ruler of 
Solacon, a gorgeous six-foot 
blonde named Dora-Ray, who 
told me that her people have 
been waiting ten T thousand years 
to contact Earth to warn us about 
fluoridated water and atomic 
radiation.” 
Somehow this didn’t sound like 
the kind of extraterrestrials I 
had in mind. This group’s chemistry was bad and their astronomy worse. 
“Excuse me, please,” said a 
small woman with silvery hair, 
raising a white-gloved hand. 
“Please,” the young man said 
in an annoyed tone, “you may 
ask questions when I’ve finished.” Then he went on with his 
story. “I asked Dora-Ray why 
they hadn’t gotten in touch with 
Earth before. ‘Because,’ she said, 
looking at me pointedly, ‘we have 
been waiting for a man who could 
understand and interpret our 
knowledge of the people on 
Earth.’ ” 
“I stared at her, not quite willing to believe what she seemed 
to be saying. ‘You mean . .? 
“ ‘I mean you are that man,’ 
Dora-Ray told me, placing her 
hands on my shoulders. ‘You, 
Simon Hudson, are that man!’ 
“I hope I’ll prove worthy of 
your great trust,’ I said humbly, 
although in all modesty I knew 
she was right. There was no one 
else on this planet who was capable of understanding the magnificent sweep of their knowledge.” 
Oh boy, I thought, we’re in bad 
shape if he’s Earth’s greatest 
brain! 
T T e went on in the same reasonable voice, saying even more 
unreasonable things. “ ‘You must 
begin work at once,’ she said. 
•You have only ten hours in 
which to learn everything we 
know so that you may teach it 
to your people. In ten hours, 
Solacon will again be on the other 
side of the sun where it cannot be 
reached for another fifty years.’ 
“ T3ut how can even I learn 
so much in so short a time?’ I 
asked. 
“ ‘We will help you with our 
hypno-robot subliminal teacher,’ 
she said with a smile. 
“Dora-Ray and her two head 
scientists, Lena-Ray and RitaRay, accompanied me through 
their crystal-glass city to the 
huge laboratory where I saw 
machines and instruments undreamed of by our scientists, by 
means of which they had made 
discoveries which disprove everything our scientists claim to 
know. In this great laboratory, 
I was placed upon a foam-cushioned hypno-couch that relaxed 
my body and brain and prepared 
it to receive the vast stores of 
their knowledge. 
“Dora-Ray stood beside me 
and looked deep ito my eyes. 
“When you awaken, you will be 
once again on your home planet,’ 
she said softly as sleep began to 
steal over me. ‘We hope much 
from you, O Great Man of Earth! 
Do not fail us! Do not fail me!’ 
“ ‘Fear not, I will not fail you,’ 
I promised as my eyes closed. 
‘But will I ever see you again?’ 
“ ‘Perhaps ... if you prove 
worthy of us,’ she said and the 
room faded away. 
“In what seemed only seconds, 
I was opening my eyes and finding myself in the middle of Sunset Boulevard with frightened 
people all around me. 
“ ‘A flying saucer! We saw a 
flying saucer!’ a woman cried, 
and I could only smile. 
“ ‘I’m sure you did,” I said, 
and ran to catch a bus to take me 
home, a changed and far, far 
wiser man than I had been before.” 
The thin young man smiled 
and reached into a briefcase and 
produced a book. “And what of 
that wisdom the Solacons entrusted to me to impart to the 
people of Earth? How can you 
gain your share of this supreme 
wisdom? You will find it all here 
in my book, Wisdom From A 
Flying Saucer, which is on sale 
in the lobby for only $6.98 a 
copy. I urge you, friends, not to 
pass up this great opportunity to 
read and absorb this knowledge.” 
Some knowledge, I thought, 
THE NIGHT BEFORE 
as Simon Hudson left the platform amid scattered applause. 
“Excuse me,” the woman in 
the white gloves said. “I am quite 
well acquainted with the solar 
system and there is no such 
planet as Solacon. And may I 
also point out that due to the 
varying rotation of the planets, 
none of them is always on the 
other side of the sun.” 
“Sit down!” someone shouted. 
“It’s not your turn yet.” 
“Yes, who do you think you 
are?” Simon Hudson demanded. 
“What right have you to mess up 
my story?” 
“Yeah, what do you know 
about space anyhow?” another 
voice asked. 
“Well, you see,” the woman 
said, and I noted that she was 
very young despite her silvery 
hair, “it so happens that I recently landed from a spaceship 
and — ” 
“So what?” demanded a baldheaded man in the front row. “A 
lot of us have recently landed 
from spaceships. I’m from Saturn 
myself. You’ll just have to wait 
your turn.” 
“But I really am from — ” 
“Repent! Repent!” screeched 
a female voice from behind us. 
“The Flying Saucers are God’s 
angels sent to watch over us in 
these Last Days. Repent! Repent! Repent before it is too 
late!" 
This was more like it, I 
thought, turning to look at the 
woman. At least she knows these 
are the Last Days even if she 
isn’t aware this is The Night Before. 
Qhe was dressed in a long white 
^ robe and held a white Bible 
lifted over her head. “Revelations 
10:7 tells us of the mighty angel 
with a rainbow at his head sent 
to save mankind. The Flying 
Saucers are those mighty angels! 
They are watching us! Their eyes 
are upon us in the market place, 
in the counting house, in the 
places where women dance with 
their naked bodies glistening before pop-eyed men! Their eyes 
are upon us as we smoke the 
devil’s stick we call cigarettes and 
when we drink the hell-poison 
we call whiskey! Their eyes are 
upon us always! Oh yes, Lord, 
the eyes of Your angels are upon 
us even in the sweltering lust of 
our carnal beds!” 
Somewhat to my surprise, no 
one paid the slightest attention 
to this outburst. The expressions 
on their faces indicated they 
thought she was being a trifle unscientific, but personally I 
thought she had a nice feeling 
for vituperation. But now that 
she had subsided, I turned back 
to the platform and saw there a 
small, hollow-eyed man who 
was talking too. 
“. my program . the program given me by the Grand Coordinator, Polius, of the Andromeda Sector of the Galactic Union is this: First, all money must 
be called in and replaced by a 
new exchange system. This will 
be preceded by a gathering of 
all industrial and other leaders 
of the world to form the Cosmic 
Cooperative and Friendship Union. The Union will then issue 
work units to everyone which 
will take the place of money. 
“If you have read my book, 
Cosmic Cooperation from 
U.F.O.’s, you already know that 
among the Cosmos there is no 
crime, immodesty, hunger or 
sex. War has long ago ceased to 
be a menace, and they do not 
live in huge, crowded cities as 
we do, but each in his own beautiful garden in which grow hundreds of beautiful flowers with 
perfumes so rare and strange 
that—” 
“I beg your pardon,” the silvery haired woman said, “but I 
must point out that you have 
made several basic mistakes in 
your description of our society. 
In truth, we have done away 
with crime and hunger, but as 
for sex . well, we certainly 
haven’t done away with that and 
I don’t think we’d care to. As for 
war, we — ” 
“Why don’t you quit butting 
in?” the man on the stage asked 
heatedly. “Wait until it’s your 
A- AW, » 
turn. 
“I was only trying to correct — ” 
“Sit down and shut up!” 
“Wait your turn!” 
“But, please, I should like to 
tell the people of Earth that — ” 
“Please, madam,” the moderator said, banging his gavel on 
the table. “We are all anxious to 
bring our messages to the people 
of Earth. You will just have to 
wait your turn to speak!” 
A nother man took over the dais 
immediately. “I am a member of a small group that has 
been in touch with the Space 
People and feel that the world 
can only be saved through the 
aid of these vastly superior beings. I want to play this tape for 
you. It is part of a radio conversation I had with the captain of 
a flying saucer.” 
He placed the spool on the 
player and a voice began to 
speak in slightly stilted English. 
“I am Lelan. I am what you 
people of Earth think of as the 
head of government on the planet 
Nobelia. I speak to you across 
the parsecs in order to bring you 
news, both good and bad. The 
good news is that a new age is 
about to begin for you through 
us. We have already contacted 
the President of the United 
States, the Pope of the Catholic 
Church and other world leaders. 
THE NIGHT BEFORE 
Unfortunately, they have chosen 
to ignor us and so we have had 
to act through this wise man who 
is playing this tape for you. 
“In the future, R. Spencer 
Jason will become your leader 
and we will deal with you through 
him. But before this new age can 
begin, we must save you from 
the influence of the vicious inhabitants of the planet Zeno. All 
Earth knowledge will become obsolete as we give you new information, and all good things will 
be free in the days that follow 
after we drive the Zenonians 
from among you. 
“But first we must warn you 
that the Zenonians will stop at 
nothing to prevent our saving 
Earth. It is they who control all 
the governments of all your nations. It is they who have brought 
all evil to your planet! It is they 
who control the Communist 
world plot. Adolph Hitler was a 
Zenonian and so are those who 
are attempting to fluoridate the 
water of America. J. Edgar 
Hoover and his FBI know that 
the Zenonians are the worst menace your beloved country has ever 
faced. Listen to this man, J. 
Spencer Jason, who is to be your 
new leader. Look around you for 
people who appear strange! Look 
for people who act and dress 
strangely! Examine the man next 
to you! Beware! You shall hear 
from us again!” 
I turned and looked at the 
guy next to me.jHe looked at me. 
He was a rather strange looking 
duck. He looked just like the 
type who would plot against J. 
Edgar Hoover if he thought he 
could get away with it. I edged 
away from him just as he started 
edging away from me. I turned 
to look at the man on my other 
side, and he was edging away 
from me too. It was just as well. 
He looked like he might be a 
Zenonian too. 
A discussion period followed 
and finally I got a chance to give 
them my impression of U.F.O.’s. 
I told them it seemed to me they 
always showed up after we had 
set off H-bombs or made space 
flights. “In fact,” I said, “I think 
Earth is a giant mental institution in which the human race has 
been incarcerated for its own 
good, and every time we start 
rattling the bars, our keepers 
come hurrying down to take a 
look.” 
No one cared much for that 
theory and I was escorted to the 
door none too politely. I didn’t 
really care because I had already 
decided none of these space 
people were the ones I was seeking. 
r T''he headlines on the comer 
newsstand were worse than 
ever. They were so bad that even 
the average man in the street was 
120 
beginning to pay attention and 
look nervous. And there was so 
much traffic that I wondered if 
some of the city’s millions hadn’t 
decided to head for the hills. 
I was scared myself, so scared 
that I seriously considered making a run for it. It was only what 
I knew about the casings of 
those new 100-megaton weapons 
that kept me from it. What was 
the use? At least here in the 
city, one would go quickly. Back 
in the mountains, death would be 
slower and more painful as fallout from cobalt casings poisoned 
the atmosphere. 
No, I wasn’t going to run, but 
it looked as though I wasn’t going to find the E.T.’s either. I 
didn’t feel that any of the other 
searchers had had any better 
luck than I, and there wasn’t 
much time left. 
I stopped and had a few drinks 
at a bar and then just sort of 
drifted along until I came to another church. A church would be 
as good a place as any when the 
bombs came. 
The one I picked was behind 
a painted over storefront window 
which proclaimed it The Church 
of the Open Word. I went inside 
and found a seat on a hard 
wooden bench between a large, 
brawny man whose chest and 
shoulders bulged out of a sweaty 
T-shirt and a pregnant blonde 
girl whose uncurled and un
GALAXY 
combed hair hung down limply 
over her ears and forehead in a 
tangled mass. She smelled almost 
as strongly of bleach as the man 
did of perspiration. For a moment I wondered why I had come 
into this place. If I had been 
sober I wouldn’t have. This 
wasn’t the kind of church one 
might expect to find E.T.’s. I 
looked around and decided no 
one looked much holier than I 
did. Maybe they were all here 
to await the end of the world like 
me. 
They were leaning forward, 
bodies tense, mouth open, radiating an emotional heat that 
turned the crowded little room 
into a humid jungle of emotion. 
Suddenly the lights at the 
front of the room went up and 
the dirty yellow walls with their 
long strips of peeling paint disappeared. A tall, floridly handsome man stepped into the spotlight. He was dressed in a wellcut, expensive suit, his hair was 
long and flowing and his face was 
wreathed in a benigh smile. He 
faced the crowd with the absolute assurance of a man who 
knows he has his audience right 
in the palm of his hand from the 
very start. 
“Let us pray!” he said, raising 
his hands, and every head in the 
place was lowered. “Let’s not just 
bend our heads . let’s really 
pray!” 
THE NIGHT BEFORE 
I bent my head with all the others, and while we sat there, 
the man on the podium began to 
sing, softly at first and then rising to a bellow. “Keep on Praying ’Til You Pray Right 
Through!” 
“Come on now, let’s pray the 
way we always do here at the 
Church of the Open Word,” he 
exhorted us. “Let’s have group 
prayer! Let’s have our out loud 
praying that always prays right 
through.” 
There was a sibilant whisper 
from the congregation. 
“Don’t just mumble! How do 
you expect the Lord to hear you 
if you don’t pray loud enough 
for Him to hear you way up in 
Heaven?” 
Everyone prayed a little louder. 
“Our Father Who art in heaven .. our Father Who art in 
Heaven . .” For some reason I 
couldn’t remember any more. I 
wanted to pray but the words 
weren’t there. Maybe I had spent 
too much time with slide rules 
and engineering formula. “Oh 
God . don’t let the war start! 
Don’t let us destroy the world! 
Don’t let the world come to an 
end! Don’t . .” 
“ALL RIGHT NOW, FOLKS, 
LET’S MAKE GOD HEAR US! 
HOW CAN HE HELP YOU IF 
HE CAN’T HEAR YOU?” the 
minister shouted. 
For some reason I had expected the people around me to 
be praying the same thing I was. 
I thought they were here to 
pray for peace, but as their individual words penetrated my 
consciousness, I knew they 
weren’t. 
Words were bubbling out of 
the blonde next to me. “Hallowed be Thy name. Don’t let 
him find out! Oh God, don’t let 
Jim find out! Don’t ever let him 
find out about Kenny and me 
that night in the garage! Don’t 
let that nosey old woman next 
door tell him about seeing us! 
He’ll kill me, Lord, if he finds 
out! And I won’t ever do it again! 
I promise! It wasn’t like the other 
times, Lord ... it wasn’t like 
with Fred and Andy. This time it 
just sort of happened. Lord. If 
you just don’t let Jim find out, 
I’ll never do it again with no 
other man. Never, never, never, 
Lord!” 
“LOUDER! LOUDER!” 
“. Thy kingdom come, on 
earth as it is in heaven . .” I 
muttered, remembering a little 
more. “Don’t let them push the 
buttons! Hold back their hands! 
Don’t let them kill us all! Please, 
God!” 
“Give us this day, our daily 
bread . .” squeaked a tiny, bespectacled man in the next row. 
“Don’t let me lose my job, God! 
Please, don’t let me lose it! I’m 
122 
too old to get another one, and 
what with Grace and the 
kids . .” 
“Forgive us our trespasses as 
we forgive those who trespass 
against us,” rumbled the big man 
on my other side. “If I could only 
get a little rest at night . then 
I wouldn’t always be so tired and 
I could take her places like she 
wants. But I can’t sleep, Lord, 
because I keep remembering . 
I keep remembering those kids 
in the back seat of that car I 
forced off the road one night . 
those screams when the fire . 
Oh God, the fire! God forgive 
me! Forgive me!” 
“For Thine is the Kingdom — ” 
It was all coming back now, just 
as I had known it as a boy when 
my mother used to tuck me into 
bed and tell me about the sweet 
Christ and our Blessed Mother 
Mary. Why had she ever left 
me? Why had she gone off and 
left Dad and me alone in that 
split-level nightmare of a house? 
“Don’t let the war start! Please, 
don’t let it!” 
“. and the Power and Glory 
. don’t let me die, Lord ! Don’t 
let me die!” It was the flashily 
dressed brunette in the row 
ahead. “Please don’t let the cancer kill me! It hurts so much, but 
I can stand it if you just don’t let 
it kill me! Keep me alive . 
let me live for a little while longer!” 
tt'fT7'e’re all going to die to’ ’ morrow, I thought wildly, and she’s praying to live a 
little longer. What’s the matter 
with these people? Don’t they 
know? Can’t they understand 
what’s going to happen? 
“Now and forever,” a little 
girl’s voice came through. “I love 
you, God, but why don’t you 
make my Mommie and Daddy 
stop fighting and live together 
again? 
“Amen.” The voice was old 
and quavery. “Don’t let them 
send me to the home, God. I 
know I’m not much use around 
the house, but I don’t eat very 
much and I’ve only got a few 
more years and I want to spend 
them with them.” 
“If Jim finds out he’ll kill me 
. and he’ll kill Kenny too. And 
anyway, Lord, it wasn’t much 
fun ’cause we were in too much 
of a hurry. Jim will kill me and 
I don’t wanna be killed for something that wasn’t even fun! If 
he’d killed me for Fred or Andy, 
that would have been kinda fair, 
but not for Kenny, please, Lord!” 
“Don’t let me lose my job .” 
“It hurts . it hurts so much, 
Lord.” 
“Don’t let them start the war!” 
“I know I get on their nerves, 
but . .” 
“Mommie! Mommie! I want 
my Mommie!” 
“I won’t never do it again 
THE NIGHT BEFORE 
with nobody but Jim. Even if I 
don’t like it with him, I won’t do 
it with nobody else, Lord! And 
how can he tell the baby isn’t 
his? Maybe it is for all I know, 
Lord. I don’t want to die! I don’t 
want to die!” 
“It hurts, but I don’t want to 
die!” 
“I don’t want to die!” 
“I don’t want to die! Don’t let 
them start it!” And then suddenly I was standing up and screaming at those around me, “WHY 
DON’T YOU SHUT UP? SHUT 
UP! HOW CAN HE HEAR ME 
IF YOU DON’T SHUT UP?” 
Then I was running up the 
aisle to get away from the sound 
of their voices, the sound of 
people who didn’t have time to 
worry about the end of the world 
because their own piddling little 
troubles were more important. 
“Why can’t I get through to 
them? Why won’t they listen to 
me?” an anguished voice broke 
through my anger. It was a vaguely familiar voice and I looked 
around for its owner. 
“I’ve tried so hard. I’ve talked 
to so many people, but no one 
seems to believe me, and it’s so 
important that they do.” 
“You! It couldn’t be you!” I 
said as I saw the woman who had 
been at the flying saucer meeting, the small, silvery haired 
woman with the white gloves. She 
was huddled in the very last row, 
praying out loud like the others. 
“You? Is it you?” I asked, looming over her. “Are you the one 
I’ve been looking for?” 
“You’ve been looking for me?” 
, She had a slight accent but I 
couldn’t identify it as any I had 
heard before. “Why have you 
been looking for me?” 
“Because ...” I was looking 
down at her hands and all of a 
sudden I understood the reason 
for die white gloves. They served 
to partially disguise the fact that 
she had six fingers on each hand. 
“You are from the . where 
are your friends? I must talk to 
your friends.” 
She shook her silvery head. “I 
have no friends . not on this 
world.” 
4 4T) ut . but you couldn’t 
-*-* have come alone . not 
all that distance alone.” 
She got up and by mutual consent we walked out the door of 
the Church to the Open Word. 
“I did not come alone,” she 
said, “but my companions were 
killed when our spaceship 
crashed. All the compartments 
except mine were flooded. I made 
myself stay there until I learned 
your language, thinking that then 
I would be able to communicate 
with you and everything would 
be all right, but for three weeks 
now I have talked but no one 
has listened ... no one!” 
We were out in the street now, 
and although it was long past 
midnight, the traffic was bumper 
to bumper. The sheep of the city 
had finally smelled the wolf of 
war coming and were trying to 
outrun him. 
“I’m listening,” I said. “I will 
receive your message for Earth, 
the message that will save — ” 
“That will save us, I hope,” 
the woman said. “You see, I came 
here to request the help of your 
people in — ” 
“You what?” I stared at her 
with a sick feeling in the pit of 
my stomach. Even now, at the 
very last minute, I had expected 
some kind of miracle from the 
ship which had come halfway 
across the universe. 
“We came here for help,” she 
said. “We thought that perhaps 
another people ... a people with 
a more spiritual background 
might be able to tell us how to 
save ourselves from ” 
“From what?” I asked as she 
hesitated. 
■“From a planet -wide war that 
will wipe us all out. We thought 
that another point of view would 
help, give us some hint of — ” She 
stopped and stared up at me. 
“You mean that you ... you 
too?” 
“Yes, we too,” I said and tried 
to keep back the sobs that were 
threatening to choke me. 
“I should have known! I’ve 
GALAXY 
been visiting your churches, trying to get in touch with your 
spiritual leaders, but I’ve felt . 
felt the same sickness here as on 
my home planet. I guess I just 
refused to face it.” 
“Just as I refused to face the 
fact that there wouldn’t be any 
last minute miracle,” I said. “The 
dragon’s teeth are sown and — ” 
“When? How soon?” 
“Very soon,” I said. “Just before dawn, I think.” 
er shoulders sagged. “We 
came so far. We came so 
very far, and now to find this — ” 
There wasn’t anything I could 
say so I reached out and took her 
hand. “I’m sorry.” 
She smiled a very small smile, 
and for the first time I noticed 
that she was beautiful. “Do you 
have anything to do before — before your world comes to an 
end?” she asked. 
“No, not now,” I said sadly. 
“Then perhaps we could spend 
the time together?” 
“Yes, I’d like that.” 
“Let’s just walk,” she said, and 
her six fingers gripped my five 
tightly as we began to walk silently into the last black dark of 
The Night Before. 
— GEORGE HENRY SMITH 
STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP. MANAGEMENT AND CIRCCIATION (Act of Octobm *» J***; 
4369 Title 39. United Mates Code). 1. Date of filing: October 1. 19B5. 2. T Ue Millcatlon . GAaxy 
Magazine. 3. Frequency ot issue: Bi-monthly. 4. Location of known office of publication. *21 Hudson SBW. 
New York. New York 10014. 5. Location of headquarters or general business ofllMs of L'ditor 
Hudson Street. New York, New York 10914. Names and addresses of publisher editor and „ h , aoi 
Publisher: Robert M. Guinn, 421 Hudson Street. New York New York 10 ^ EdiWr: Frrterik Pohl. 421 
Hudson Street. New York, New York 10014. Managing Editor: None. 7. Owner Galaxy Publishing Lor 
poration, 421 Hudson Street. New York. New York 10014; Robert M. Guinn (sole stekholder), 421 Hud 
son Street, New York New York 10014. 8. Known bondholders, mortgages and other Mount* ' holders 
owning or holding 1 percent or more of total amount of bonds, mortgages or othar seOTrltles None. 
9. Paragraphs 7 and 8 include, in cases where the stockholders or security holder appears upon the books 
of the company as trustee or in any other fiduciary relation, the name of the person or . 
such trustee is acting, also the statements in the two paragraphs show the affiant s full Iraowleage ana 
as to the circumstances and conditions under which stockholders and security holders who do not appe 
upon the books of the company as trustees, hold stock and securities in a capacity other than that r 
a bona fide owner. Names and addresses of individuals who are stockholders of a corporation which itself 
is a stockholder or holder of bonds, mortgages or other securities of the publishing corporation bare been 
Included in paragraphs 7 and 8 whes the interests of such individuals are equivalent to 1 percent or 
more of the total amount of the stock or securities of the publishing corporation. 10. A. Total no. copies 
printed (net press run). Average no copies each issue during preceding 12 months: nz,460. Single issue 
nearest to filing date: 112,750. B. Paid circulation: 1. Sales through dealers and carriers, street vendors 
and counter sales. Average no. copies each issue during preceding 12 months: 67,110; Single issue nearest 
filing date: 66,525. 2. Mail subscriptions: Average no. copies each issue during preceding 12 months, o,50V; 
Single issue nearest to filing date, 6,700. C. Total paid circulation: Average no. copies each issue during 
preceding 12 months, 73,610; Single issue nearest to filing date, 73,225. D. Free distribution (Including 
samples) by mall, carrier or other means: Average no. copies each issue during preceding 12 months 
None; Single issue nearest to filing date. None; E. Total distribution (sum of C ! and D): Average no. 
copies each issue during preceding 12 months, 73,810; Single Issue nearest to filing date, 73,225. F. 
Office use. left-over, unaccounted, spoiled after printing: Average no. copies each Issue during preceding 
12 months, 38,850; Single issue nearest to filing date, 39,525. G. Total (sum of E and F—should equal 
net press run shown in A) ; Average no copies each issue during preceding 12 months, 112,460 ; Single 
issue nearest to filing date, 112,750. I certify that the statement made by me above are correct and 
complete. Robert M. Guinn, Publisher. 
THE NIGHT BEFORE 
for 
your 
information 
BY WILLY LEY 
THE RE-DESIGNED 
SOLAR SYSTEM 
A t one time in my career — it 
was in summer, 1929 — I was 
asked to write an introductory 
article for a special issue of a 
German movie magazine. That 
special issue was for the premiere 
of the first large scale space-travel 
movie, Fritz Lang’s Girl in the 
Moon. Having worked myself 
into a poetical mood by thinking 
of the past and of the future simultaneously, I conceived the 
idea of the “three ears of astronomy”. 
During the first, the pre-telescopic era, astronomers could 
only determine the positions of 
the fixed stars in the sky and the 
movements of the planets among 
them. They could neither hope 
to find the sizes of the planets — 
if, indeed, they differed in size 
— nor could they expect to find 
out any of the distances. 
Then came the second era, that 
of the telescope. It first proved 
that the planets were solid bodies, 
it made it clear that they were 
of different sizes, it established 
their distances and finally it even 
found the distances to some of 
the nearer fixed stars. But then 
the question of the surface conditions on the various planets 
came up, and the most determined efforts with the telescope, and 
later with spectroscope and camera, only produced “educated 
guesses” and speculation. It was 
rarely possible to draw a line between the two. Therefore I wrote 
that the second era had succeeded in solving all the unsolved 
problems of the first era — but 
had created a number of problems of its own. 
Ah, but the third era, the era 
of space-going devices! That 
third era would solve all the 
problems posed by the second 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
era. More in the spirit of tolerance than out of conviction, I 
added that the third era might 
pose some problems of its own. 
Well, we are in the early stages 
of that third era by now. Some 
problems that were inherently insoluble for the second era, like 
the appearance of the far side of 
the moon, have been nicely solved. Quite a number of other 
things have happened too, and, 
taking refuge in that half sentence that the “the third era might 
pose problems of its own”, I can 
sav that I foresaw this fact. 
But I did not expect new problems to crop up right at the outset of the space age. Nor did I 
expect that space age astronomy 
would re-design the whole inner 
solar system. As far as the inner 
portion of the solar system is 
concerned, literally every member of it, including our own Earth, 
has been changed around. 
Let us begin with the planet 
nearest the sun, Mercury. 
TV Mercury has always been a 
“difficult object”, to use the 
cautious language of the astronomer. At the very best the angular distance of Mercury from the 
sun is 27 degrees and 45 minutes 
of arc. That means that, as seen 
from the Earth, Mercury is always close to the sun. It can 
therefore only be seen in a sky 
that is illuminated by the sun, 
3 
Fig. 1. Tfie Brightside of Mercury os 
drawn by G. V. Schiaparelli 
and later by E. M. Antoniadi. 
either at dusk or at dawn. And, 
of course, you have to have a 
horizon that is free of clouds and 
haze. It is an interesting fact that 
Nicholas Copernicus knew of the 
existence of Mercury only second-hand; late in life he complained that he had never seen 
it himself. 
Yet the light coming from 
Mercury, even though it is only 
reflected sunlight, is by no means 
weak. If we could have Mercury 
in the midnight sky it would outshine Sirius. It is the proximity 
to the sun that causes all the 
problems. 
At one time the Italian astronomer Giovanni Virginio Schiaparelli decided that one could gain 
a little by observing Mercury in 
128 
daylight. Of course the sky would 
be still brighter, but at least the 
planet would be high in the sky 
so that our atmosphere would 
not be so much in the way. The 
idea proved to be so useful that 
in 1893 Schiaparelli could announce — with the king and 
Queen of Italy in the audience, 
no less — that Mercury had a 
period of rotation that matched 
its period of revolution, hence 
that it always turned the same 
face to the sun, just as the moon 
does with earth. 
With that lecture, the concept 
of Mercury that survived until 
last year was born. Not quite 
half of the planet was never 
reached by the sun’s rays; there 
the leftovers of the original atmosphere would be lying frozen 
on the ground. And not quite 
half of the planet’s surface was 
ever under the fierce rays of the 
nearby sun, and tin and lead, if 
present, would form shimmering 
puddles on the hot rock. Between 
these two extremes there was the 
promise- crammed Twilight Belt, 
illuminated but hardly heated by 
slanting sunlight for a few days 
of every Mercurian year that 
lasts only 88 days. This concept 
was fine and logical and firmly 
established for threescore and ten 
years. 
And then what happened? 
Then they started bouncing radar 
impulses off Mercury and found 
Fig. 2. The beginning of the earth's "magnetic tail". The figures 
give distances in thousands of miles, measured from the center of the Earth. 
that Mercury is slowly turning 
on its axis. 
Its year is still 88 days, but its 
day is only about 64 days. The 
result, of course, is that both the 
sunlit side and the dark side wander slowly around the planet. The 
sunlit side will still be very hot, 
but it will get a chance to cool 
off. And the dark side will become the sunlit side at regular 
intervals — which means that 
there can be no remnants of the 
Mercurian atmosphere left. All 
the gases that might have existed 
there once must have escaped in
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
to space a long time ago. 
While I was contemplating the 
problem of how to re-write the 
section on Mercury in my Conquest of Space, a reader sent me 
something that was labeled “an 
unpoetic fragment”, with permission to quote but with simultaneous insistence on “no screen 
credits, please!” The Mercury 
section reads: 
Gone the thrilling tales of Brightside 
Neatly paired with chilling Nightside 
Not even now a Twilight Zone, 
The darn thing rotates, just like home. 
But I feel obliged to add that 
“home is still a thousand times 
more comfortable — at least to 
us. 
Well, the discovery of the rotation of Mercury may have destroyed a few cherished concepts, 
but after all this is progress. 
Didn’t space age astronomy neatly solve the problem of Mercury? 
Well, yes, but . 
T)ut there is the problem of 
some pictures. 
Schiaparelli, when at the 
height of his career, drew a chart 
of the brightside of Mercury (Fig. 
1.) Some fifteen years later the 
Greek-bom French astronomer 
Eugenios-Marie Antoniadi also 
drew a chart of the brightside of 
the planet. Except for the fact 
that Antoniadi filled in some 
areas, like the oval on the lower 
right of the drawing, with a uniform gray shade, the two drawings are alike. 
But if Mercury rotates, how 
can this be explained? 
Well, there is a possible explanation, and it has to do with 
what Percival Lowell termed a 
“presentation”. When observing 
Mars, Lowell had to keep in 
mind that the rotation of Mars 
is a bit slower than that of the 
earth. If you had a certain view 
of Mars at 10 P.M. on a . given 
night, that same view would not 
occur at 10 P.M. the following 
130 
£ 
Fig. 3. Mars, as drawn by Antoniadi 
in 1909, showing a dost storm 
obscuring almost one quarter 
of the disk of the planet. 
night, but at about 10:40 P.M. 
Then you had the same view 
in the telescope — the same “presentation”. Now Schiaparelli’s 
drawing shows one specific presentation of Mercury. Antoniadi’s drawing is evidently the same 
presentation. 
But why are there no other 
drawings of other presentations, 
since Mercury rotates? If one 
assumes that the other hemisphere of Mercury is devoid of 
outstanding features and therefore looks just like a blur, these 
two drawings can be reconciled 
with a rotation : they both would 
show the only “presentation” 
where something can be seen. 
If anybody should tell me that 
this is merely an excuse I made 
I up in a hurry I would have to 
accept the accusation. We’ll simply have to wait and see what 
additional work will turn up. In 
the meantime this explanation 
has to serve — because there is 
no other. 
Progressing to the next planet, Venus, the changes brought 
about by space age astronomy 
are less disappointing — or more 
so, depending on what you believed before. When I heard my 
first lectures on astronomy I 
learned that there were two views 
of Venus. One had the classical 
name of panthatassa (meaning 
“all ocean”) and according to this 
view Venus was completely covered by water. There might be a 
few small islands, but a large 
land mass could not exist. If 
there were one, it would cause 
vertical currents in the atmosphere and these currents would 
break up the uniform cloud layer 
which every observer complained about. 
The other view did admit land 
masses, but not dry land masses. 
Land masses there might be, but 
everything would be swampy, 
covered with shallow lakes. In a 
few elevated areas there might 
be stretches of dripping jungle. 
And who could tell what weird 
animals might walk or crawl 
around in the eternal greenish 
dusk? 
In the interval between the two 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
world wars a third view of Venus 
was conceived. One could have 
the unbroken cloud layer, which 
was the main fact known about 
Venus, without endless oceans. 
One could have the same clouds 
if Venus were completely dry, 
with all the water in its atmosphere in the form of vapor, while 
on the ground, at a temperature 
above the boiling point of water, 
endless dust storms were raging. 
Space probe Mariner II showed 
that the surface temperature of 
Venus is 800 degrees Fahrenheit, 
so that the third view was proved to have been closest to the 
mark. Science-fiction writers realized that a whole shelf of nice 
Venus stories was suddenly obsolete, and my “unpoetic fragment” echoes their disappointment: 
Bye-bye mermaids and dripping jungles 
Dinosaurs, large swamps and similar 
bungles. 
In fact, bye-bye Venus — you beutiful 
tease 
Till you explain those 800 degrees. 
As a matter of fact much more 
than those 800 degrees have to 
be explained. According to the 
findings of Mariner II, the atmospheric pressure at the ground 
must be ten to twenty times that 
of our atmosphere at sea level. 
The lower limit of the cloud layer 
would lie at about 15 miles, 
which is higher than the highest 
clouds (except for temporary volcanic clouds) in our own atmosphere. But the mass of Venus is 
about 81 per cent of the mass of 
our planet. How can Venus hold 
on to such an extensive atmosphere with a smaller mass — 
and, in addition to that, be closer to the sun? Somebody should 
put a computer or two to work 
on that problem. 
■progressing to the Earth, space 
-*■ age astronomy has not changed its surface, of course. But it 
has shown that the earth has a 
number of things we have literally never seen. 
Until airplanes climbed to high 
altitudes we had no idea of the 
existence of the so-called jetstream in our atmosphere. And 
until the first American satellite, 
Explorer I, climbed beyond 600 
miles we had no idea of the radiation belt, now known as the 
Inner Van Allen Belt. When a 
friend of mine, a physicist, informed me of the discovery of 
the belt by long distance call 
from Washington and told me 
about the electrons and protons 
from the sun that were trapped 
there by the earth’s magnetic 
field, I said something like: “One 
should have thought of that, 
shouldn’t one?” and received the 
reply: “You and thirty-seven 
others!” Fact is that nobody did 
until it was discovered. Then 
132 
everything was suddenly crystal 
clear and obvious. 
Since then something else invisible has been discovered and 
it goes under the name of the 
“wake in the solar wind” or else 
the “magnetic tail”. (Fig. 2) 
There is a steady stream of subatomic particles, mainly protons 
and electrons, leaving the sun. 
This has been dubbed the solar 
wind. The Earth, with its pronounced magnetic field, must disturb the smooth flow of the solar 
wind, in the manner in which a 
rock in a shallow creek disturbs 
the flow of the water. The situation near Earth is shown in the 
diagram. As the solar wind encounters the Earth’s magnetic 
field there is an interaction that 
has been labeled the shock wave. 
Just behind the shock wave there 
is an area of uncertainty; in some 
cases the Earth’s magnetic field 
is more energetic than the particle of the solar wind, in other 
cases the particles are more energetic. But then comes the clearcut superiority of the geomagnetic field which can be pentrated 
only by very energetic particles, 
so-called “cosmic rays”. As shown 
in the diagram the geomagnetic 
field forms a spreading cone, 
pointing away from the sun. But 
with increasing distance from the 
Earth the field must grow weaker and the particles of the solar 
wind more or less retain their en
GAIAXY 
ergy. Hence at one point the area 
of disturbance in the solar wind 
must grow narrower and finally 
peter out. In short, the “magnetic 
tail” cannot be of indefinite 
length. 
A few satellites specifically designed to investigate this question have been sent up. Originally 
they were designated IMP, for 
Interplanetary Monitoring Platform. Later the name was changed into Interplanetary Explorer 
satellites. Unfortunately one of 
them did not attain the orbit into 
which it was supposed to go and 
therefore the measurements are 
incomplete. Most experts feel 
sure that the “magnetic tail” 
reaches beyond the orbit of the 
moon, but nobody can tell how 
far. 
Electrons and protons by the bucket 
and gallon 
Produce the two belts named after 
Van Allen, 
But this moment the general wail 
Is: How long is our magnetic tail? 
E ven in the case of the moon 
space age astronomy has 
produced a problem, in addition 
to providing a great deal of information. When astronomers 
were asked in the past about the 
probable appearance of the backside of the moon they would 
answer unanimously that there 
was no reason to suppose that 
the moon’s farside would differ 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
significantly from the side we can 
see from earth. 
A Russian rocket launched on 
“Sputnik Day” — October 4, 1959 
— succeeded in taking a few pictures that showed a portion of 
the moon’s farside. The pictures 
were few in number, they were 
not very good, and the sole transmission of them that could be 
achieved was full of “snow”. But 
what there was seemed to bear 
out the general idea: the backside of the moon looked generally like the visible side. 
But on July 18, 1965, the Russians launched another space 
probe, dubbed Zond III. It passed the moon on July 20 at a distance of 7500 miles and took pictures for an hour and eight minutes. The Russians then waited 
until Zond III was quite some 
distance from the moon. On July 
29 they sent the radio order to 
start transmission and a stream 
of pictures came back to the 
earth from a distance that had 
grown to 1,375,000 miles. They 
comprise a total of about three 
million square miles of the lunar 
surface, with much of it on the 
farside. These pictures are good 
and clear and they show that the 
moon’s farside is marked up by 
a profusion of impact craters, just 
like the visible hemisphere. However they do not show any of the 
large gray mare plains which are 
visible with the naked eye. 
THE MARINER PICTURES 
Center ef picture in Slant range Extant In miles 
BOKfMTl 
Center ef picture in 
Martian 
Slant range 
(miles) 
Extent In 
E. to W. 
miles 
N. to 8. 
Latitude 
Longitude 
(degrees) 
(degrees) 
1. 
+35 
10,500 
800 
2 . 
+27 
10,100 
530 
3 . 
+13 
9,500 
310 
4 . 
+ 7 
9,300 
270 
5 . 
— 2 
8,900 
220 
6 . 
— 6 
8,700 
200 
7 . 
—13 
8,400 
180 
8 . 
—16 
8,300 
170 
9 . 
—23 
8,100 
160 
10. 
—26 
8,000 
160 
11. 
—31 
7,800 
150 
12. 
—34 
7,700 
150 
13. 
—39 
7,600 
140 
14. 
—41 
7,600 
140 
15. 
—45 
7,500 
140 
16 . 
—47 
7,500 
140 
17 . 
—50 
7,400 
140 
18 . 
—51 
7,400 
140 
19. 
—51 
7,500 
150 
20. 
focused on 
nightslde of Mars, useless 
21. same 
22. same 
Why our moon has mare plains 
on one hemisphere and not on 
the other — disregard the fact 
that one is the visible hemisphere 
and the other is not, that is probably accidental — is something 
that will need explanation at one 
time. At the moment it is one of 
the puzzles produced by space 
age astronomy. 
And now we come to Mars. 
On July 14, 1965, space probe 
Mariner IV passed the planet 
Mars after a flight from earth 
that had taken 228 days. The 
space probe was instrumented to 
take 22 pictures of the planet and 
everybody concerned had 7J4 
months during which to worry 
whether everything would go 
well. Could one rely on instruments that were exposed to space 
conditions for that length of time 
and that could not even be tested 
while underway? And somebody 
exacerbated the atmosphere by 
pointing out that the space probe 
might well collide with the inner 
moon of Mars, Phobos. Since one 
could not be sure of the precise 
hour of the fly-by and since 
Phobos needs only 7 hours and 
39 minutes to complete one orbit 
around its planet one simply 
could not make sure of avoiding 
Phobos, especially since the closest approach to the planet was at 
about the distance of Phobos. In 
theory there was a safety margin 
of a few hundred miles, but no 
134 
one could be sure that the course 
of the space probe would be that 
precise. 
Well, Phobos was missed, the 
cameras functioned, Mariner IV 
disappeared behind Mars, measuring the density of its atmosphere in the process, and after 
it had reappeared the transmitter began sending the pictures to 
earth, over a distance of more 
than 130 million miles. This had 
to be a point by point transmission because of the long distance, 
so it took about six hours for 
every picture to be completed by 
the transmitter. 
The first of the pictures showed the rim of Mars and something next to it that could either 
be a high flying cloud or merely 
an imperfection in the system. 
But the next pictures brought a 
surprise; Mars looked like the 
moon in these pictures. There 
were large and apparently old 
craters, there were smaller and 
probably younger craters; it was 
simply and plainly a moonscape 
we saw. 
I might say right here that this 
similarity was unduly enhanced 
by the fact that the pictures 
were in black and white. Seen 
through the telescope, Mars is 
the most colorful of all planets, 
with white polar caps, yellowish 
desert areas, dark areas that look 
gray or greenish, and an occasional white cloud, probably con
GALAXY 
sisting of ice crystals. If the 
Mariner pictures had been in 
color they would not have looked quite as strange. 
As the pictures progressed the 
areas photographed shrank in 
size (see table) so that the features showed up better. But it 
was always the same — craters, 
craters, craters. Pictures 9 and 
10 should show a “canal” that 
can be seen on many maps. They 
didn’t. Of course one could say 
that the time of the fly-by was 
the wrong season for Mars, a season where the “canals” always 
are weak. Or one might say that 
the space probe was so close, 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
only about 8000 miles from the 
point to be photographed, that a 
canal would not show up because 
it would be lost among the detail 
photographed. Still, that leaves 
the question of just what is a 
canal as unanswered as it has 
always been. 
That Mars should be covered 
with craters was, by itself, not too 
surprising because of the vicinity 
of the planet to the asteroid belt. 
In fact it had even been predicted by an amateur, Donald Lee 
Cyr by name, more than fifteen 
years ago. But the overwhelming 
number of craters was still a surprise. It indicated that the crat
135 
Big Business 
by JIM HARMON 
There was no doubt that these men 
attached great value to human life. 
In fact, they could see billions in itl 
ers were not worn down by erosion, and while it has always been 
agreed that Mars does not have 
much water, there had also been 
the agreement that it had some 
water, while these pictures looked as if it had none at all. There 
is a discrepancy here that will 
need explaining. 
XT ow as the space probe went 
J- ' “behind” Mars there was a 
chance of measuring the density 
of the Martian atmosphere. The 
value obtained was much lower 
than anybody had expected. In 
the past the figure usually given 
was: pressure at ground level 
somewhat like ours 20,000 feet 
up. More recently, because of 
measurements and calculations 
by Gerard P. Kuyper, the answer was modified to read: like 
ours at 50,000 or 60,000 feet. But 
Mariner IV reported figures that 
made this like ours at 80,000 feet 
or even at 90,000 feet. 
This, unfortunately, ruins the 
beautiful deep-blue sky Chesley 
Bonestell painted for my book 
The Exploration of Mars and my 
correspondent, with reference to 
these pictures, rhymed : 
The Mariner fly-by has laid bare 
The little canal that wasn't there. 
Ditto skies of azure hue 
Chesley must be feefing blue. 
and concluded : 
Quick, let's write about Saturn, Ora nut, 
Jupiter 
Before science makes us feel stupfdor. 
Those cold facts. I'm trying to resist 
'em — 
Give me back my dear old Solar 
System! 
Well no. I can’t bring the “old” 
solar system back, but I can point 
out that even the Mars measurements leave some room for doubt 
So the pressure at ground level 
is now down to ten millibars. All 
right, measurements are measurements. But how about those dust 
storms that have been seen? Fig. 
3 shows a drawing made by E. M. 
Antoniadi in 1909. At that time 
the whole disk of Mars was hazy, 
but Antoniadi succeeded in making out the detail shown, except 
for an area of about one quarter 
of the visible surface where he 
left a blank space and wrote 
matiere jaune into it, “yellow 
matter”. It was a duststorm obscuring an enormous area. 
Does that tally well with a 
pressure of ten millibars? 
I don’t know the answer. All I 
can do it to sit back and trust to 
the proverb that time will tell! 
— WILLY LEY 
4(nphe moment for action is 
here, suh,” Colonel Big 
Jack belched, stabbing a foul 
cigar at me. “The time for talk 
has been here and gone. Let me 
tell you fellers that I am not going to just sit still on this here 
pocket of little old gold forever, 
no-sir-ree-bob.” 
Colonel Big Jack Farquard 
was one of the most obnoxious 
men in mid-Twientieth Century 
America. He was a man almost 
completely without redeeming 
feature. He was ugly, uncouth, 
vicious, nearly illiterate, stupid 
about most of the things that 
most people consider count. His 
dress consisted of white linen 
suits, cowboy hats and a brace 
of loaded six-guns with which he 
had shot at least three people in 
public, none fatally (in public). 
He was my employer. 
“Now lookee here,” he said to 
Princely Soames, the man who 
had arranged this job for me. 
“The propaganda campaign has 
been goin’ on for over twenty 
years now. I spent nine hundred 
million dollars on that campaign, 
boy. I expect to see me some results, boy. You expect I been nitpickin’ around with other stuff 
and forgot all about this thing, 
boy?” 
Princely Soames looked calm 
and collected. But the collection 
was only half deposited. Soames 
knew as well as I did that Big 
Jack could ruin his life — or take 
it, if he thought Soames had 
caused him to lose nine hundred 
•million dollars. The nostrils of 
Soame’s fine aristocratic nostrils 
quivered like those of a finely 
bred race horse. 
“Big Jack,’-’ Soames said, “I 
disagree with you.” 
Big Jack nodded, and smiled 
to expose his gold-capped teeth. 
He didn’t waste his money on 
yes-men, but I could almost see 
him thinking: This better be 
good, boy. 
“The public is still too interested in space travel for us to make 
our move,” Soames said simply. 
“SPACE TRAVEL!” Big Jack 
howled at the top of his voice. He 
hurled his white Stetson to the 
thick carpet that floored this office, fortunately sound-proofed 
(and spy-proof). 
T)ig Jack stomped his Stetson 
-*“* out of shape with his handcarved boots, howling and hurling 
curses at the gods. He stopped 
at last, panting for breath. He 
was almost ninety years old, although with his doctors and the 
research institutes he financed 
he could have fooled somebody 
else’s doctor into thinking he was 
fifty. 
“Sp-a-ace travel, by damn!” 
he said at last. “Old man LeCzem has got a goodun in that, 
ain’t he?” 
Soames frowned slightly. “Re138 
member, sir, that LeCzern’s campaign to promote space travel 
has been going for forty years.” 
“Don’t I just know it, though. 
Don’t I just, boy.” Big Jack’s 
eyes narrowed like a mountain 
cat getting ready to pounce. “He 
gives away a little money to them 
crackpots in rocket societies, 
gives a phone call to that Hitler 
runt, buys up a few down at the 
heels airplane factories, and 
what’s he got? I’ll tell you what 
he’s got — he got four hundred 
million dollars a year, and a 
billion a year pretty quick now! 
And who told me that they didn’t 
think space travel would go 
over?” 
“I did,” Soames admitted. “At 
that time, my technical information was deficient. You know we 
both went on Professor Sledgeman’s opinion that a rocket could 
not operate in the vacuum of 
space because it wouldn’t have 
anything to push against.” 
“Professor Sledgeman,” Big 
Jack snorted. “Professor of Dead 
Languages at some two-bit college in Florida. Why ask him 
about rockets?” 
“That’s what he asked, too, but 
he finally accepted our hundred 
thousand dollar retainer. Human 
error, I’m afraid:*’ 
“And there was another human 
error when you suckered me into 
this time-travel business,” Big 
Jack said darkly. 
I sat back in my chair. I had 
been a bit uncomfortable while 
these two men discussed other 
matters. But at last they were 
getting at what concerned me. 
( ( 'T'ime travel is going to be 
very big, sir,” Soames 
said. “That isn’t merely my personal opinion — everything points 
to it.” 
"Big?” Colonel Big Jack stomped to the desk, and rummaged 
through some papers before coming up with the one he wanted. 
“You say ‘big’. In the last fully 
accounted year, the U.S. government spent exactly twenty-three 
million, one hundred forty-six 
thousand, one hundred and three 
dollars and no cents on time travel at cost plus twenty per cent — 
which of course I tossed back in 
to keep ’em interested. The projects in France and England and 
Pakistan ain’t worth mentioning. 
There ain’t no money in secret 
projects, by damn! The public 
has got to be sold on ’em, so the 
money can be spent out in the 
open!” 
“We were right about atomic 
power,” Soames pointed out. “We 
are making money off of that.” 
Big Jack nodded slowly. “A 
little, boy, a little.” He waited. 
“I know it was my thought that 
the use of atomic power would 
help speed time travel development by making the present un
BIG BUSINESS 
livable, and I feel I still may be 
correct.” 
“You’re going to be correct all 
right,” Big Jack said. Deliberately he tore his cigar in two, pinched some tobacco up and put it 
into his mouth. He chewed. “I’m 
through underwriting all these 
propagandists like them two fellers — what’s their names? — uh, 
one’s Blackberry and the other’s 
Fishy — I’m through trying to 
sell people on how great the past 
was. What’s the use in them fellers we got on the payroll who 
are all the time writing about 
how much better silent pictures 
were than talkies? Now you got 
this new feller writing about how 
much better radio was than TV. 
Next you’ll be telling them that 
dying used to be better than it 
is now!” 
“Yes, we’re doing that. Covering every angle as it were.” 
“But hell, man, where’s it all 
going?” Big Jack asked, hands 
stretched to the screened-off 
stars. “People are just experiencing the past vi-car-i-ous-ly. 
Damned vicious habit, that vicar-i-ous-ness. Un-American! We 
got to make um want to REALLY go backr 
Big Jack emphasized the last 
line by pounding the butt of one 
six-gun on the desk. 
“Am I to suppose, Colonel Farquard,” I said at last, “that this 
is where I come in?” 
"Yes, suh, Dr. Moribund,” Big 
Jack said civilly. “You are correct. I do declare I feel that you, 
and you alone, suh, can be the 
making of Texatime, Ltd.” 
I savored the title of Farquard’s 
proposed company. “Texas Time, 
Limited. A good name.” 
ttXTaturally, I got the best 
-*■ ^ brains money can buy 
to think up names. ’Course it 
ain’t really Limited. Going to be 
a corporation. Have to say (A 
Corporation) in small print after 
the name. The main thing is to 
suggest that time is running out, 
and fast.” 
“It certainly will be running 
out fast if I arrange the explosion of that cobalt bomb,” I remarked. 
“Right,” Big Jack said. He 
spat the small wad of tobacco into 
the wastebasket. “Now here’s my 
plan . 
Imperceptibly, Soames and I 
gathered in closer. 
“You get them to test that 
cobalt bomb in outer space, and 
then you see to it that it explodes 
in too low an orbit,” Big Jack 
said, simplifying the plan I had 
worked out with some of his 
technical people. 
I nodded. “As a respected 
member of the aerospace team, I 
should be able to arrange that 
easily.” 
“Keeno! Now remember not to 
explode the cobalt thing too low 
on account of that would wipe 
out the human race, and colored 
too. And naturally enough, I 
don’t want that, being human 
myself. Haw-haw-haw!” 
“Quite,” said Soames. 
“I understand. I will explode 
ft at the exact point where the 
radioactive particles will rain 
down to wipe out human life 
within approximately a year.” 
“That’s it, boy.” I was “boy” 
now; I was working for him. 
“Now I’m pretty sure this timetravel thing can be developed 
And it’s sure everybody will be 
putting big money into trying to 
make it work so’s we can get the 
hell outa here before it’s too late, 
and that’s all she wrote. I reckon 
there’s a chance it can’t be developed, but there’s billions riding on this, and what the hell, 
I’ve lived a full life.” He nudged 
me in the ribs. 
<<T et me assure you,” I said 
to him, “that time travel 
can and will be developed. As a 
matter of fact, I’ve traveled in 
time myself.” 
Big Jack’s eyes narrowed with 
his instinctive animal cunning. 
“Why, you ain’t joshing, are you, 
boy?” 
“No,” I said. “I come from ‘the 
future’, roughly speaking. Actually I am not the real Dr. 
Moribund at all. I have replaced 
him in order to prevent you from 
doing your particular bit to make 
the Earth uninhabitable. Others 
will have to deal with all your 
competition in this goal.” 
Big Jack got it instantly. “Say, 
you mean if I contaminate the 
world, I’ll ruin a lot of your property, make it worthless.” 
“Yes,” I confirmed. 
“And you came back to stop 
me yourself?” 
“Yes,” I admitted a bit sheepishly. “I suppose I should have 
hired an expert but there is a 
time when one does not delegate 
authority.” 
“And you’re figuring on stopping me how?” Big Jack asked, 
smooth as silk. 
Something about him made me 
stop willing my body from generating anti-life processes. 
“It is necessary for Big Jack 
to complete his plans for contaminating Earth, so that I may 
complete my plans,” Soames said. 
“I’ve devoted one of my years 
and thirty of yours to them.” 
Big Jack laughed with seeming 
good nature. “I always figured 
you had some kind of ace up 
your sleeve. What is it, suh?” 
“My plan is to get salvage 
rights to the dead planet,” 
Soames announced. 
“You come from the future 
too!” I blurted. 
Soames shook his finely 
BIG BUSINESS 
wrought head. “No, no, I am from 
outside. An alien. Inhabitant of 
another star system’s civilization. 
Disguised, of course.” 
“You want me to go on ahead 
with getting that cobalt baby set 
off?” Big Jack asked, thinking 
that over. 
“Yes,” said Soames. “After 
that, the planet will have to be 
deserted, either by evacuation of 
the populace via time, or possible 
space travel, or by the death of 
all the inhabitants. The latter is 
best, incidentally, since I have 
several ready markets for the 
unspoiled, bacteria-free corpses.” 
“You’re showing a lot of your 
cards, Princely,” Big Jack drawled. 
“No, I have no paranormal 
means of ‘brain-washing* you, or 
of committing overt acts of violence against you, as you would 
find out all too soon. I can’t allow 
Dr. Moribund to kill you. Big 
Jack, so — I’m offering to split 
up this world with you three 
ways. In essence, I am offering 
you partnership in, shall we say, 
Earth Salvage, Inc.” 
Big Jack said it first. I took 
longer, but I long ago admitted 
my weaknesses and occasional 
vacillation from my own patriotic ideals. I repeated Big Jack’s 
words. “I want in,” I said to the 
alien Soames. “Done,” he said. 
— JIM HARMON 
141 
THE PRIMITIVES 
by FRANK HERBERT 
Illustrated by WOOD 
It was the kind of crime a man could 
take pride in — hoisting a diamond 
- from Mars with a girl from the past I 
I 
nphe sinking of the Soviet pro-*■ paganda ship for the sole 
purpose of stealing the Mars 
diamond was a typical Conrad 
Rumel (alias Swimmer) crime: a 
gigantic nose-thumbing for profit. And Swimmer had the gigantic nose for it, plus a hair line 
that crowded his eyebrows, small 
gray-green eyes, a chin that al
most vanished into his neck and 
a wide thick-lipped mouth like 
a hungry sea bass. 
When he was seventeen, 
Swimmer had decided his physical ugliness left him only one 
suitable career — crime. He came 
from a family noted for professional specialists — mathematicians, surgeons, physicists, teachers, biochemists. It was no surprise then that Swimmer chose 
to specialize. His specialty was 
underwater crime. 
He’d had his first gill mask and 
equalizer suit at the age of five 
(the gift of a father who preferred him out of sight) and there’d 
soon been no doubt that Swimmer was at home in his chosen 
element. 
Good breeding had marked 
him, though: he drew the line at 
bloodshed and murder. If there 
was any single modus operandi 
stamp on Swimmer’s crimes (beyond touches that betrayed physical cowardice) it was bizarre 
humor. It’s noteworthy that he 
sank the Soviety ship in shallow 
water when only five men of the 
anchor watch were aboard (the 
others being ashore at an official 
Mexican fiesta-reception) and the 
five were all on deck. Swimmer 
had thoughtfully provided an 
open carton of a product called 
“Flotation Falsies” which bobbed to the surface and provided 
the bouyancy on which the five 
Russians made their way safely 
to a nearby beach. 
By the nature of the crime and 
his subsequent actions, Swimmer 
had hoped to involve a professional mobster named Bime Jepson. Disposal of the Mars diamond was going to be no easy 
matter and Swimmer’s sense of 
honor insisted he owed this to 
Jepson. Their last mutual enterprise had gone exceedingly sour, 
144 
costing Jepson a bundle which 
he quoted at $288,764.51. 
Jepson’s reaction then came as 
a surprise. 
ttnphis is a diamond?” he 
sneered, staring at the object in his hands. The stone 
was bluish-white, cloud-surfaced, 
about the size and shape of a 
medium cantaloupe. “Are you 
nuts or something?” Jepson demanded. “This is . is . .” His 
one-track mind struggled for a 
suitable word. “This is a rock. 
This is a chunk of nothing!” His 
narrow blue eyes glared with anger. 
They stood in the bedroom of 
Jepson’s suite on the 324th floor 
of the Mazatlan Hilton. Corner 
windows opened to a view of the 
ocean and city, colors blaring and 
gaudy in the bright Mexican afternoon. 
Jepson lifted his attention from 
the stone. He fixed his gaze on 
the dark-haired oversize gnome 
of a man who had brought this 
unpleasantness. The man was a 
walking reminder of their last 
encounter — all that money sunk 
into an invention by one of Swimmer’s professional uncles, Professor Amino Rumel. 
Uncle Professor’s project was 
a time machine of uncertain function. Apprised of the device by 
Swimmer, Jepson had conceived 
fiie idea of a sortie into the past 
backed by a crew with modem 
arms, the object being to raid the 
treasury of Knossos. (One of Jepson’s mistresses had read a work 
of fiction in which this treasure 
figured.) 
After all those megabucks, 
Uncle Professor had pronounced 
the machine as requiring “much 
more development.” 
“It didn’t work,” was Jepson’s 
summation. And he was a man 
who did not like to be thwarted. 
Only the fact that Uncle Professor was “one of them” (legitimate) and the latent hope that 
the device might yet be made to 
work had prevented Jepson from 
committing bloody violence. Now, 
here was this creep-nephew, 
Swimmer, back with more trouble. 
Swimmer had read the signs 
of anger. He said: “Jep, I swear 
that’s . .” 
“You swear nothing! This ain’t 
no diamond! A diamond’s sometiling with . something you 
can . .” 
“Jep, let me explain about . .” 
“Ain’t you been warned never 
to interrupt me, Swimmer?” 
Swimmer retreated a short step 
toward the door. “Now, don’t go 
getting excited, Jep.” 
Jepson threw the stone onto 
the unmade bed behind him. “A 
diamond!” he sneered. 
“Jep, that rock’s worth . .” 
“Sharrup!” 
THE PRIMITIVES 
His heart pounding, Swimmer 
took two steps backward, stood 
pressed against the door facing 
Jepson. This was not going at all 
as he had anticipated. 
“I should call in the boys and 
teach you a little manners,” Jepson growled. “How many times I 
gotta tell you don’t interrupt?” 
Jepson scowled. “Only reason the 
boys let you in was you told ’em 
you heisted a diamond too hot 
for you to handle. Everybody 
knows how big hearted I am. I’m 
here to help my friends with little 
matters like that. But I ain’t here 
to help my friends with . with 
... I ain’t here to be woke up 
every time some beadhbum finds 
a big pebble what’s good for 
nothing but tying around somebody’s neck so they should sink!” 
CC/'-'on I say something, Jep?” 
Swimmer pleaded. 
“Say anything you want, but 
say it somewheres else. I want 
you should get outa here and — ” 
“Jep!” Swimmer pleaded. 
“Interrupt me once more, 
Swimmer, and I lose my temper.” 
By its lack of inflection, Jepson’s voice managed to convey a 
profound menace. 
Swimmer nodded silently. He 
hadn’t anticipated instant rage 
from Jepson. Everything depended on being able to explain. 
“You think I don’t recognize 
this rock?” Jepson asked. 
Swimmer shook his head from 
side to side. 
“This is the Mars diamond,” 
Jepson said. “Diamond! It’s the 
rock them Ruskie’s brung back 
in their spaceship. It was in their 
floating museum out in the harbor just yesterday. I seen it there 
myself. Does that answer all your 
questions, Swimmer?” 
“But it’s worth maybe ten million dollars!” Swimmer blurted. 
“Everybody said . 
“It ain’t worth ten Mexican 
cents! Didn’t you see all them 
charts and things in with it?” 
Swimmer patted a breast pocket of his permadry suit and a 
dollop of water trapped there 
spurted out onto the rug. He 
gulped, said: “I brought them, 
too. The diagrams, everything.” 
“Then you shoulda known better,” Jepson snarled. “There ain’t 
no diamond cutter in the world’d 
touch this thing. Ain’t no cutter 
wouldn’t recognize it in the first 
place. And in the second place, 
them charts show why this diamond can’t be cut without it 
breaks into chips worth maybe 
two-bits apiece. It’s impossible 
to cut this thing, you dumbhead! 
And in the third place, this is 
what they call a cultural relic of 
Mars what the Russkies and 
every cop in the world’s gonna 
be looking for soon’s they find 
it missing. And you hadda bring 
it here!” 
For Jepson, this was a long 
speech. He stopped to collect his 
thoughts. Stupid creep Swimmer t 
Swimmer stood trembling with 
the desire to speak and the fear 
of what might happen if he did. 
Jepson looked out the window, 
returned a speculative stare to 
Swimmer. “Haw’d you heist it?” 
“I sank the boat. While everybody was splashing around topside, I went in with a gill mask 
and burner, opened the case and 
took off across the bay. It was 
easy.” 
Jepson slapped his forehead 
with the heel of his right hand. 
“You sunk the boat!” He sighed. 
“Well, I’m gonna do you a favor. 
Not because I wanta, but because I hafta. I’m gonna see this 
rock finds its way back into the 
bay near the Russky boat like 
maybe it fell overboard. And 
you ain’t never gonna mention 
this thing again, right?” 
“Jep,” Swimmer said, speaking 
with desperate urgency, “maybe 
I know a cutter.” 
J epson studied him, interested 
in spite of the lessons from 
past experiences with Swimmer. 
“A cutter who could handle this 
rock? A cutter who’d even try 
it?” 
“She’ll work any rock, Jep. 
And she won’t recognize it and 
she won’t care where it came 
from.” 
“She?” 
Swimmer wiped his forehead. 
He had Jepson’s interest now. 
Maybe Jepson would come along 
after all. 
“That’s right, she,” Swimmer 
said. “And there isn’t a cutter in 
this world can hold a candle to 
her.” 
“I never heard of no dame 
cutter,” Jepson said. “I din’t think 
they had the nerves for it.” 
“This is a brand new one, Jep.” 
“A new cutter,” Jepson mused. 
“A dame. Is she a looker?” 
“I doubt it, but I’ve never 
seen her.” 
“You’ve never seen her, but 
you’ve got her?” 
“I’ve got her.” 
“Awwww,” Jepson said. He 
shook his head. “I find it interesting you have a new cutter on 
the string, but nobody can cut 
this rock. You seen them charts. 
The Russkies don’t make mistakes like that. This rock is for 
nobody. It can’t be cut.” 
“I think this cutter can do it,” 
Swimmer said. 
The stubborn set to Swimmer’s 
mouth whetted Jepson’s interest. 
It wasn’t like Swimmer to be 
stubborn in the face of determined opposition. 
“Where you got this cutter?” 
Jepson asked. 
Swimmer wet his lips with his 
tongue. This was the ticklish part, 
Jepson’s temper being what it 
THE PRIMITIVES 
was. “You remember my uncle 
Amino and his advice for you to 
be patient about . 
“Ahhh, hah!” Jepson barked. 
He pointed to the door. “Out! 
You hear me, creep? Out!” 
“Jep, the time machine works!” 
Cilence dragged out for a dozen 
^ heartbeats while Swimmer 
wondered if he had timed that 
revelation correctly, and while 
Jepson reminded himself that 
this possibility was one of the 
reasons he hadn’t obliterated 
Swimmer. 
Presently, Jepson said: “It 
works?” 
“I swear it, Jep. It works, but 
the controls aren’t too . well, 
accurate. Sometimes my uncle 
says it balks and ... it doesn’t 
go precisely where you want.” 
“But it works?” Jepson demanded. 
“It brought back this cutter,” 
Swimmer said. “From perhaps 
twenty or thirty thousand years 
ago. 
A muscle twitched on Jepson’s 
left cheek and his jaw line went 
hard. “I thought you said your 
cutter dame was a expert.” 
Swimmer took a deep breath, 
wondering how he could explain 
paleolithic culture to a man like 
Jepson. The patois of the underworld didn’t fit the job. 
“You ain’t got nothing to say?” 
Jepson asked. 
“I’m quoting my uncle, who’s a 
very truthful man,” Swimmer 
said “According to my -uncle, 
the people of this dame’s culture 
made all their tools out of stone. 
They have what my uncle calls 
an intuition about stones and 
working with them. He’s the one 
said she could cut the Mars 
diamond.” 
Jepson frowned. “Did Uncle 
Professor fall off the legit? He 
put you up to this job?” 
“Oh, no! None of my family 
know how I . ahh, make my 
living.” 
Jepson groped backward with 
one foot, found the edge of the 
bed, sat down. “How much more 
loot does Uncle Professor need to 
fix his machine?” 
“You have it all wrong, Jep. It 
isn’t a matter of loot. My uncle 
says there are local anomalies 
and force-time variations and 
that it very likely will be impossible ever to steer the machine 
very close to a time mark.” 
“But it works?” 
“With these limitations.” 
“Then why ain’t I heard about 
it? Thing like this, seems it’d be 
more important than any Mars 
diamond. Why ain’t it big news?” 
“My uncle’s trying to determine if his force-time variation 
theory is correct. Besides, he has 
a plan to present his stone-age 
woman before a scientific meeting and he’s collecting support148 
ing evidence. And he says he’s 
having trouble teaching her how 
to talk. She thinks he’s some kind 
of god.” 
“I’m beginning to be very interested in what you tell me,” 
Jepson said. “So say some more.” 
“You’re not mad any more, 
Jep?” 
“I’ve said unkind words. So? 
Maybe I’m entitled. Leave us 
now say that interest has overcome my unhappiness. You sure 
your uncle didn’t plan this little 
job?” 
Qwimmer shook his head. “Un^ cle Amino wouldn’t take any 
part of action like this. He’s cubed. No, this was mine. After our 
— you know — I was on the 
shorts. I figured to do this one 
for the ready and cut you in because . well, I owe it to you. 
You’ll get your bundle back with 
interest. And this is a job with 
style, Jep. The Mars diamond — 
impossible to cut. But we cut it.” 
“And who’s to believe?” Jepson 
said. He nodded. “You think this 
gal of your Uncle Professor’s can 
do it?” 
“I ran into Uncle Amino up in 
Long Beach. He was there buying equipment when the Russian 
ship made port and the Mars 
diamond was big news. Uncle 
Amino read this part about it 
being impossible to cut and he 
laughed. He said his gal could 
cut it into a watch fob for Premier Sherdakov if she wanted. 
That’s the first I knew about the 
gal and about the machine working. He’s been keeping it pretty 
secret, as I explained. Well . 
what he said, that’s what gave 
me the idea. I questioned my 
uncle; he was serious. This stoneage gal can do it. He insists she 
can.” 
Jepson nodded. “If he says this 
cutter can do it, perhaps . just 
perhaps, mind you, we could do 
business. It don’t go until I see 
for myself, though.” 
Swimmer allowed himself a 
deep sigh. “Well, naturally, Jep.” 
Jepson pursed his lips. “I tell 
you a thing, Swimmer. You ain’t 
done this entirely outa kindness 
for me. You heist this rock, you 
maybe start a international incident, but you ain’t got no way 
to get die rock outa Mexico.” 
Swimmer stared at his feet, 
suppressed a smile. “I guess I 
didn’t fool you a bit, Jep. I have 
to get the rock up north. I have 
to get the cutter away from my 
uncle and I need a place where 
she can work. I need organization. You have organization.” 
“Organization is expensive,” 
Jepson said. 
Swimmer looked up. “We 
deal?” 
“Seventy-five and twenty-five,” 
Jepson said. 
“Ahhh, Jep! I was thinking 
THE PRIMITIVES 
fifty-five, forty-five.” At the look 
in Jepson’s eyes, he said: “Sixtyforty?” 
“Sharrup before I make it 
eighty-twenty,” Jepson said. 
“Just be glad you got a friend 
like me who’ll help when you 
need.” 
“There’s a few million bucks 
in this thing,” Swimmer said, 
fighting to keep the hurt and 
anger from his voice. “The 
split’s — ” 
“The split stands,” Jepson said. 
“Seventy-five and twenty-five. 
We don’t argue. Besides, I’m nuts 
even to listen to you. Every time 
you say dough I buy trouble. 
This time, I better get some of 
my investment back. Now, you 
go out and tell Harpsy to slip 
the" dolls some coin and send ’em 
packing. We gotta concentrate on 
getting this rock over the border. 
And that is gonna take some doing.” 
II 
nphe chalet nestled furtively 
wren-brown within the morning shadows of pines and hemlocks on a lake island. The lake 
itself was a sheet of silvered glass 
reflecting upside down images of 
the island and a dock on its south 
shore. Two airboats had been 
brought up under the trees and 
hidden beneath instiflage netting. 
Seated in shadows above the 
dock, a man with a blast-pellet 
swagrifle puffed nervously on an 
alerto cigaret. Two other men, 
similarly armed and similarly 
drugged to eye-darting sensitivity, patrolled the island’s opposite shore. 
The sounds of an argument 
could be heard coming from within what had been the chalet’s dining room and now was a juryrigged workshop. It was only one 
of many arguments that had consumed considerable time during 
the past five days of harried 
flight northward from Mazatlan. 
Swimmer, for one, was sick of 
the arguing, but he knew of no 
non-violent way to silence his 
uncle. Things were not going at 
all as he had planned. First, there 
had been the disconcerting discovery that a Mexican boy had 
identified him from mug files as 
the man who had walked out of 
the water wearing a normal business suit (permadry) and gill 
mask and carrying a “white 
rock.” 
Jepson’s organization had 
smuggled Swimmer over the border concealed in a freight load 
of canteloupes. One of the canteloupes had been hollowed out to 
hold the diamond. 
Next, Swimmer’s uncle — alerted by the front-page hullabaloo 
— had absolutely balked at cooperating in anything his wayward 
nephew wanted. 
Jepson had lost his temper, had 
given terse orders to his boys and 
here they all were now — somewhere in Canada or northern 
Minnesota. 
Arguing. 
Only one of the dining room’s 
occupants had failed to participate in the arguments. She answered to the name of Ob (although her own people had called her Kiunlan, which translated 
as Graceful Shape). 
iunlan-Op stood five feet one 
inch tall. Professor Amino 
Rumel’s lab scales had placed 
her weight at one hundred twenty-seven pounds nine ounces. Her 
blue-black hair had been drawn 
back and tied with a red ribbon. 
She had a low forehead and 
large, wide-set blue-gray eyes. 
Her nose was flat and with large 
nostrils. Both chin and mouth 
were broad, the lips thick. Fifteen 
welted red scars down the left 
side of her face told the initiated 
that she had seen fifteen summers and had not yet littered. A 
simple brown pullover dress belted at the waist covered her 
heavy-legged body, but failed to 
conceal the fact that she had 
four breasts. 
This feature had first attracted 
Swimmer’s fascinated attention. 
He had then noted her hands. 
These bore thick horn callouses 
over palms and fingers and along 
the inner edges of the fingers — 
even occasionally on the backs 
of the fingers, especially around 
the nails. 
Ob stood now beside a bench 
that had replaced the chalet 
dining room’s table. One of her 
hands rested on die back of a 
high stool drawn up to the bench. 
The Mars diamond lay on a cushioned square of black velvet atop 
the bench. The stone’s milky surface reflected a faint yellow from 
the spotlight hanging close to it 
on a gooseneck. 
As the argument progressed, 
Ob’s attention shifted fearfully 
from speaker to speaker. First, 
there were many angry noises 
from Gruaaack, the super devilgod who was called Proff Ess 
Orr. Then came equally loud and 
angry noises from the big stout 
devil-god called Jepp, the one 
whose eyes blazed with the threat 
of unknown terrors and who obviously was superior over all the 
others in this place. 
Sometimes there were softer 
sounds from the smaller creature 
who had accompanied the devil god Jepp. The status of this creature was not at all clear. He appeared to Ob to be vaguely human. The face was not at all unpleasant. And he seemed to share 
some of Ob’s fears. She thought 
perhaps the other creature was a 
human snared like herself by 
these terrible beings. 
THE PRIMITIVES 
“Yes, she’s a genius at shaping stones!” Uncle Professor blared. “Yes! Yes! But she’s still a 
primitive creature whose understanding of what we want is definitely limited.” 
He paced back and forth in 
front of Ob and the bench, a bald, 
skinny little man trembling with 
indignation. 
Thieves, assassins, kinappers, 
he thought. How could Conrad 
have become ^associated with such 
a crew? Coming on him in his 
lab that way, crating his equipment without a by-your-leave 
and spiriting him off to this remote place. 
“You through yakking?” Jepson asked. 
“No, I am not,” Uncle Professor said. He pointed to the diamond on the bench. "That . 
that is no ordinary diamond. That 
is the Mars diamond. Turning 
such a priceless stone over to . .” 
“Sharrup!” Jepson said. 
Creeps with their stupid arguments, he thought 
U ncle Professor glanced at his 
nephew. There’s been some 
bad moments during the past 
few days of their furtive journey. 
Again, the Professor wondered 
about nephew Conrad. Could the 
boy have been deceived by Jepson? The man was a criminal 
and that obviously was where all 
his money came from — all the 
money provided to develop the 
time machine. Was it possible this 
Jepson had dragged poor Conrad into this nefarious scheme 
through some terrible threat? 
In a quiet voice, Jepson said: 
“Did you or din’t you tell your 
nephew the Swimmer here that 
your gal could cut this Mars 
rock?” 
“Yes, I said that; I said she 
could cut any stone, but . 
“So awright. I want she should 
cut.” 
“Will you please try to understand?” the Professor pleaded. 
“Ob undoubtedly can cut your 
stone. But any idea of facets and 
deriving the maximum brilliance 
from a given gem — this probably is outside her understanding. She’s accustomed to functiorlal artifacts, to simpler purposes in her . .” 
“Simple, Schmimple!” Jepson 
snarled. “You’re stalling. What’s 
it, huh? D’you lie about this 
dame? Alla stories I ever see 
’bout creeps like her, the guys 
did the stone cutting and the 
dames sat around caves hiding 
from tigers they got teeth six 
feet long.” 
“We’re going to have to revise 
our previous hypotheses about 
stone-age divisions of labor,” the 
Professor said. “As nearly as I 
can make out from Ob, women 
made the tools and weapons 
while the men did the hunting. 
152 
Their society was matriarchal 
with certain women functioning 
somewhat like priestesses. CaveMothers, I believe it would translate.” 
“Yeah? I ain’t so sure. What 
about them things?” 
“Things?” The Professor peered at Jepson with a puzzled 
frown. 
“She’s got four of ’em!” Jepson barked. “I think you’re trying to pass off some freak as . .” 
“Oh,” the Professor said. 
Four, yes. That’s very curious. 
About one in fourteen million 
human female births today demonstrate a condition of more than 
two mammaries. Heretofore, 
there’ve been three major hypotheses: one, mutation; two, absorbed sibling, and three, ahh . 
throwback. Ob is living proof of 
the third case. Multiple births 
were more frequent in her time, 
you see? It’s quite simple: female were required to suckle 
more infants. A survival characteristic that gradually disappearas multiple births declined.” 
“You don’t say.” Jepson growled. 
“George was particularly elated,” the Professor said, “since he 
had maintained the third case.” 
“George? Who is George?” 
Jepson demanded. 
“My associate, Professor George 
Elwin,” the Professor said. 
“You didn’t tell me about no 
GALAXY 
George,” Jepson said. “When I 
was sinking all that loot in your 
atupid machine, there wasn’t no 
George around. Who’s he, your 
new mark?” 
“Mark?” The Professor glanced at Swimmer back to Jepson. 
Swimmer tried to swallow in a 
dry throat, sensing how near Jepson was to a violent explosion of 
rage. Swimmer found it odd that 
his uncle couldn’t see the danger. 
“I don’t really see where my 
associate is any concern of 
yours,” the Professor said. “But 
if . .” 
“How many people know about 
that time machine — ” Jepson 
pointed to the large crate in the 
comer behind him — “ and about 
this Ob dame?” 
“Well, you know, of course, 
and . 
“Don’t get smart with me, 
creep! Who knows?” 
T he Professor stared at him, 
aware at last of the suppressed rage. Professor Rumel’s 
mouth felt suddenly dry, Criminals such as this could be most 
violent — murderously so, at 
times. 
“Well, aside from those of us 
here in this room, there are Professor Elwin and very likely two 
or three of George’s assistants. I 
didn’t impose any special strictures of secrecy other than to 
suggest we’d wait for the comTHE PRIMITIVES 
plete investigation before publishing our . 
“How come this George?” Jepson demanded. 
“Well, my dear sir, someone 
with the proper training had to 
go to Northern France and seek 
the archeological authentication. 
Inevitably, there will be cries of 
fraud, you know.” 
Jepson screwed his face into a 
puzzled frown. Archeo . • 
What’s this Northern France 
bit?” 
The Professor’s face came 
alight with the glow of a man 
launched on his favorite subject. 
“You may not know it, Mr. Jepson, but paleolithic artifacts bear 
markings that are, in some respects, as distinctive as the brushstrokes of a master painter. Now, 
under strictly controlled archeological conditions, we’re seeking 
some of Ob’s work in situ 
where she originally made it.” 
“Yeah?” Jepson said. 
“You see, Mr. Jepson, as nearly as we can determine, Ob came 
from the region just east of Cambrai in Northern France. This is 
something more than an educated guess. We have several pieces 
of evidence — a scrap of obsidian 
which Ob — you see how I got 
her name . my little joke: Ob 
for obsidian . well, this piece 
of obsidian she carried on her 
when we picked her up is of a 
type common in the region we’ve 
selected. There was also plant 
pollen on her person, types of 
clay soil in the mud on her feet 
and a photograph of the background landscape which we took 
as we snatched Ob from . 
“Yeah,” Jepson said. “So only 
a few of us know about her.” 
“Quite,” the Professor said. 
“I’m sure you can see why we 
decided to delay any publication 
and prevent idle speculation. 
Nothing destroys the essential 
character of scientific endeavor 
more than Sunday supplement 
romanticizing.” 
“Yeah,” Jepson said. “Just like 
you tol’ me.” 
“And there’s the ethical problem,” the Professor said. “Some 
people may question the morality of our bringing this human 
being out of her natural habitat 
in the past. I, personally, incline 
to the theory that Ob’s timestream diverted from ours at the 
moment of her removal from her 
— and our — personal past. However, if you . .” 
“Yeah, yeah!” Jepson barked. 
Keerist! he thought. The old 
creep could yak all day about 
nothing. Big words! Big words! 
Didrit mean a thing. 
Ill 
S wimmer looked from one to 
the other and marveled at the 
low level of communication beTHE PRIMITIVES 
tween his uncle and Jepson. The 
Professor might just as well be 
talking to Ob for all the sense he 
was making. Swimmer fingered 
the gill mask in his pocket, thinking of it as a back-door way of 
escape should things get completely out of hand here. 
“As I was about to say,” the 
Professor said, “if you consider 
the equation of historical interference as one element of your 
total . .” 
“Yeah!” Jepson exploded. 
“That’s very interesting. But what 
I wanna know is why can’t I 
show this Ob dame a rock and 
say I want some other rock cut 
likewise and such and so? She 
could do the thing like that, ain’t 
it?” 
The Professor sighed and threw 
up his hands. He’d thought he’d 
penetrated Jepson’s strange jargon, conveyed some of the problems to the man, but not a bit of 
it appeared to have gotten 
through. 
“Din’t you say die was a expert?” Jepson demanded. 
“Given time,” The Professor 
said in a patient, long-suffering 
tone, “I do believe Ob could 
make one of the finest diamond 
cutters in the world. We’ve a few 
industrial diamond chips in the 
lab and part of our examination 
of her involved seeing what she 
could do with them. She needed 
no more than a glance to see the 
natural cleavage lines. No fumbling or mistakes. Just one praccal glance. But I wish to warn 
you — the measure of her understanding may be seen in the fact 
she thought the diamonds too 
hard for practical purposes.” 
“But she worked them rocks 
okay?” 
“If that’s what you want to call 
it.” 
“Did she have any better tools 
than we got here?” Jepson motioned to the rack at the rear of 
the bench, the cutter’s vice 
clamped to one end. 
“Not as good.” 
“She know how to use them 
tools?” 
“She has a natural tool sense 
and she’s quite awed by our 
equipment. She’s an intuitive 
worker. You might say she lives 
the stone. Indeed, she appears 
to project ideas of life and animism into the stones she works.” 
“Yeah,” Jepson said. “So let’s 
get busy.” He turned and studied 
Ob. 
Che lowered her gaze under the 
U presure of that stare from 
the angry devil-god. Ob felt she 
understood what was wanted of 
her. She had a much better grasp 
of the language than she had 
permitted the devil-gods to suspect. The training imparted by 
her Cave Mother fitted well here: 
“When dealing with devil-gods 
156 
and spirits, give them the obedience and subservience they demand. But dissemble, always dissemble.” 
A pang of homesickness shot 
through her and her lower lip 
trembled, but she suppressed the 
emotion. A female trained to the 
cave-motherhood and the creation of living tools did not give 
way, even before devil-gods. And 
there was work to do here, creation for which she had been 
trained. Beyond her understanding of the devil-gods’ words, there 
were much more direct ways of 
divining their desires. They had 
brought her into the presence of 
their wondrous tools and they 
had set up the stone as for a sacrifice. The stone was one of the 
difficult, very hard ones, and its 
grain had been criss-crossed and 
twisted by unimaginable forces. 
But Ob could see the points of 
entry and the manner in which 
the work should progress. 
“Tell her what she should do,” 
Jepson said. 
**I refuse to have any more to 
do with this,” the Professor said. 
Swimmer blanched. 
“Nobody,” Jepson said in a 
low, cold voice, “but nobody refuses what I say do. You, Uncle 
Professor, will get across to your 
cutter dame what it is she should 
do. You will do this or I will permit you to watch my boys cut up 
your creep nephew here into ex
GALAXY 
ceedingly small pieces. We 
wouldn’t want the fishes should 
choke while they are disposing 
of him. Do I make myself plain?” 
“You wouldn’t dare,” the Professor said. But even as he spoke 
he sensed that Jepson would indeed dare. The man was a criminal monster . and they were 
at his mercy. 
Swimmer "stood trembling. 
Now, he regretted ever having 
started this exploit. The gill mask 
in his pocket was useless. Jepson 
would never let him get off this 
island alive if there were the 
slightest upset in his plans. 
Grudgingly, the Professor said: 
“Just what is it you want me to 
do, Mr. Jepson?” 
“We been through all that!” 
Jepson snarled. “Get your dame 
started on this rock. The bigdomes say it can’t be cut. So let’s 
see her cut it.” 
“It’s on your head,” the Professor said. 
“Yeah,” Jepson said. “So do.” 
S wimmer took a deep breath as 
the Professor turned toward 
Ob. It was obvious to Swimmer 
now that Jepson had plans of his 
own concerning the cutter dame. 
The Mars diamond was merely 
a preliminary. Swimmer suspected he shortly would have no place 
in Jepson’s plans. And people 
who had no place in Jepson’s 
plans sometimes disappeared. 
THE PRIMITIVES 
As these thoughts went through 
Swimmer’s mind, Ob looked at 
him with such a weight of shared 
understanding that he wondered 
if the ancients had possessed a 
telepathic faculty which had 
been lost in the genetic ebb and 
flow of the ensuing eons. And he 
wondered suddenly at the terrors 
this poor creature must be undergoing — and hiding so well. She’d 
been snatched from her place 
and time, taken forever from her 
friends. There could be no sending her back; the time machine 
couldn’t be controlled that well. 
And here she was now, in Jepson’s hands. 
Something would have to be 
done about Jepson, Swimmer 
thought. He shivered with fear 
of what he had to do . and the 
fear of what would happen if he 
failed in any step. 
“Ob,” the Professor said. 
Ob looked at Gruaaack, trying 
to convey by her waiting silence 
the almost frantic desire to 
please. Thank whatever benign 
spirits might hover near this 
place, the devil - gods were 
through fighting, she thought. 
“Ob,” the Professor repeated, 
“look at this stone.” He pointed 
to the Mars diamond on its bed 
of black velvet. 
Ob looked at the stone. 
The Professor spoke slowly and 
distinctly: “Ob can you work this 
stone?” 
Such a difficult stone, Ob 
thought. But there was a way. 
The devil-god Gruaaack must 
know this. It was a test then. The 
devil-god was testing her. 
“Ob. Work. Stone,” she said. 
Swimmer marveled at the 
throaty quality of her voice. 
“First, you must cut off a small 
piece of the stone,” the Professor said. 
Yes, it is a test, Ob thought. 
Everyone knows the work progresses a small chip at a time. 
This was such a difficult stone, 
though. The first cut would be 
somewhat larger than usual. 
Still, the cut would remove a 
small enough piece. 
“Small. Piece,” she agreed. 
“Do you have the tools you 
need?” the Professor asked. He 
indicated the vise, jeweler’s mallet and wedges on the bench. 
Another test, Ob thought. 
“Need. Wa. Ter,” she said. 
“Need. Ongh-ongh.” 
“What the devil’s a ong-ong?” 
Jepson asked. “I never heard no 
cutter ask for a ong-ong.” 
“I’ve no idea,” the Professor 
said. “She’s never used the term 
before.” He turned a puzzled 
frown on Jepson. “Surely you 
must see now how limited our 
communication really is. There 
exists such a wide gap in . .” 
“So get ’er a ong-ong!” Jepson 
barked. 
Ob looked from one devil-god 
158 
to the other. They must have 
ongh-ongh, she thought. Wherever there was fire there was onghongh. She looked at Swimmer, 
seeing only the fear in him. He 
must be another human like herself. She turned her attention to 
Gruaaack. Could this be another 
test? It was very puzzling. She 
picked up the Mars diamond in 
one horn-calloused hand, drew a 
finger along it. “Ongh-ongh.” 
The Professor shrugged. “Oh, 
you get ongh-ongh,” he said. 
Ob sighed. Another test. 
She clasped the Mars diamond 
in both hands headed for the 
chalet’s living room. There was 
a fire-hole in the living room ; she 
had smelled it and seen it. 
The living room had been furnished with heavy rustic furniture and Mexican fabrics. The 
colorful upholstery filled Ob with 
awe. What manner of animal 
could have produced such skins? 
She wondered. Devil-god land 
must possess many terrors. 
Two of Jepson’s boys sat at a 
round table near the windows* 
overlooking the lake. They were 
eating and playing poker. A fire 
had been layed in the stone fireplace and Ob headed directly 
toward it, trailed by Jepson, the 
Professor and Swimmer. 
The boys looked up from their 
game and one said: “Get a load 
of that shape. Gives me the 
creeps.” 
“Yeah,” his companion said, 
and looked at Jepson. “What’s 
she doin’ with the rock, boss?” 
Jepson spoke with an offhand, 
casual tone, keeping his attention 
on Ob. “Shamip.” 
The boys shrugged and went 
back to their game. 
/^vb knelt at the fireplace, scoop■ ed out a small handful of 
ashes. “Ongh-ongh,” she said. She 
rested the diamond on the hearth, 
spat into the ashes, kneaded a bit 
of black mud which she transferred to the diamond. Her homy 
hands worked the mud into the 
stone’s surface. 
“What’s she doon?” Jepson demanded. 
“I’m sure I don’t know,” the 
Professor said. “But ongh-ongh 
appears to be ashes.” 
Jepson fixed his attention on 
the diamond which was now a 
Mack-streaked mess. Ob picked 
It up, walked to the room’s east 
windows. She lifted the diamond 
to the sun, studied it. 
Yes, she thought, the light of 
Mighty Fire passed through this 
stone and was dimmed and cut 
Into stPange patterns by the onghongh. She rubbed the stone, removing some of its black cover, 
wiped her hands on the brown 
dress, again held the diamond to 
Mighty Fire. It was as she had 
expected, the technique taught 
her bv tbe. t'QTre Mother. Lines of 
THE PRIMITIVES 
ongh-ongh on the stone’s surface 
betrayed tiny flaws and these 
lines provided a fixed reference 
against which to study the interior contours. 
“I believe this must be some 
sort of religious prelude to the 
actual work,” the Professor said. 
Swimmer looked at him, glanced at Jepson, then moved up behind Ob. He bent, peered up at 
the stone in her hands, seeing the 
coruscating light and the patterns 
revealed by the ash coating. 
Ob turned, seeing him close 
there. She ventured a shy smile 
which was quickly erased as she 
darted glances at Jepson and the 
Professor. 
Swimmer straightened, grinned. 
Again, he was rewarded by 
that shy smile. It gave a momentary lightness to her heavy features. 
“Strange,” the Professor said. 
“Sun worship, very likely. I must 
delve into her religious beliefs 
more . .” 
“When’s she gonna cut out this 
crap and get to cutting?” Jepson demanded. 
“Ob. Work,” she said. 
She turned, led the way back 
into the workroom, returned the 
stone to its square of velvet. 
Swimmer started to move up 
dose, was stopped by a hand 
gripping his shoulder. He turned, 
looked up at Jepson. 
“I want you should stay back 
outa the way, boy,” Jepson said. 
Swimmer shivered. He had 
sensed ultimate rejection in the 
man’s voice. 
A bird chose this moment to 
sing outside the room’s south 
window: “Willow, will -will, willow.” 
Ob looked to the window, smiled. The birdsong was familiar, a 
voice she understood. He was 
saying: “This is my ground, my 
bush.” She turned, met Jepson’s 
harsh stare. 
“Cut that damn rock!” Jepson 
said. 
She cringed. There was death 
in that voice. She had heard it 
distinctly. 
The Professor adjusted the 
spotlight above the bench, touched Ob’s arm. 
She looked up, surprised to 
find fear in his eyes, too. Gruaaack afraid? All was not as it 
appeared with the devil-gods! 
Her mind churning, she bent to 
the stone, rested it in the visestand, turned it — gently, precisely — locked it in place. Such 
wonderful tools they had, these 
devil-gods. 
Jepson moved around beside 
the bench where he could command a clear view of her work. 
He wiped his hands against his 
sides to remove the perspiration. 
He had watched cutters at their 
work before. Time always seemed 
160 
to stretch out during that first 
cut — dragging, dragging — while 
tensions mounted and the cutter 
drew on the nervous energy to 
make the single tap . just right. 
Expecting this, Jepson found 
Ob’s actions stupefying. 
IV 
Qhc searched a moment among 
^ the wedges racked on the 
bench, selected one and rested it 
on the diamond. She lifted the 
mallet in her other hand. 
Jepson waited for the long 
drawn-out positioning and shifting of the wedge. He jumped as 
she brought the mallet down 
without changing that first, apparently casual placement. 
Crack! 
A long narrow piece of the 
Mars diamond fell to the bench. 
Crack! 
Another, slightly smaller this 
time. 
Crack! 
Jepson came out of his shock 
as a third chip clattered to the 
bench. “Wait!” he shrieked. 
Crack! 
Ob eased the vise, turned the 
diamond slightly. 
Crack! 
“Tell her to wait!” Jepson 
bleated. 
Crack! 
The Professor found his voice. 
“Ob!” 
She turned, still holding mallet and wedge firmly, waited for 
Gruaaack’s command. 
“Stop work,” the Professor 
said. 
Dutifully she lowered her 
hands. 
Jepson pursed his lips, made 
a low sound: “Whooooeeee.” He 
picked up the largest chip, turned it in the light. “The rock that 
couldn’t be cut, eh? Whooooeeee.” He dropped the chip to 
the bench, drew a dart pistol 
from a shoulder holster, pointed 
it at Swimmer. 
“No hard feelings, Swimmer,” 
he said. “But you are excess baggage. And Uncle Professor needs 
a lesson that he should do like 
he’s told.” 
“You wouldn’t!” the Professor 
whispered. 
Jepson darted a glance at the 
Professor. 
I n this instant, Swimmer acted 
from desperation, leaping 
sideways and kicking at the gun 
hand. Muscles hardened from 
years of swimming slammed the 
toe of his shoe into Jepson’s hand. 
The gun went pffwt! as it left the 
hand. A dart buried itself in the 
ceiling. The gun clattered across 
the room. 
Ob stood for a frozen second, 
horrified by Swimmer’s action 
against the devil-god. But she 
had heard the death in the devilTHE PRIMITIVES 
god’s voice and she knew that 
even the will-will willow bird 
would attack a human if given 
enough reason. Why then 
couldn’t a human attack a devilgod? 
As Jepson opened his mouth 
to call his boys, Ob brought a fist 
crashing down onto his head. 
There was a sound like the dropping of a ripe melon and a sharp 
snap of Jepson’s neck broke. He 
collapsed with a soft thud. 
Swimmer dove for the fallen 
dart pistol, scooped it up, 
crouched facing the door to the 
living room, listening with every 
sense for a sign that the disturbance had been heard. 
“My word!” the Professor said. 
Only the ordinary sounds ol 
the house penetrated the room 
footsteps from one of the bedrooms overhead, the creak of 
bedsprings, a faucet being turned 
on, somebody whistling. 
Swimmer turned. 
Ob stood staring down at Jepson. A look of dawning wonder 
covered her face. 
Swimmer crossed to Jepson, 
bent, examined him. 
“Dead,” he said. He straightened, smiled reassuringly at Ob. 
It was a reassurance he did not 
feel, however. “We’re in the soup, 
Uncle,” he said. “If any of the 
boys come in . .” 
The Professor fought down a 
shudder. “What shall we do?” 
161 
i -j 
“We have one chance,” Swimmer said. “Ob, help me get this 
carcass behind your bench.” He 
bent, started to drag Jepson’s 
body. 
Gently, Ob brushed him aside, 
lifted Jepson’s body with one 
hand through the belt. The dead 
man’s head lolled; his arms 
dragged on the floor. 
Swimmer swallowed, indicated 
where he wanted the body deposited. They propped Jepson in 
a comer, moved the bench to 
conceal him. 
“My word,” the Professor 
whispered. “She’s strong as an 
ox!” 
“Now listen carefully,” Swimmer said. “Ob must go right on 
working as though nothing had 
happened. I’ll try to get into the 
lake. If I can, once under water, 
I can get away and bring help.” 
He passed Jepson’s dart pistol 
to the Professor. “Keep this in 
your pocket. Don’t use it unless 
you have to.” 
“This is dreadful,” the Proffessor said. 
“It’ll be more dreadful if you 
don’t do this just the way I 
say,” Swimmer rasped. “Now, 
put that gun in your pocket.” 
The Professor gulped, obeyed. 
“Now get her back to work,” 
Swimmer said. 
The Professor nodded, faced 
Ob. “You . work . stone,” 
he said. 
She remained motionless, 
studying him, wondering at the 
tone of command the human had 
used against this devil-god. 
Could a human command devilgods? 
“Please, Ob,” Swimmer said. 
‘Work the stone.” 
Something near worship was in 
^ her eyes as she looked at 
Swimmer. “You. Want. Ob. 
Work?” she asked. 
“You work,” Swimmer said. He 
patted her arm. 
Again that shy smile touched 
her mouth. She turned back to 
the bench and the diamond. “Ob. 
Work?” she asked. 
Swimmer looked at his uncle. 
The man’s eyes appeared glazed 
with shock. 
“Uncle?” Swimmer said. 
The Professor shook his head, 
met Swimmer’s eyes with something like attention. 
“If anyone asks for Jep,” 
Swimmer said, “he went for a 
walk and left you to supervise 
Ob cutting the rock. Got that?” 
The professor gulped. “I - quite 
understand, Conrad. I must dissemble, tell falsehoods. But do 
hurry. This is most distasteful.” 
Crack! 
Ob chipped another piece from 
the diamond. 
Crack! 
Swimmer permitted himself a 
deep breath. He had no time to 
be afraid or remember that he 
was a physical coward. The lives 
of his uncle and this strangely attractive primitive woman depended on him. He composed his 
features, slipped out of the room 
and down the side passage to the 
kitchen. It was empty, but someone had left a pot of water boiling. A spicy steam odor followed 
him across the room as he left 
himself out the back door. 
A soft breeze rustled the pines 
overhead. He looked up, checked 
the position of the sun — still forenoon. There was motion along 
the shore to his right and left — 
two guards. 
Swimmer forced himself to a 
casual, strolling pace toward the 
lake, aiming for a point midway 
between the guards. A fallen tree 
reached across the sand into the 
water there, its dead limbs 
sprayed out into air and water. 
He sat down on the sand beside 
the tree and within inches of the 
water, tossed a cone into the lake 
as though in idle play. 
The guards ignored him after 
one searching glance. 
Swimmer waited, wondering 
why he found Ob so attractive. 
He decided at last that she was 
the only woman who’d ever really looked at him without some 
degree of revulsion. 
The guards strolled toward 
■him, turned and patrolled away. 
Both had their backs to him now. 
THE PRIMITIVES 
Swimmer whipped out his gill 
mask, brought it down over his 
head, slipped into the water 
among the tree’s branches, submerged. Years of practice made 
the action almost noiseless. 
Slowly, he worked himself out 
into the lake, staying close to the 
bottom. His permadry suit billowed around him, and he pulled 
the hidden cords to tighten it 
Presently he was in deep water. 
He twisted his shoe heels. Flippers emerged from the toes. With 
a strong, steady stroke, he struck 
out for the opposite shore, guiding himself by the compass on 
the back of his wristwatch. 
Strange emotions churned in 
him, not the least being a sense 
of cleansing at the realization 
that he was cutting himself off 
from his criminal past. The code 
was explicit: you did not inform 
on your fellows — no matter the 
provocation. 
But he had to inform. Otherwise a woman who was suddenly 
very important to him might die. 
IV 
W hen Swimmer looked back 
on it, that afternoon which 
the authorities referred to as 
“the day we broke up the Jepson 
Gang” contained shadows of 
dreamlike unreality criss-crossed 
with currents of profound immediacy. 
There was the comparative 
quiet of the lake crossing under 
water. That was routine and 
hardly counted. He emerged 
around a point hidden from the 
island and there was a brief dogtrot through trees and buckbrush 
to a dirt track, its sides piled high 
with duff blown there by skimmer fans. The track led to a rural 
road where he was picked up by 
a farm truck with outsize aprons 
and a hover-blast like a hurricane. 
The face of the farmer failed to 
register — but his voice, a whining 
twang, lingered for years, and 
there was a dark brown mole 
over the second knuckle of his 
right hand. It seemed important 
to Swimmer, reflecting upon it 
later, that the farmer was hauling 
a load of cabbage which smelled 
of fresh dirt. 
Worry over Ob kept Swimmer 
jittery and on the edge of the 
truck’s seat. The farmer called 
him “neighbor” and complained 
about the price of fertilizer. The 
man asked Swimmer only one 
question: “Where y’ going, neighbor?” 
“To town.” 
Town, according to a sign at its 
edge, was Ackerville, population 
12,908. The farmer dropped 
Swimmer across the street from a 
tall building which obviously 
dated from before the turn of the 
century: It presented a monot164 
onous face of glass and aluminum. A plaque over the entrance 
revealed that it was the administrative center for Crane County
A whistle hooted for noon as 
Swimmer entered the building 
and followed arrow signs to the 
Sheriff’s Office. He was to remember the place afterward 
chiefly for the smell of its halls 
(pine disinfectant) and the tall, 
skinny sheriff in a conservative 
business suit and western hat, 
who said as Swimmer entered the 
office: 
“You’d be Conrad Rumel. 
Ralph Abernathy just called from 
his truck and said he brought you 
into town.” 
The fact that a farmer in Northern Minnesota could identify 
him that easily helped Swimmer 
to understand the terrifying efficiency in which he was abruptly immersed. Armed deputies appeared in the door behind him. 
They appeared surprised that he 
carried no weapons. He was hustled into a maple-paneled office 
that looked out through a wall 
of windows onto the street corner where the farmer had dropped him. 
Ralph Aberrtathy. There was 
no face in his memory to go with 
the name. Swimmer wondered 
how he could’ve ridden in the 
truck with the farmer and not 
remember the face. 
Obi The danger! 
T he Sheriff wanted to know 
about the Mars diamond. 
Swimmer had to repeat his 
story three times for the Sheriff 
and deputies, another time for a 
bald, white-bearded fat man 
identified as the County Prosecutor. They seemed unconcerned 
about the urgency, kept dragging 
out new questions. 
Abruptly, there were many 
more men in the room. Sheriff 
and County Prosecutor faded into the background. 
The newcomers deferred to a 
Wallace MacPreston, a thin little 
rail not over five feet two inches 
tall, iron gray hair and a wide 
mouth set in a perpetual halfsmile that never reached his large 
blue eyes. 
“I am a special assistant to the 
President,” MacPherson said. 
Swimmer didn’t have to ask 
President of what? 
MacPreston then launched into his own line of questioning. 
Some were the same questions 
the Sheriff and deputies had 
asked, but MacPreston was also 
concerned about how Swimmer 
had sunk the Soviet propaganda 
ship. Was Swimmer aware he’d 
cracked the ship in half? Had 
that been his intention? What 
had guided him in placement of 
the explosive charges? How large 
was each charge? Why? What 
THE PRIMITIVES 
type of detonator? How far had 
he retreated to avoid the compression shock? What clues in 
the ship’s design had betrayed 
its weak points? What particular 
burner had he chosen to cut open 
the diamond box? Why had he 
selected that particular time for 
the operation? 
Gradually, Swimmer grew 
aware of faces in the crowd 
around MacPreston. One particularly caught his attention: a 
square-faced hulk of a man at 
MacPreston’s left — eyes like 
brown caverns above a hooked 
nose, dark straw hair wisping 
away to twin bald spots at the 
temples. This man betrayed an 
obvious interest in the details of 
how Swimmer had sunk the ship. 
But none of these people appeared to grasp the urgency, the 
danger to Ob . and Uncle Amino. 
MacPreston went over Swimmer’s story . and over it . 
and over it . and over it. 
The position of the diamond 
box — how had that guided him in 
placement of the explosives? 
“Look!” Swimmer suddenly 
raged. “Don’t any of you realize 
what’ll happen if Jepson’s boys 
find out he’s dead?” 
“Jepson’s boys aren’t going 
anywhere,” MacPreston said. 
“But they’ll kill Ob . and my 
uncle,” Swimmer said. 
“Doubtful,” MacPreston said. 
“Now, about this Ob. You say 
your uncle picked her up with a 
time machine?” 
Swimmer had to explain then 
about the time machine, Jepson’s 
money, about the break-through, 
tire inaccurate controls. With 
every new question to answer, he 
could feel time running out for 
Ob and his uncle. 
“Time machine,” MacPreston 
sneered. 
The hook-nosed man tugged at 
MacPreston’s sleeve. MacPreston looked up, said: “Yeah, 
Mish?” 
“Outside,” the man said. “Wanta talk.” They left the room. 
M ore time raced past. Swimmer began to lose all hope. 
MacPreston and his companion returned followed by an Army 
general and a Ranger colonel. 
The Colonel was speaking as they 
entered: “Three hundred and 
eighty men, counting the singlescooters and manjets, plus the 
twenty-five flying tanks the Marines are sending; that should do 
it” 
“What about him?” the General asked, and he nodded toward 
Swimmer. 
“Rumel goes with us,” MacPreston said. “You heard what 
the President said.” 
“We still have three hours of 
daylight,” the Colonel said. 
"That’s plenty of time.” 
“Do you need transportation?* 
the General asked. 
“We’ll use our limousine* 
MacPreston said: 
“Stay high and out of it until we send the signal,” the General said. “I don’t suppose you’re 
armored.” 
“A Presidential limousine — 
you’re joking!” MacPreston said. 
“Yeah, well I still want you out 
of it until the shooting’s over,” 
the General said. “No telling 
what armament a mob like that’ll 
have.” 
“What shooting?” Swimmer 
asked. 
“We’re going in and rescue 
your uncle and your stone-age 
woman friend,” MacPreston said. 
He shook his head. “Time machine.” 
Swimmer took two deep 
breaths, said: “You know where 
they are?” 
“We have a plan of the house 
from the architect,” MacPreston 
said. He started to turn away, 
looked back at Swimmer. “One 
of Mish’s boys just handed 1 me 
the damndest report I’ve ever 
seen in my life — from a Professor Elwin in Cambrai, France. 
You know this Elwin?” 
“I know who he is,” Swimmer 
said. And he stilled his own questions in the hope these people 
would launch themselves into 
their promised action. 
“Time machine,” MacPreston 
GALAXY 
muttered, but there was awe 
rather than doubt in his voice. 
Swimmer felt something grab 
his left wrist, looked down to find 
the wrist connected by handcuffs 
to the right wrist of the hooknosed companion — Mish. 
“I’m Mischa Levinsky, CID,” 
the man said, staring hard at 
Swimmer. “Wanta talk to you 
sometime, Rumel, about that 
Mazatlan operation. For one 
man, that was a dilly.” 
CID, Swimmer thought. The 
President. Army. Rangers. Marines. He had the feeling that he 
was lost in a mad pinball machine, about to be bounced from 
bumper to bumper while MacPreston shouted. “Tilt! Tilt! 
Tiltr 
“Let’s roll it,"’ Levinsky said. 
V 
' I "'he combined force dove into 
A the lake island out of the afternoon sun, screaming in like a 
swarm of angry insects onto an 
enemy hive. Army armored 
single-scooters formed a solid 
ring around the beach perimeter. 
Marine flying tanks darkened the 
sky. Leaping Rangers in manjets popped up and down through 
the pines. 
To Swimmer, watching from 
the rear of the limousine which 
hovered at about seven thousand 
feet southeast of the scene, the 
orderly pandemonioum was an 
insane game. He found it difficult to associate any of his own 
actions with this result. Had it 
not been for his fear over Ob, 
Swimmer knew he’d have found 
the whole thing ludicrous. 
The limousine dropped down 
to three thousand feet, moved in 
closer. 
Swimmer glanced at MacPreston on his right. “Are they . .” 
“Dunno yet,” MacPreston 
said. “Pretty good operation, eh, 
Mish?” 
“Too damn many of ’em,” 
Levinsky growled. “Wonder they 
aren’t falling all over each other.” 
“What do you think, Rumel?” 
MacPreston asked. 
“What?” 
“Is it a good operation?” 
They’re nuts, Swimmer 
thought. He said: “I agree with 
Mr. Levinsky. Jepson couldn’t 
have had more than twenty of 
his men down there . from 
my count. I’d have held the armor out farther and gone in with 
fifty men.” 
“Where would you have hit?” 
MacPreston asked. 
“Right on top of the house.” 
Levinsky nodded. 
The limousine dropped to five 
hundred feet above the lake’s 
southeast shore. Swimmer could 
hear scattered rifle shots. Each 
one sent an agony of fear through 
him. 
Ob ... 
A man-made serenity returned 
to the island, a shocked silence 
broken only by faint shouts 
heard across the hush of water. 
A line of men with their hands 
in the air was marched onto the 
island’s dock through a cordon 
of single-scooters. 
Something buzzed from the 
limousine’s dash. 
“That’s it,” MacPreston said. 
“Let’s go.” 
r T~'he limousine slanted in to 
the patch of open ground beside the chalet. Its hover jets 
raised a cloud of pine-needle 
duff that settled slowly after the 
motors were silenced. 
MacPreston opened his windown, sneezed from the dust. 
A Ranger captain ran up, 
saluted, spoke through the window. “All secure, sir. Professor 
Rumel and the — ah — woman are 
safe in the house.” 
Swimmer allowed himself a 
deep sigh. 
“What were the casualties?” 
Levinsky demanded. 
“Sir?” The Ranger captain bent 
to peer in at Levinsky. 
“The casualties!” Levinsky 
snapped. 
“We have ten wounded, sir. 
Eight from our own cross-fire. 
Nothing serious, though. And we 
killed two of the — uh — men here. 
Wounded four others.” 
THE PRIMITIVES 
MacPreston touched a button 
beside him. The limousine’s bubbletop swung back with a hiss of 
hydraulic mechanism. 
"Fifty men right on top of the 
house,” Levinsky muttered. 
“Would’ve been plenty.” 
“Well, Captain,” MacPreston 
said, “bring Professor Rumel and 
the woman out here. I’m anxious 
to meet them.” 
The Ranger captain fidgeted. 
“Well, sir . you know we had 
orders to handle her and the 
Professor with kid gloves and 
we — 
“So bring them out here!” 
“Sir, the woman refuses to 
leave her work.” 
“Her work?” 
“Sir, Professor Rumel says 
she’ll take orders only from his 
nephew there.” The Captain nodded toward Swimmer. 
Swimmer absorbed this silently, but with a strong upswing of 
good humor. He liked this Captain. He liked MacPreston. He 
liked Levinsky and all this damn 
fool mob of fighting men. Swimmer was surprised to come out of 
this reverie and find Levinsky 
and MacPreston staring at him. 
“What didn’t you tell us?” 
Levinsky asked. 
About Ob working on the diamond, Swimmer thought. He 
swallowed, said: “I think she 
likes me.” 
“So?” MacPreston said. 
“So that’s good,” Swimmer 
said. 
“From the description, she 
sounds like a freak,” MacPreston said. “What’s good about it?” 
Swimmer suddenly did not 
like MacPreston. The emotional 
reaction was apparently quite 
evident in the glare Swimmer 
turned on the Presidential assistant. “Maybe the description’s 
wrong,” MacPreston said. 
“Wally,” Levinsky said, “why 
don’t you shut up?” 
I n the embarrassed silence 
which followed. Swimmer 
looked at Levinsky, reflecting: 
Ob a freak? She’s no more a freak 
than I am! So she has extra 
equipment. In her day, that was 
an advantage. And it isn’t her 
fault she was snatched out of her 
day. She didn’t ask to be brought 
here and have people sneer at 
her. Just because of the way she 
looks. She’s a normal and healthy human female. Probably a 
lot more normal and healthy 
than this MacPreston jerk! 
MacPreston, his face flushed 
with anger, turned to the Ranger 
captain, said: “She refuses to 
come out here?” 
“Sir, the Professor insists she’ll 
only take orders from his nephew. 
I’m ... I hesitate to use force.” 
“Why?” MacPreston demanded. “Don’t you have enough 
men for the job?” 
“Sir, there’s a bench in there 
must weigh four hundred pounds. 
They hid this Jepson behind it. 
We wanted to move the bench to 
see if Jepson was really dead. 
Sir, she lifted that bench with 
one hand.” 
“A four hundred pound bench? 
With one hand?” 
“Yes, sir. Oh . and Jepson 
was really dead, sir. Skull 
crushed. According to the Professor, she did that with one blow 
of her fist.” 
“Her fist?” MacPreston turned 
his outraged stare onto Swimmer. “Rumel, what kind of female is that in there?” 
“Just an ordinary, normal 
woman,” Swimmer said. 
“But—” 
“Nothing unusual at all about 
her!” Swimmer said. “In her 
day, she may even have been a 
ninety - seven - pound weakling. 
She didn’t ask to be brought here, 
MacPreston. She didn’t ask to 
have people pronounce stupid 
judgments on her appearance.” 
MacPreston studied Swimmer’s 
face, noting every detail of it 
from the low hairline to the vanishing chin. Presently he said: 
“Sorry, Mr. Rumel. My error.” 
Swimmer nodded, thinking : 
She’ll only fake orders from me. 
A crazy elation filled him. He felt 
his left wrist being lifted by the 
handcuffs, looked down to see 
Levinsky unlocking the cuff. 
“Mish, what’re you doing?” 
MacPreston asked. 
“Isn’t it obvious?” Levinsky 
asked. 
“Now, wait a minute, Mish,” 
MacPreston said. “I sympathize 
with your request, and the President does, too. But there are 
large obstacles. This man has 
committed crimes which no other 
man — ” 
“He’s the best demolition man 
I ever met,” Levinsky said. 
“But we have the Russians to 
think about!” MacPreston said 
unhappily. 
“We’ll give ’em Jepson,” 
Levinsky said. “Jepson’s dead. 
He can’t object ... or dispute 
our story.” 
Swimmer massaged his wrist 
where the handcuff had been, 
stared from MacPreston to 
Levinsky. Their conversation 
made no sense to him. The Ranger captain, still standing beside 
the limousine, appeared equally 
puzzled. 
“But Rumel has been identified!” MacPreston said. 
“So?” Levinsky said. 
“So the Russians’!! know he 
was involved. What use can he 
be to you after that? He has a 
face — excuse me, Mr. Rumel, but 
it’s true — that a Minnesota farmer could identify after seeing it 
only twice in the newspapers. 
How could you hide that from 
the Russians?” 
THE PRIMITIVES 
44'T'Von’t be stupid, Wally! I 
■L'' never wanted to use him 
that way. I want his knowledge, 
his experience. I want him in the 
academy.” 
“But if we don’t hand him over 
to prosecution with the rest of 
that mob — ” 
“What if we claim he was our 
agent all along? What if we say 
he infiltrated the Jepson mob 
for us?” 
“You said it yourself, Mish. 
They know who the expert was. 
They know who sank that boat.” 
“So?” 
MacPreston frowned. 
“You heard what the President 
said,” Levinsky said. “If Rumel 
proves cooperative, and if we 
deem it advisable after our field 
investigation — ” 
“I don’t like it.” 
“The Russians won’t like it, 
either. Especially when we give 
them back their diamond and the 
Jepson gang, what’s left of it.” 
“The boat!” 
“We’ll apologize about the 
boat.” 
Give them back their diamond. 
Swimmer thought. Oh, God! And 
Ohs’ in there cutting that rock into little pieces! 
“I’ll have to think about it,” 
MacPreston said. “Discomfitting 
the Russians would give me just 
as much pleasure as it would 
you. But there are other considerations.” He looked up at the 
Ranger Captain. “Well, whafre 
you standing there for?” 
“Sir?’ 
“Take us to Professor Rumel 
and this . woman.” 
“Sir, I’ve ... I think we’d better hurry.” 
“Why?” 
“Well, sir, it’s what I’ve been 
trying to . sir, this work she 
won’t leave — she’s cutting up 
that Mars diamond.” 
Swimmer had not suspected 
MacPreston could move that 
fast. The limousine’s door was 
slammed open. MacPreston 
grabbed his arm, and they were 
out and running — up the chalet’s 
front steps with armed men in 
uniform leaping aside, through 
the door and into the living 
room. 
Overturned chairs, broken 
windows, a bullet-splintered wall: 
all testified to the violence of 
the attack. A cordon of guards 
was opened to the hall leading 
into the workroom. 
MacPreston stopped short. 
Swimmer bumped into him, was 
bumped in turn by Levinsky who 
was right on their heels. 
“That sound,” MacPreston 
said. 
Swimmer recognized it. The 
sound came from the hallway. 
Crack! 
Crack! 
Crack! 
MacPreston released Swim172 
mer’s arm, advanced on the hall 
like a bull preparing to charge. 
A nudge from Levinsky sent 
Swimmer following after. He felt 
he was being escorted to his execution, and found it odd how 
their feet kept to the rhythm of 
Ob’s chipping. 
Into the workroom they paraded. 
The place appeared untouched 
by the military’s violence except 
for a shattered window at their 
left. Professor Amino Rumel 
stood beside the window. He 
turned as his nephew entered, 
said: “Conrad! Thank heaven 
you’re here. She won’t do a thing 
I say.” 
M acPreston stopped a good six 
feet from where Ob was 
working. He stared at the square 
brown figure, noting the intense 
concentration in every line of her 
back, the play of muscles. Swimmer and Levinsky stopped behind him. 
Crack! 
Crack! 
The Professor advanced on 
Swimmer. “There’s been the most 
dreadful confusion,” he said. 
“In heaven’s name, Rumel, 
stop her!” MacPreston rasped. 
“I’ve tried,” the Professor said. 
“She pays no attention to me.” 
“Not you!” MacPreston roared 
Crack! 
The Professor drew himself up, 
GAIAXY 
stared at MacPreston. “And 
who,” he asked, “might you be?” 
He turned oddly pleading eyes 
on Swimmer. It was obvious that 
MacPreston had remembered 
about the four-hundred-pound 
bench being lifted with one hand. 
Swimmer tried to find his 
voice. His throat felt as though 
it had been seared with a hot 
poker. Slowly he brushed past 
MacPreston, touched Ob’s arm. 
Ob dropped mallet and wedge, 
whirled on Swimmer with a glare 
that sent him retreating one 
quick step. At sight of him, 
though, a smile stretched her 
mouth. The smile held a radiant 
quality that transfixed Swimmer. 
“Ob, you can stop the work 
now,” Swimmer whispered. 
Still smiling, she moved close 
to him, put a calloused forefinger 
to his cheek in the silent invitation of the cave, testing the emotion she read on his face. There 
were no scars on the cheek to 
count his years — and the skin was 
so sweetly, excitingly soft . 
like one of the Cave Mother’s 
babies. Still, he appeared to understand the fingerplay. He drew 
her aside, brushed a lock of hair 
away from her cheek, touched 
her scars. 
Ob wanted to take his hand, 
lead him to the bench and show 
him the work, but she feared to 
break the spell. 
“Even with the bullets flying 
THE PRIMITIVES 
around,” Professor Rumel said, 
“she paid no attention. Just went 
right on, as though — ” His voice 
trailed off. Presently he said: 
“Dear me. She wouldn’t know 
about bullets.” 
Swimmer heard the voice as 
though it came from a dream. 
Part of him was aware that MacPreston and Levinsky had gone 
to the bench, that they were 
bent over it muttering. What he 
read on Ob’s face made all of 
that unimportant. 
The words of the Cave Mother 
came back to Ob: “7fs all right 
to play with the males and sample 
them, but when the time comes 
for permanent mating, my magic 
will tell you which one to choose. 
You'll know at once.” 
How wise the Cave Mother 
had been to know such a thing, 
Ob thought. How potent was the 
Cave Mother’s magic! 
Qwimmer felt that he had come 
^ alive, been reborn here in 
this room, that behind him lay a 
whole misplaced segment of nonexistence. He wanted to hug Ob, 
but suspected she might respond 
with painful vigor. She’d have to 
be cautioned about her strength 
before she broke his ribs. He 
sensed also that she might not 
have the inhibitions dictated by 
current culture. He could imagine 
her reacting with complete abandon if he should kiss her. 
Slowly he pulled away. 
Ob saw his reluctance, thought: 
He thinks of the devil-gods. We 
must distract the devil-gods, occupy them with other things. 
Then perhaps they’ll take their 
thunder-magic elsewhere, and 
leave mortals to the things which 
interest mortals. 
But Swimmer had just begun 
to think about consequences. He 
found himself filled with wonder 
that he had never before worried 
about the legal consequences of 
his actions. The Mars diamond 
had attracted him, he realized, 
because it was a romp, a lark, a 
magnificent joke. But after what 
had happened to the rock, MacPreston and Levinsky would have 
to throw him to the Russians. 
They couldn’t just hand over a 
mess of chips and say: “Sorry, 
fellows ... it came apart.” Everything had come apart— and 
Swimmer was struck speechless 
bv fear of what might happen to 
Ob. 
Consequences no longer could 
be ignored. Levinsky and MacPreston ~were engaged in a heated argument. 
“This is a catastrophe, I tell 
you!” MacPreston said. 
“Wally, you’re being an ass,” 
Levinsky said. 
“But what can we tell the Russians?” 
Exactly, Swimmer thought. 
What can we tell the Russians? 
“That’s just it,” Levinsky said. 
“This prehistoric female has 
solved that problem for us. She’s 
made us a propaganda weapon 
we can parade before the whole 
world!” 
“You’d just—’ 
“Certainly! There isn’t a person in the world who’ll fail to get 
the point.” Levinsky lowered his 
voice. “The uncuttable diamond, 
don’t you see? And we can say 
we planned it this way. We give 
’em the Jepson gang and — ” He 
pointed to something hidden by 
MacPreston’s body. “. and an 
object lesson.” 
Cwimmer found himself over
come by curiosity. He headed 
for the bench, but Ob darted 
ahead, shouldered MacPreston 
aside and turned with something 
glistening in her hands. 
“Ob. Work,” die said. “For 
. you.” 
With a sense of shock and awe, 
Swimmer accepted the object 
from her, understanding then 
what Levinsky had meant by 
“object lesson.” 
The thing Ob had fashioned 
from the Mars diamond was a 
spearhead — delicately balanced 
and with exquisite workmanship. 
It lay in Swimmer’s hands, warm 
and glittering. 
“You . want?” Ob asked. 
—FRANK HERBERT 
Tovr Subscription Is Your Private Window On 
the stars 
in our galaxy 
The only thing we know about tomorrow is 
that it has its roots today. And out of the fantastic facts of today's scientific wonders Galaxy's 
all-star lineup of contributors weave stories that 
are sometimes wry, sometimes terrifying — but 
always a delight to read. 
Would you like to join us, next issue and 
every issue thereafter for years to come, on this 
fascinating exploration of the fears and foibles of 
tomorrow? All it takes is a check, a stamp and a 
minute of your time. (If you prefer not to tear the 
coupon out of your magazine, just give us the information requested on a plain piece of paper.) 
From then on the mails will bring Galaxy to your 
door, with the best stories being written by the 
best science-fiction writers of all time. 
Here are some of the famous stories that appeared in Galaxy in its first fifteen years. Will 
the next fifteen years be as good? 
Frankly, we dont think so. We think they'll 
be better! 
£ Galaxy Publishing Corp. 
;^21 Hudson Street 
► M*w York. N.Y. 10014 
t 
■4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
*Yes, start my subscription to Galaxy right away. I en-^ 
►close my check or money order for: 
► □ 12 issues for $6.00 
4 
4 
□ 24 issues for $11.00 ^ 
4 
^ Name J 
► 4 
► Address 4 
► < 
^City & State Zip Code ^ 
► U.S. only. Add 10c per issue foreign postage. 4 
Please check whether Q new or [3] renewal. ^ 
hiAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA? 
Baby Is Three 
Theodore Sturgeon 
The Ballad of 
Lost C 'Mel I 
Cordwainer Smith 
The Big Time 
Fritx Leiber 
The Caves of Steel 
Isaac Asimov 
Day After Doomsday 
Poul Anderson 
The Demolished Man 
Alfred Bester 
Do I Wake or Dream? 
Frank Herbert 
The Dragon Masters 
Jack Vance 
The Fireman 
(Farenheit 4511 
Ray Bradbury 
Gravy Planet 
(The Space Merchants) 
Pohl & Kornbluth 
Here Gather the Stars 
(Way Station) 
Clifford D. Simak 
Home from the Shore 
Gordon R. Dickson 
Hot Planet 
Hal Clement 
King of the City 
Keith Laumer 
Mind swap 
Robert Sheckley 
Med Ship Man 
Murray Leinster 
The Men in the Walls 
William Tenn 
The Old Die Rich 
H. L. Gold 
The Puppet Masters 
Robert A. Heinlein 
Surface Tension 
James Blish 
The Visitor at the Zoo 
Damon Knight 
Wind between 
the Worlds 
Lester del Rey 
Devise 
and Conquer 
by CHRISTOPHER ANVIL 
What luck that the democracies were 
destroying themselves! The only real 
problem was — what made them stop? 
Qergei Vladimirov sat at the 
^ steering wheel near the bustling street corner, conscious of 
the hurrying crowd, the new-style 
cars, a huge sign reading “CloseOut Sale,” and P. Grulov. 
P. Grulov was in the passenger’s seat beside him. P. Grulov 
was a small man with thick 
glasses and an air of absolute 
rightness. When P. Grulov spoke, 
subordinates nodded eager agreement. When he commanded, they 
sprang to obey. When he was 
irritated, they cringed. 
Sergei Vladimirov was a subordinate of P. Grulov and P. 
Grulov was irritated. 
“Look there,” snapped Grulov. “Do you see that across the 
street? What sort of incompetence is this? We leave you in 
charge for a year and a half, because we trust you. We raise 
your pay and rank, heap medals 
on you, give your family a nice 
house to live in — and this is 
how you repay us! You bunglar, 
explain that to me!” Grulov angrily pointed across the street. 
Vladimirov looked where he 
pointed. “There is a crowd of 
shoppers, but nothing unusual.” 
“Nothing unusual! Look there! 
Do you see those two men? There 
they go, arm-in-arm!” 
Vladimirov groaned. “I see 
them.” 
“This is an American city, is it 
not?” 
“Yes, comrade.” Vladimirov 
could feel the iron jaws of logic 
begin to close on him. 
“And these,” said P. Grulov, 
making a gesture to indicate the 
crowd, “are Americans, are they 
not?” 
“Yes. Yes, that is true.” 
“And there are two kinds of 
Americans, are there not?” 
“Well, comrade — about that.” 
“No evasion. Remember your 
teachings at the Special School. 
There are two kinds of Americans. Name them.” 
Vladimirov groped mentally 
for some way out. “Capitalists 
and workers, exploiters and — ” 
P. Grulov’s voice carried a bite. 
“None of that! You evade. I am 
speaking of your teachings at the 
Special School.” 
“Oh.” 
“There are two kinds of Americans. Name them.” 
“Exploiters, and — and exploited.” 
“Very good. Now be more specific.” 
Vladimirov drew a deep breath. 
“Those of European, and those 
of African descent.” 
CCXT'ou are squeamish, Vladimirov. Why go around 
the problem? Speak out! Why 
DEVISE AND CONQUER 
do you hesitate? Look here, my 
friend, this is the Americans’ 
problem. You don’t have to worry about it. Let them twist and 
turn. You don’t need to find soft 
words and easy expressions. Not 
European and African, Vladimirov. White and black. There, now 
we have it. Think blunty. Be 
more than blunt. Call a spade a 
dung-fork. You are a satboteur, 
Vladimirov. It is your job to 
throw matches into other peoples’ racial gasoline.” He eyed 
Vladimirov sharply. “That is 
right, is it not?” 
Vladimirov nodded miserably. 
“Yes, Comrade Grulov.” 
P. Grulov scowled. “Or am I 
being too subtle for you? Let me 
be more plain about it. America, 
Vladimirov, is made up of many 
races. Ideally they will all separate like a pack of mixed dogs and 
cats and tear each other to pieces. 
Divide and conquer, you see?” 
Vladimirov gripped the steering wheel, and nodded. 
P. Grulov went on. “At home, 
there are some who disagree. I 
am happy for you that you are 
not one of them, Vladimirov.” 
Vladimirov swallowed nervously
Grulov said, “Ideally, from the 
Americans’ viewpoint, these different races will all say, ‘I’m 
American. Nobody better try to 
turn me against my country, or 
I’ll smash his head.” 
Vladimirov nodded dutifully. 
“Yes, that is what the Americans 
want.” 
“You realize,” said P. Grulov, 
“that they have been very fortunate. They have had a very 
large measure of that. We are 
alone here, and I can say it. They 
have been truly ‘the melting pot 
of races.’ You know that?” 
“I know it.” 
“Let us be very realistic, Vladimirov. How have they been able 
to do this? First, they have had 
'a great deal of work that needed 
to be done. Second, they had a 
frontier. Third, they had a philosophy. The philosophy struggles 
on under great ideological handicaps; tile frontier is gone, except 
for a little piece here and there, 
mostly in Alaska; and the abundance of work, Vladimirov, is 
running out, thanks to the new 
machinery and the automation. 
The melting pot was a blast furnace, in tiie memory of living 
men. What is it now? All that is 
left is the remaining heat from 
the past, and the American philosophy which tries to keep it 
going. It is not enough I am talking to you very frankly. Ideas 
are essential, but they alone are 
not enough. They must be implemented, made real, provided 
with actual material means. This 
American melting-pot has been a 
real thing, a very real frustration 
to us. It is a cliche, it is hack178 
neyed, it is a set of words used 
so often the meaning is all but 
rubbed off, but nevertheless, it 
has been a real thing. But now 
the heat is almost out. Now is 
our chance! Now is the time to 
drive in the wedges! Now is the 
time to find the planes of cleavage and split all these races wide 
open. American against American, Vladimirov. And what do 
you do but slump here with your 
hands on the wheels and mutter 
excuses! Speak up for yourself! 
What are your plans? How will 
you make up for this disgraceful 
defeat, it we permit you to try? 
Do you think we have grown so 
broad-minded we will not punish 
incompetents and worse? Do you 
know how quickly you can lose 
your rewards? Speak up!” 
“Comrade — ” 
“Why have you failed? Look!” 
He pointed: “And look there!” 
He pointed again. “Don’t sit there 
staring at the instruments! Look 
out! See where I point!” 
Miserably, Vladimirov raised 
his head, and looked out vaguely 
at the shoppers going by. 
Furiously, P. Grulov commanded. “Focus your eyes! Look 
at these people. Now, you see 
what I mean?” 
Tfladimirov forced himself to 
V obey, and gradually he saw. 
“There,” said Grulov, “go two 
young men, talking intently. 
They have some plan, perhaps 
for a sale of merchandise. They 
are making a ‘deal.’ To use your 
weak-kneed phrase, Vladimirov, 
one is ‘of European descent,’ and 
the other is ‘of African descent’ 
Right?” 
Vladimirov groaned. “No. You 
don’t understand — ” 
“I understand well enough. It 
is your job to keep them at each 
other’s throats. You have the 
money, you have the training, 
you have the false identity, so 
your acts can never be traced 
back to us — ” 
“Comrade — ” 
“And I come over here, to 
check discreetly, and what do I 
find? Here they are, walking 
around in each other’s arms! 
There go three women, chattering like hens! There is no selfconsciousness, no stiffness! Look 
over there! This time, two men, 
well-dressed, talking casually. 
And, great ghost of — ” 
“Comrade,” pleaded Vladimirov, “I meant well. But a terrible 
misfortune befell us.” 
“Horrible! Horrible!” roared 
Grulov. “This time it is a whole 
group, all going off on a picnic 
together! And no one is doing 
anything!” 
“I couldn’t help it,” Vladimirov 
was pleading. 
“Shut up!” snapped Grulov, 
abruptly getting control of himself. “This is incredible! I can 
DEVISE AND CONQUER 
see what you are up against. But 
it is a very simple matter to fix, 
just the same.” 
“No,” said Vladimirov earnestly, “that’s just it. It isn’t simple. 
It’s tricky. It’s so subtle you don’t 
know who’s behind it, or if anybody is behind it. It’s a very 
trucky, underhanded, peculiarly 
American — ” 
“Sh-h!” Grulov looked around. 
“No need to get hysterical, comrade. We have our duty, and it is 
very simple, and we will do it. 
Now, at the moment, I don’t see 
any suitable opportunity, but 
there will be one, and I will show 
you. I have experience at this. 
Start the car.” 
Vladimirov shook his head resignedly, and did as he was told. 
P. Grulov said, “There is a 
simple little key word, Vladimirov, and if you only use it at the 
right time, you can set off an explosion. There are, in fact, several key words that can be fired 
off in various directions, like 
rockets. But for this present problem, one specific key word in 
particular is suitable. I will show 
you how to use it. Be ready to 
drive off at once. This is a very 
crude technique, Vladimirov, but 
it is, at least, sure to work.” 
Vladimirov braced himself to 
make one more attempt to explain the trouble, but Grulov 
said, “Ah, here we are. Splendid.” 
A tall, extremely dark young 
man was coming down the 
sidewalk. 
Grulov threw his coat in the 
back seat, yanked his tie to one 
tide, unbuttoned the top button 
of his shirt, sprang out, took his 
hat off and put it on aslant. He 
swaggered across the sidewalk. 
In a loud voice, he said, “Out of 
my way you — ” And then P. 
Grulov used the key word. 
The young man glanced at him 
in puzzlement, then smiled uncertainly, “I am dark, aren’t I?” 
Grulov looked momentarily 
stunned. Recovering fast, he 
shouted, “Tell me to get off the 
sidewalk, will you, you — ” In 
quick succession, he spat out halfa-dozen powerful adjectives, and 
tacked a key word on the end. 
The young man looked at him 
blankly, then shook his head in 
wonderment and shoved past. 
Grulov shouted insults after 
him, freely mixed with key words. 
Nothing happened. 
Now genuinely furious, Grulov 
accosted an extremely dark 
young matron, screaming insults 
at her. An elderly red-faced man, 
chewing tobacco and carrying a 
large cane, reversed the cane, shot 
it out, caught Grulov around the 
neck by the crook and yanked 
him away from the woman, who 
walked past with her nose in the 
air. 
Grulov, rubbing his neck and 
180 
staggering, stared after the woman, unable to speak. 
The crowd moved on again. 
A burly man paused to snap 
at Grulov, “Just where in the 
hell have you spent the last year 
and a half?” 
Another passerby said menacingly, “Better go home and sleep 
it off, buddy. The market in used 
nightmares is damned low around 
here right now.” 
A third, an imposing man with 
broad shoulders and pale complexion, gripped Grulov by the 
shirt front and growled, “Use 
that word on me and see what 
happens.” 
A fourth bystander, who had 
been lounging against a telephone 
pole, now straightened up and 
growled. “Seems to me there was 
something funny about his accent. Let’s hear him say all that 
over again.” 
Vladimirov set the parking 
brake and shot out of the car. 
Explaining earnestly that his 
friend didn’t mean it, that he 
had these spells now and then, 
that he was sick, that he was 
under the influence of strong 
drink, and that he wouldn’t do it 
again, Vladimirov got Grulov 
safely back into the car. 
' I 'he people on the sidewalk followed his departure with 
hard glares, as Vladimirov shot 
away from the curb and got lost 
in the traffic. When they were 
well away from the place, on the 
way back to his apartment, Vladimirov stopped at a drugstore 
for iodine, liniment, sore-throat 
remedies and other supplies. 
Then he parked his car in the 
lot near the apartment, helped 
Grulov, who had yet to say a 
word, into the elevator, then down 
the corridor and into the apartment. There he painted Grulov’s 
various scratches, and gave him 
a large spoonful of the sore-throat 
remedy. 
Grulov gagged and choked. 
“Phew.” He sat up, looked 
around, and whispered, “Incredible. Who would have believed 
it?” Then he sank back dizzily. 
Vladimirov loosened Grulov’s 
shirt, picked up the bottle of liniment, and eyed the label, which 
read: 
“. its soothing warmth penetrates deep into sore and aching 
muscles . 
Vladimirov poured some into 
his hands, winced, and went to 
work on the dazed Grulov with 
it. Grulov suddenly got his voice 
back: 
“What are you doing to me? 
Where am I? Nothing you can 
do will make me talk!” 
“Steady, comrade,” said Vladimirov, his hands burning, “You 
are among friends.” 
It was some moments before 
the situation became clear to 
DEVISE AND CONQUER 
Grulov, who suffered further 
temporary confusion as Vladimirov explained that the liniment 
was really all right, and showed 
Grulov the label, with the words 
“for external use only,” and the 
warning that it was illegal to 
drink it. Grulov wonderingly 
stared at the label, massaged his 
throat and sat up. He straightended his glasses regretfully. 
“I apologize to you, Comrade 
Vladimirov. You truly had difficulties. I see that now.” 
“It has been very discouraging,” Vladimirov agreed. 
“It is incredible. I do not look 
forward to reporting this. You, 
at least, were spared that problem, since there was to be no 
contact — nothing that could 
possibly be traced.” 
“For which, frankly, I was 
grateful. And yet, very uneasy. 
Word of this should have been 
sent back at once.” 
“Yes.” Grulov got up gingerly. 
“Fantastic. Our plans plainly 
count on them to fly at each 
other’s throats. Instead, here they 
are, going around arm-in-arm. 
Yet it looked so promising a little 
while ago! The melting-pot must 
have had more heat in it than 
we thought. Look here, Vladimirov, what did it? Was it the civilrights movement?” 
Vladimirov shook his head sadly, thinking of the shock still 
ahead for Grulov. 
Grulov said hopefully, “Something purely local, perhaps? 
Something others of your group 
may not have run into?” 
“No, comrade. It came out very 
quietly. With no fanfare. It was 
very subtle. Very underhanded: 
Maybe it hit me first, I don’t 
know. But it’s widespread now.” 
Grulov said, with a sort of nervous dread, “It wasn’t — ah — 
ah — ‘brotherly love,’ was it?” 
“Not that I know of.” 
“Government action! The 
courts, perhaps?” 
“No. All these things had their 
effect, but it wasn’t this that 
hurt.” 
“An ‘executive order,’ perhaps ?” 
“No, comrade.” 
“Some new ‘grass-roots’ movement?” 
“No.” 
“Was it the churches, then?” 
“Not that I know of. As I say, 
all these things had their influence. They were troubles to us. 
But we were making progress 
anyway.” 
P Grulov frowned. “This is a 
very serious problem. Vladimirov. Here we have an ideal 
situation from our viewpoint. 
Splits and divisions in our opponent s camps are to be encouraged 
— quietly and unobtrusively, of 
course. This was made to order 
for us.” Exasperatedly, Grulov 
182 
said. “With automation, with nine 
jobs for ten people, we could 
count on it to get worse.” Plaintively, he added. “Is that not 
true, Vladimirov?” 
Vladimirov said patiently, “It 
is true, Comrade Grulov.” 
“And what has happened? How 
has this great store of trouble and 
embarrassment in our opponent’s 
camp vanished into thin air? How 
has it just disappeared?” 
Gently, Vladimirov said, “I 
understand your feelings, Comrade Grulov. It is very sad.” 
Grulov blew his nose and sat I 
down. “You are sparing me some 1 
blow, Vladimirov. All right. Let’s 
have it. Obviously they have outgeneraled us. How did they do 
it?” ' 
Vladimirov reached into the 
paper bag from the drugstore. 
Grulov eyed the. iodine, liniment, and sore-throat medicine, 
and winced. 
Vladimirov handed him a waspwaisted bottle with a shiny goldedged green label bearing in large 
letters the trade-name “SUN
and beneath the slogan “Suddenly you don’t burn!” 
Squinting at this, Grulov discovered that the bottle held soand-so many ounces, contained 
such-and-such chemical constituents and was a long-lasting 
quick-acting lotion for the “positive protection of sunburn, by 
nature’s own tested remedy.” 
Grulov put the bottle down and 
looked up questioningly at Vladimirov, who handed him a second bottle like the first, except 
that the label read “UNBLOX,” 
and had the slogan, “When sunburn is no problem.” 
Grulov felt a pulse beat at his 
forehead, swallowed hard, and set 
the second bottle by the first. 
“Surely, Vladimirov — ” 
Vladimirov shook his head. 
“Steady, Comrade. This is the 
way the Americans do things. 
They must have figured the whole 
thing was basically caused by 
differences in the amount of heat 
and sunlight over a long period 
— so they worked out a way to 
control the process at will.” 
“You don’t mean to tell me — ” 
“I’m not trying to tell you 
anything, comrade, except that 
this whole problem, that promised to blow their whole country 
up into one huge anarchy, has 
all been kicked out from under 
our feet by a couple bottles of 
sun-cream.” 
“Are you sure it works?” 
“Try it.” 
P. Grulov sat and glared at 
die bottles as if they were enemies. Finally he reached out, and 
uncapped the SUNBLOX. Muttering to himself, he rolled up his 
sleeves, poured some into his 
hand, and smeared it on his forearm. Vladimirov handed him a 
paper towel, and Grulov wiped 
DEVISE AND CONQUER 
off the excess. Gradually, his 
forearm came to look as if he 
had spent a solid summer on the 
beach. Grulov smeared on some 
more cream. Then another dose. 
Grimly determined to test the 
potential of the stuff, he repeated the treatment till his arm was 
blacker than anything Vladimirov had seen before. A long session at the sink then convinced 
Grulov that soap didn’t budge it. 
Vladimirov held out the UNBLOX. Grulov smeared it on. 
After half-a-dozen applications 
of this, he was back where he had 
started from. 
V ladimirov said apologetically, 
“You can imagine what it 
was like, Comrade. The capitalists have, of course, been selling 
sun-tan cream for a long time. 
There has even been stuff that 
would give you a tan without 
the sun. This cream here was advertised as operation on ‘Nature’s own principle of solar protection.’ It sold in huge quantities. There’s another version, 
called SUNBLOX with REPELZZ, that also repels bugs. 
Naturally sportsmen smeared it 
on good and thick. Then, comrade, if some other sportsman 
who didn’t know about it came 
along and used a key-word, he 
got flattened. Meanwhile, young 
people took to using it as a prank. 
The demand was unprecedented. 
For a time, UNBLOX was selling at around seventeen-fifty a 
bottle.” 
“I can see you certainly had a 
problem,” admitted Grulov, staring at the bottle. 
“What was there to do? It went 
from bad to worse, until the 
situation became so confused that 
if I used a key-word in a mixed 
crowd, I never knew who would 
hit me.” 
Grulov shook his head gloomily. 
Vladimirov added wearily, 
“Undoubtedly, comrade, it was 
the cursed ‘profit motive’ at 
work. Our loss is some capitalist’s gain.” 
“It seems incredible that such 
disastrous things could happen 
without reaching our ears.” 
“Would members of our provocation units break discipline to 
report? And then, who wished to 
be the one to bear the bad news? 
Worse yet, seeing it from the 
outside, who would really know 
what was happening until it was 
too late?” 
For a considerable time, Vladimirov and Grulov sat in gloom, 
then at last, Vladimirov said 
hesitantly, “They still have unemployment.” 
“It isn’t enough. In a struggle 
like this, any advantage to either 
side tilts the balance, and tends 
to accumulate new advantages. 
Most of the energy the Americans 
1S4 
wasted in this problem is now 
freed. They can apply it to other 
things. We must have some compensating advantage, or — ” 
Vladimirov snapped his fingers. 
He rummaged through a bureau 
drawer, and handed Grulov a 
large brown pill-bottle. 
Grulov scowled. “And what is 
this?” 
“We have, at times, had — ah 
— difficulties with certain of our 
Asian comrades.” 
Grulov winced. “But what has 
this bottle to do with that?” 
“Read the label.” 
Grulov squinted at it : “SWEETRES’N. Take two tablets each, 
before conferences.” 
“What’s this?” said Grulov. 
“They came out with it a few 
months ago. The Americans use 
these pills at contract talks.” 
“What can we do with them? 
And how do you pronounce that 
trade name?” 
“Well, as for what we can do, 
I was thinking if we invited the 
Chinese comrades to a banquet, 
ground up several dozen of these 
pills and put them in the food 
. The name on the bottle is 
pronounced ‘Sweet Reason,’ comrade.” 
“ ‘Sweet Reason,’ ” murmured 
Grulov. He looked from the bottle to Vladimirov. “You are not 
fooling me? These will work?” 
“I understand that they have 
worked for coal miners and op
GALAXY 
erators, longshoremen and ship 
omners and even for the executives and workers at a factory out 
west, where they had been bombing and shooting each other for 
seventeen years.” He hesitated. 
“Of course, as for whether they 
will work on the Chinese comrades — ” 
“Anything would be worth trying,” said Grulov. 
“They cost a dollar eightynine cents a bottle. I think there 
are fifty pills to a bottle.” 
G rulov dug into his pocket. 
“Get a big supply. You may 
have to go from store to store. 
Several dozen bottles would not 
be too many.” 
Vladimirov started out. 
“Wait,” said Grulov, “there is 
one other thing.” 
“Yes, comrade?” 
“The Americans seem very 
thorough in the drug line. And 
— there is no escaping it — I s till 
have to report that we have failed 
here. Is there anything that you 
could — say — squirt at your superior, and then he is reasonable? 
Feeding him pills might be too 
slow.” 
Vladimirov looked intent. “I 
hadn’t thought of that.” 
P. Grulov lay back, and winced with pain. “Think about it 
now,” he said testily. “Keep your 
eyes open, for a change.” 
Vladimirov blinked. “Yes, 
Comrade Grulov.” 
“Don’t just stand there,” snapped P. Grulov, getting back into 
form. “Move.” 
Vladimirov gently shut the 
door. 
If, he told himself fervently, he 
only could find such a drug, he 
knew exactly who to try it out on 
first. —CHRISTOPHER ANVIL 
THE SUICIDE EXPRESS 
Thrilling complete short novel of drama 
and intrigue on the fantastic RiverworW! 
by Philip Jose Farmer 
LIKE ANY WORLD OF GREE 
Exciting novelet*# of a galaxy -wide war 
by C. C. MacApp 
Sam Markowitz's latest article in his fascinating now 
series, science article by R. S. Behardson and many more, 
at] hi the May Worhh of Tomorrow — on solo now! 
DEVISE AND CONQUER 
(NON-FACT ARTICLE) 
by JACK B. LAWSON 
TWENTY -SEVEN 
INCHES OF 
MOONSHINE 
ttT got to raise,” said Robert 
(“Bob”) Johnson. He 
looked me hard in the eye. “It’s 
going to cost you another two 
grand to see ’em.” 
Bluff? A murmur riffled 
around the moon-igloo. Henry 
(“Hen”) Titus scratched his 
three-days-old beard thoughtfully. Old Bill Moss sucked on his 
dead pipe. A. M. (“Mel”) Forester and Warren (“Two 
Moose”) Burgess exchanged 
questioning looks. 
I stole a glance at the anomal us — or, as the clever little instruction booklet explains it, 
“fishy” — motion gauge on my 
Marlowe reel. The needle was 
all the way down flat, below 
the zero mark. My eyes went 
back at the table. 
The atmosphere was tense. 
There were chips worth sixteen 
thousand new dollars in the pot, 
and you can buy a lot of eggs for 
your beer with that kind of 
money. Everybody was long gone 
except me and Bob. What he had 
showing was a pair of tens, 
against my nine and king of 
clubs. I took another peek at my 
hole cards, just to be sure, and 
they hadn’t changed; ten, jack 
and queen of clubs. 
On the other hand, two thousand dollars might be the difference between meeting my tax bill 
and going to jail come next April. 
I took a deep breath. 
“Okay,” I said. “It’s one hell 
of a way to catch fish, but 1 11 
call you.” 
A t precisely that instant my 
special automatic - recoil 
hooksetting Marlowe marvelrod 
straightened out with a whi-i-ing\ and the reel siren started 
howling like a wolf that’s latched 
onto a big moose and wants help. 
The scene in the igloo came 
apart. The poker game was forgotten. I jumped straight up and 
darn near put a hole in the roof, 
what with that weird light gravity you keep forgetting about. 
Mel and Two Moose grabbed 
their poles and started checking 
gauges. Bob Johnson said a word 
that I won’t repeat here. You 
wouldn’t think a Texas oilman 
could get that involved in a poker 
game; sixteen thousand wasn’t 
much more than a shoeshine tip 
in his books. 
Old Bill Moss was the only one 
who kept his head. By the time I 
came down he was standing over 
my rod, cool as a Canadian 
trout watching the dials go 
around. He looked up at me and 
took the pipe out of his mouth. 
“Might jes’ be a big ’on, ” he 
says calmly. “I set yore reel to 
keep three pounds drag on the 
line. You figurin’ on playin’ it 
by hand?” 
I started to say something, but 
then it leaped and we all crowd
187 
TWENTY-SEVEN INCHES OF MOONSHINE 
ed against the wall of the igloo 
to see. It went up on a long 
curve, the kind of curve that 
these scientist fellows call a parabola — anyhow, that’s what the 
computer engineer called it when 
I ran off the film from the rod on 
the flight back to Earth. I asked 
him what that meant, and he 
wiggled his hands like all the 
spaceboys do when they’re talking about sex. That was sort of 
how I felt watching it jump, too, 
if you follow me. At least I guess 
I used to feel that way about 
girls. It soared up past the point 
where you thought sure it would 
have to start falling now, and on 
up out of the crater shadow into 
that serrated, fish-knife sunlight 
and glittered all red and gold. It 
kept on going up until, for a 
shake there, I thought it might 
be going to hit escape velocity 
and get away from me into outer 
space. And then at last it started 
to come down again. When it 
smacked the moondust, Old Bill 
squinted at the spot carefully and 
said. 
“Might jes’ be a record fish, 
that.” 
It was. A half hour later I finally landed my piece of moonshine, and back in the igloo 
stretched it out on the table 
alongside twenty-seven inches of 
tape from the hilt of Mel’s rod— 
a good three inches better than 
the old record. That was held, as 
188 
every real fisherman knows, by 
Frank R. Thornton, and he got it 
on the very first moonshine ever 
caught, back in 2026. 
Bob broke out the whiskey. 
Co there you have the true story 
^ of how I caught the world’s 
— no, better say the universe’s — 
record moonshine. 
Needless to say, it was the 
thrill of my life. Moonshining is 
undoubtedly the most exciting 
and challenging of all sports. 
Only thirty-five of these strange 
creatures have been caught to 
date, and any moonshine is a 
trophy fish, not to speak of the 
magnificent specimen mounted in 
the place of honor over my fireplace in Wikkinikkiw, Michigan. 
Of course, some people don’t 
think a moonshine is a fish, rightly speaking. But I’ve got my answer ready for that one. When 
the biologist who came up from 
Michigan State to see mine shook 
his head and said no, no, it was a 
gobbledegook-snark, or whatever 
it is biologists call moonshines, I 
lugged my tackle box in from 
the back porch and without a 
word showed him a red and yellow Lucky 13. He looked at it 
and then at my fish on the wall 
and then back at the Lucky 13, 
and after a while he went away 
looking vexed. There’s no denying the resemblance, like it or 
not — and mostly, I understand, 
the scientist fellows don’t. That’s 
not the only thing they don’t like 
about moonshines, either. 
But this isn’t any scientific 
study. What I aim to do is tell 
you, speaking as one fisherman 
to another, something about 
moonshining as a sport: how it 
got started, what tackle and techniques to use and things like 
that. 
You may never have a chance 
to use the information — trips to 
the moon are a mite expensive 
yet — but you can always dream, 
can’t you? And you’ll be ready, 
just in case. Last spring I 
wouldn’t have given a wormy 
bluegill for my chances, but now 
I’ve got twenty-seven inches of 
moonshine over my fireplace. 
The universal record. 
What did it weigh? People are 
always asking me that, and I 
expect you’re no different. It 
isn’t an easy question to answer 
though, because, when you think 
about it, you’ll see it all depends 
on where you do the weighing. 
On the ship coming home my 
moonshine weighed exactly as 
much as I did, that is to say, 
nothing. But on Jupiter it would 
tip the scales at better than seventy pounds, or that was what 
my engineer friend claimed. I 
got to considering, and asked him 
to make up this chart, which I’ll 
simply pass along to you to look 
over: 
Record Largo
Record Cut
Record 
month Bass 
throat Trout 
Moonshine 
Moon 
3.57125 6765 
4.455 
Mercury 
6.0075 
11.07 
7.29 
Venus 
18.9125 
34.85 
22.95 
Earth 
22.25 
41. 
27. 
Mars 
8.455 
15.58 
10.26 
Jupiter 
108.24 
71.28 
Saturn 
26.0325 
47.97 
31.59 
Uranus 
20.47 
24.84 
Neptune 
24.92 
45.92 
30.24 
Pluto 
2 
t 
The scientist fellows don’t 
seem to know much about Pluto. 
T et’s start with the history of 
moonshining, then. Mostly. 
I reckon we don’t know how our 
favorite sports got started. Probably the first fisherman looked 
more like a bear than he did like 
you or me. Who’s to say? But we 
can say what the first man who 
fished for moonshines looked 
like, and exactly how he came to 
do it. He was, and is, Frank R. 
Thornton, a vice-captain on the 
Mars run these days, and I guess 
you’d have to call him one of 
the universe’s dedicated fishermen. 
The story goes that one day 
back in ’26, as he was making repairs on a moontractor, his right 
hand picked up a pair of pliers 
and before he knew what it was 
doing, had turned a cotter pin 
into a pretty good double-barbed 
hook. Any real fisherman has had 
similar experiences. I myself am 
forever doodling musky on business papers, for instance. 
TWENTY-SEVEN INCHES OF MOONSHINE 
Well, once he saw what he’d 
done Frank was hooked, so to 
speak. Remember, he’d been up 
there the better part of a year, 
nine whole months without any 
fishing. The next thing was line. 
In no time at all the supply chest 
was minus one spool of fine grade 
copper wire. 
So then he only needed rod, 
reel, something to use for bait, 
and something to fish in. Once 
you’ve seen the way moondust 
ripples under convection currents 
you’ll understand that this last 
requirement, something to fish in, 
wasn’t as much of a problem as 
it might seem. And any true fisherman has looked over a mudpuddle critically once or twice in 
his life. So much for that. 
What about bait? As Frank 
pointed out later on, success in 
fishing is nine-tenths a matter 
of what you put on the hook— as 
the amateur with his electronic 
iunk learns when he’s standing 
next to the old pro who’s pulling 
them in on manual tackle. But 
Frank hadn’t any idea what he 
was fishing for, and consequently no notion of all of what to 
use, even supposing he’d had 
some handy. Which he didn’t. 
You could dig around on the 
moon for a long time without 
coming up with an earthworm, 
you know. 
Still, he’d gone too far to quit 
now. His fisherman’s blood was 
190 
up. After giving the matter a 
little thought, Frank decided his 
best bet was snatch fishing. 
A/T aybe I’d better explain what 
that is for the benefit of the 
young and ignorant. In snatch 
fishing the fisherman ties a 
weight to the end of a line and 
attaches a bunch of hooks, usually three or four, a few inches 
apart down by the weight. He 
swings the line good — you can 
tell an expert by the fact that 
he spins the line against the 
heel of his hand, while your inexperienced fisherman goes at 
it like a cowboy roping steers — 
and throws it out behind a school 
of fish, or into a likely spot. 
Then he yanks the line hard 
through the school and hopes like 
high heaven that he foul hooks 
something good for supper. 
That was what Frank decided 
to do. It took care of rod, reel 
and bait at one blow. Only, of 
course — and that was the big 
point! — he didn’t really expect 
to catch anything. He was just 
a badly frustrated fisherman pretending for all he was worth. 
Consequently, when something 
hit his line and started in fighting 
like a five pound sandbass, he 
thought that was just pretended 
too, a good dream. When it 
leaped and he saw it, a living, 
twenty-four inch, red and gold 
Lucky 13, complete with eye
spot, he thought the moon had 
finally gotten to him: lunacy, 
you know. But when he showed 
his moonshine to the rest of the 
boys and they saw it too — unh! 
He didn’t know what to think. 
I’ve heard that particular exploration party didn’t accomplish 
even close to the amount of 
mapping it was supposed to do. 
They didn’t catch any more 
moonshines, either, of course. 
Doubting biologists to the contrary, the technique of moonshining boils down to one curious fact: though you’ve got to 
make the effort, you can’t catch 
a moonshine if you intend to. 
Call it ESP, or coincidence, or 
whatever you like, that’s how it 
works. For my part, I’ve had a 
rather similar experience with 
lots of earthside fish. It’s only 
after you’ve lost all faith and 
keep on throwing out that plug 
out of sheer contrariness that 
they decide to hit. And why not? 
In my opinion, a little ESP 
might be a first- class survival 
trait. The biologists ought to 
Hunk about that some. 
A nyhow, you have to catch 
your moonshine by accident, 
so to speak. But you still have to 
be working at it. This means that 
a girlie magazine or deck of 
cards can be an important addition to your tackle box, more important than that fifteen-dollar 
TWENTY-SEVEN INCHES OF MOONSHINE 
Reflex-revolvo spinner, for example. You set out your line — 
and what a whopping cast you 
can make on the moon! Someday I’m going to take my fly rod 
up there — and then sit down to 
a little serious poker to put you 
in the right frame of mind, preoccupied, but still interested in 
fishing. The rest may not be as 
much luck as you’d suppose. Every now and then I wonder how 
many of my record moonshine’s 
twenty-seven inches are due to 
the fact that I was getting way 
over my head. 
A word of caution here: certain types of minds simply aren’t 
suited to moonshining. If you’re 
the sort of fellow who in betting 
this year's tax money away is 
likely to think, *Now, surely this 
will make me preoccupied enough 
to catch’ and so on — give it up, 
friend. You’ll never land your 
moonshine. Whether thinking like 
that is a sign of intelligence or 
of just plain deviousness, doesn’t 
matter; it’s no good either way. 
Most biologists’ minds seem to 
work in some such a complicated and fishless way, I might add. 
Tough luck. For them — good for 
fishermen. 
As for tackle, you’ll need the 
new automatic equipment. I 
know, I know. I hate it too. You 
can tell a fisherman from a boob 
by the fact that the latter has 
more brains in the butt of his 
192 
rod than under his fly-covered 
hat. Earthside, I use, as a rule, 
a rebuilt antique Pfleuger bait 
caster, with the antibacklash 
ripped out, and one of the old 
fiberglass rods. But on the moon 
you need the fancy equipment to 
do some of your thinking for you. 
At the least, you need either 
lures (and moonshines will apparently take any kind of lure 
except a Lucky 13) with proximity hooking, or a hooksetting rod. 
Even with all the dude equipment, though, you can always tell 
the expert from the amateur. As 
Old Bill Moss pointed out to me, 
the amateur is likely to set his 
pole with a terrific curve in it, 
bent through maybe ten degrees 
pi arc, under the mistaken notion 
ttiat the bigger recoil will set the 
hook solidly. What it’s more 
Kkely to do is tear the poor fish’s 
jaw off, of course. I bent the tip 
of my marvelrod over an inch 
and a half to two inches, no more. 
Bill bent his less than an inch. 
B ut the amount and kind of 
equipment you can take is 
pretty much limited by the 
weight restrictions on your spaceship. I had to leave a tacklebox 
full of tested-and-true fish-getters behind, in the first mate’s 
locker at the Cape — where, I’m 
happy to say, they were waiting 
safe and sound on my return. 
But it was that or the whiskey. 
This brings me to another big 
point. Probably the most difficult 
thing about moonshining, next to 
achieving the right frame of 
mind, is getting there. Compared 
to the moon, Lost Lake with its 
two-hundred pound trout is in 
your back yard. 
Basically, you can go to the 
moon in one of three ways. First, 
you can join the space service, 
which is how Frank Thornton did 
it. Of course, you have to be 
born with the right aptitudes and 
to start working at it young, or 
you’re out of luck. Or second, you 
can belong to one of the seven 
sportsman’s clubs that make 
yearly expeditions to the moon, 
like Bob Johnson, Hen Titus, 
Mel Forester and Warren Burgess — or else be the club’s fishing pro. like Old Bill Moss. That 
way you don’t have to have your 
billion salted away the same as 
the rest of them, just expert 
knowledge. 
Third and last, but of course 
not least, you can work your 
pants to the bone for some politician on the Space Committee, 
so that when a billionaire slips 
on a dog’s mess and breaks his 
hip, for example, your buddy in 
Washington will call you at 3:15 
a.m. and say: 
“Hank, I hear there’s a vacancy on the next moonrocket for 
one fisherman, fare prepaid and 
uncancellable. Somehow I don’t 
TWENTY-SEVEN INCHES OF MOONSHINE 
think anybody but you is going 
to have the right clearances to 
get aboard, you understand me? 
But you’ll have to make it to the 
Cape by noon.” 
Then the only thing that really 
holds you up is explaining to the 
Bttle woman that this time she 
doesn’t have to pack you a 
lunch. Arguing with a sleepy 
woman is like dragging a big catfish out of the weeds. 
I think most of us will agree 
that my third route to the moon 
is the most practical one, all 
things considered. True, you’re 
taking a chance. Your billionaire 
may never slip up. But even if 
he doesn’t you’re still helping to 
promote democracy, which is 
something we sportsmen especially should be concerned about. 
And there’s always a chance, 
friend. Anything can happen. 
In that case, you too might 
find yourself, beyond your wildest dreams, on tomorrow’s moonrocket, Marlowe marvelrod (or 
whatever you make is) in hand, 
mapping out strategy. I’ve got a 
record twenty-seven inches ol 
moonshine on my wall, but to a 
fisherman with the right frame 
of mind the sky’s the Emit. Rumor has it Frank Thornton is 
trolling a Mobius spoon on the 
Mars run. 
I for one wouldn’t like to bet 
against him. 
JACK B. LAWSON 
The BEMs in your neighborhood 
won't run off with your books 
if you put inside the front cover 
of each book ... a gummed bookplate 
with your name printed on it! 
FINAGLE SAYS — 
The umpteenth corollary 
of Finagle's General Law of 
Dynamic Negatives says: 
"No books are ever lost 
by loaning except ones you 
particularly want to keep." 
100 for $4; 200, $6; 300, $8 
with owner's name imprinted 
All Postpaid. Add state sales tax, if any. 
ACTUAL SIZE, all designs, 3x4 inches 
No. GM-12 by Cullen Rapp No. CX-57 by Lynd Ward 
The designs shown above are the only ones we offer! 
Order from GALAXY 421 Hudson Street, New York 14, N. Y. 
Could you write 
for television? 
ByMaxShulman 
A rankly, I don’t know. But this I do know: 
when I was running the Dobie Gillis show, 
I often paid $2,500 and more for scripts 
turned out by people who should have been 
arrested for impersonating writers. 
How such people got to be high-priced 
TV writers is not as mysterious as it seems. 
Television is an insatiable maw into which 
scripts must be fed at a rate unprecedented 
in the history of entertainment. It is a grateful producer indeed who consistently gets 
scripts which have been written with real 
understanding of television’s powers and 
limitations. 
To help train new TV writers, I joined 
with Rod Serling (creator of The Twilight 
Zone, winner of five Emmy Awards) and 
ten other leading authors* to start the 
Famous Writers School. We pooled everything we had learned in our long years in the 
business to devise four professional writing 
courses that men and women, seriously interested in writing, could take in their own 
homes in their free time. 
How to write “with a lens” 
All four of our courses give you a solid 
foundation in basic writing skills. And three 
of them (Fiction, Non-Fiction and Advertising) give you training in the techniques 
of television. You learn to build interesting, 
believable characters; how to write dialogue 
that rings true; how to plot convincingly. 
Therf you develop the specialized approach 
that TV demands: the facility to tell your 
•Bennett Cert, Bruce Catton, Faith Baldwin, Bergen 
Evans, Mignon G. Eberhart, John Caples, J. D. 
Ratcliff, Mark Wiseman, Rudolf Flesch, Red Smith 
story (or documentary or commercial) in 
quick, visual sequences ... the knack of 
thinking and writing with a lens! 
Through a series of carefully planned 
assignments, you learn as you write— guided 
by our own specially organized textbooks. 
Your assignments are painstakingly edited 
and revised by our staff of instructors, themselves all professional writers. Under our 
supervision, an instructor works with you 
by mail, much as a producer or editor works 
with an established writer. 
Do you have an aptitude for writing? 
To help you (and us) decide whether you’ve 
got the stuff to be a writer, we have worked 
up a revealing aptitude test. The coupon 
below will bring you a copy, along with a 
48-page School brochure. If your test indicates aptitude, you are eligible to enroll in 
the School. You are, however, under no obligation to do so. 
Famous Writers School 
Dept. 6853, Westport, Connecticut 
I am interested in finding out whether I have an 
aptitude for writing. Please mail me, without 
obligation, a copy of your writing aptitude test 
and information about the courses you offer. 
Mr. 
Mf s Age 
M* ss (please print) 
Street 
City Zone 
County State . 
Accredited by Accrediting Commission of the 
National Home Study Council.