QAUxy The Best in Pertinent Science Fiction May, 1970 60? mac 
May, 1970 60< MAC 
NOVELETTE SCIENCE FICTION 
THE GOD MACHINE 
David Oerrold 
d STYLE IN TREASON 
James Blish 
“We want to test your writing aptitude” 
If you have ever wanted 
to write, here is your 
opportunity to find out if you 
have talent worth developing. 
Take this revealing 
Aptitude Test created 
by 1 5 famous authors 
By Rod Serling 
If you want to write, my colleagues and 
I would like to test your writing aptitude. 
We'll help you find out if you have the 
talent it takes to become a successful 
writer. 
Several years ago, I joined together 
with Max Shulman, Faith Baldwin, Bennett Cerf, Bruce Catton, J. D. Ratcliff 
and several others to form the Famous 
Writers School. Our aim was to help 
qualified people acquire the skills they 
need to break into print. We poured 
everything we know about writing into a 
new kind of professional training course, 
which you take at home in your free time. 
After a solid grounding in the fundamentals of all good writing, you get advanced 
training in the specialty of your choice. 
Each of your writing assignments is 
examined by instructors who are themselves professional writers or editors. 
Your instructor goes over your work 
word by word, blue-penciling corrections 
right on it — much as an editor does with 
established writers. Then he returns it to 
you with a long, personal letter of advice. 
This training works well. Our students 
Rod Serling, six-time Emmy Award 
winner, made TV writing an art form with 
Patterns, Requiem for a Heavyweight and 
Twilight Zone. He has also written many 
short stories and motion picture scripts. 
have sold their writing to hundreds of 
publications including Redhook and True. 
Free Aptitude Test offered 
To find out if you can benefit from this 
training, send for the School’s free Aptitude Test. If you test well, or offer other 
evidence of writing ability you may enroll. But there is no obligation. 
Famous Writers School 
Dept. W-4569 
Westport Connecticut 06880 
1 want to know if I have writing aptitude 
worth developing. Please mail me, 
without obligation, your Aptitude Test 
and ilkisiraled brochure. 
Mr. 
Mrs Age 
Miss [Circle one and please print] 
Slreet 
City 
State Zip 
Accredited by the Accrediting Commission 
of tile National Home Study Council. 
Galaxy is published in French, German, Italian, Japanese and Spanish. 
The U. S. Edition is published in Braille 
and Living Tape. 
Vol. 30, No. 2 
NOVHITTES 
A STYLE IN TREASON 4 
James Blish 
THE GOD MACHINE 46 
David Gerrold 
WHATEVER BECAME 
OF THE MCGOWANS? 109 
Michael G. Coney 
SEKIAL (Part II) 
THE TOWER OF GLASS 86 
Robert Silverberg 
EJLER JAKOBSSON 
Editor 
FREDERIK POHL 
Editor Emoritus 
DONALD H. MENZEL 
Science Editor 
LESTER DEL REY 
Feature Editor 
JUDY-LYNN BENJAMIN 
Managing Editor 
FRANC L. ROGGERI 
Art Director 
JACKGAUGHAN 
Assaciafe Art Director 
ARNOLD E. ABRAMSON 
Publisher 
BERNARD WILLIAMS 
Associate Publisher 
SHORT STORIES 
NEUTRON TIDE 82 
Arthur C. Clarke 
TIMESERVER 99 
Avram Davidson 
ILLUSTRATED FEATURE 
SUNPOT 126 
Vaughn Bode 
FEATURES 
EDITOR'S PAGE 2 
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 106 
Algis Budrys 
OVERKILL 130 
Frederik Pohl 
GALAXY STARS 133 
Cover by GAUGHAN, suggested by 
THE TOWER OF GLASS 
GALAXY MAGAZINE is published monthly by Universal Publishing & Distributing Corporation, Arnold E. Abramson, President, Main ottices; 235 East 45 
Sireel, New York, N.Y, 10017. 60c 
per copy. 12-issue subscription: 
S6.00 in the United States, elsewhere S7.00. Second class postage 
paid at New York, N.Y. and additional mailing offices. Copyright 
^ 1970 by Universal Publishing & 
Distributing Corporation under 
International, Universal and PanAmerican Copyright Conventions. 
All rights reserved. The publisher 
assumes no responsibility for unsolicited material. All stories 
printed in this magazine are fiction and any similarity between 
characters and actual persons is 
coincidental. Title registered U.S. 
Patent Office. Printed in U.S. A. 
THE DDTs 
Like it or not, right or wrong, if 
you’re a reasonably constant reader of this magazine and others who 
strive in the field, you’re head-conscious. You spend some time upstairs. You think or try to. 
Let’s also assume that you’re 
free of irrelevant hang-ups — hair 
on other people doesn’t bother you 
and miniskirts on pretty girls are 
out of sight unless you’re trying to 
think of something else. You don’t 
buy everything that’s advertised, 
don’t think that baldness, skin color or complexion necessarily denote virility or lack of it and your 
God is not a panhandler. 
So then you look around for the 
next thing. And somebody points a 
finger at you and says you’ve got 
DDT. 
So it could have been malaria — 
but you don’t say so because with 
your luck it might not have been. 
When you think of all the vicissitudes your particular genetic material has survived since the first 
DNA was knocked up in some unimaginable dawn of life you might 
count yourself pretty lucky. 
A born gambler. 
But now you have the DDTs — 
along with everyone else alive today, according to some scientific 
authority. The stuff has even been 
found in the tissue of animals native to and living in Antarctica. 
Certainly you share it with millions — one official estimate places 
the figure at a billion — of your fellow humans, approximately onethird of whom live in malaria-susceptible areas, who have been 
spared the disease because of effective DDT spraying of mosquito 
breeding grounds. DDT applications have reduced malarial deaths 
in India from an annual 750,000 to 
about 1,500 and have virtually 
eliminated the disease in Greece, 
which fifteen years ago reported a 
million cases in a single year. DDT 
has boosted food crops and reduced starvation world wide. 
To date no one has charged that 
a single human being has died 
from the proper use of DDT. Substantial scientific opinion discounts 
any dangerous effects from the 
amounts you and 1 have ingested; 
there is disagreement on that subject, but it’s at least arguable that 
the total human environment has 
been improved in this instance. 
No one denies the dangers of 
air- water- and soil-pollution but 
you and I would rather drive, ride 
a bus or a plane than walk. We 
prefer an electric light at home or 
in the operating room to candlepower. We like central heating and 
would starve without refrigeration. 
More details on this at a later date 
— but the point is that for right 
now and the foreseeable future 
we’ve become our own environment. 
There is no other worth mentioning. And I’m not about to tell 
either of us what to do about it. 
Nor, if past history is any criterion, is anyone else. Lots of luck. 
— JAKOBSSON 
City & Stale Zip Code. 
Prices outside the Western Hemisphere add $1 .00 per 1 2 issues for postage 
Please check whether □ new or □ renewal 
IT DOESN’T TAKE A GENIUS 
UNIVERSAL PUBLISHING AND DISTRIBUTING CORPORATION 
235 EAST FORTY-FIFTH STREET. NEW YORK, N Y. 10017 
Hurry and enter my subscription to GALAXY and WORLDS OF IF at your special combination 
rate. I enclose my check or money order for: 
□ 12 issues of each for $11.50 □ 24 issues of each for $22.50 □ 36 issues of each for $31.50 
to figure out how much you hate missing the best story of your favorite writer 
or the major part of a great novel. But 
we can’t compute a formula to stock 
every newsstand in the country with 
enough copies of our popular magazines 
to satisfy every reader. So we sometimes miss you and you miss us — and 
that's a double tragedy. 
BUT THERE’S AN ANSWER. 
It doesn’t take a genius to handle it, 
either. All it takes is a minute of your 
time, for which we want to repay you 
with a handsome saving over the newsstand price. Just fill in the coupon — 
or write the information on a piece of 
plain paper — and mail it to us. Then 
you’ll be sure instead of sorry. 
f' ■. 
1 ] 
' /I 
IRelflrtistically, dft things on 
Earth cilre sale and those 
;^^o win n^t sell or cannot 
. iwMfirid themse^es poor! 
A 
Illustrated By Brock Gaughan 
The man you have bought may not stay bought 
but you can keep books on him and put paid to 
him. 
The man who works for you because he believes 
in you is a fool and will change his mind tomorrow. 
The apprentice Guildsman will often hear asked: 
How can a system based on treason possibly work? 
His first duty is to conceal that it does. 
To conceal from a man his own nature is the 
easiest of all tasks and the basis of civilized intercourse. 
— MAXIMS OF LORD GRO 
The Green Exarchy is generally known to be older 
than man, but nobody knows man’s age. Time is relative; and what with the distortions of interstellar travel, the welter of galactic languages, the different 
stages of history to be found on every world, the bad 
communications, and the indifference fostered by 
longevity, no one can say with confidence even what 
today’s date might be, no, not within a year. 
We may guess, however, that man discovered the 
Imaginary Drive about four thousand years ago, and 
emerged from UrSpace to find the Exarchy, or its 
parent empires, already established. The Exarchy to
day consists exclusively of non-human races and is 
still one of the two major centers of power in the galaxy. It is thought to be a tyranny, but the applicability of so anthropocentric a word to a non-human political system is dubious; indeed, we cannot be sure 
that the Exarchy is a “political” system, except externally. 
The second majoj power center is the loose and 
shifting confederation of planets dominated by High 
Earth. These are predominately human or humanoid 
in population. The reader will be familiar with a number of these and is doubtless living on one. 
Both systems constantly contend for the independent planets. Of these there are two types. Those populated mainly or entirely by humans are ex-colonies 
which broke free of High Earth in the past or were 
forgotten: these may also bear enclaves of humanoid 
or non-human aborigines. Those populated mainly 
by humanoid or non-human peoples are products of 
independent evolution; a few also tolerate human enclaves. 
The independent planets are almost invariably divided into nation-states. Once such a planet develops 
a world government, it tends to gravitate, or be 
forced, into one of the main power systems. 
Incessant intrigue is therefore the social norm alike 
upon the independent planets and upon those dominated by High Earth, and has quasi-official status 
through the Traitors’ Guild, an institution now perhaps a thousand years old (or so it claims). Little is 
known, necessarily, of the policy of the Guild. Operationally, it has not been above selling an occasional 
planet to the Green Exarch, but seems firmly to oppose anyone else’s doing so. Its methods are deliberately enshrouded in rumor, but in general, seem to 
place a very high value upon expertise and tradition. 
If a social norm prevails under the Exarch, other 
than the will or policy of the Exarch itself, no official 
knowledge of it exists. 
— A Child’s Guide to the Galaxy, 11:4-5 
I 
¥ ISTENING automatically for the first sound of 
“possible interruption, Simon de Kuyl emptied his 
little poisons into the catch basin in his room and 
ironically watched the wisps of wine-colored smoke 
rise from the corroded maw of the drain. He was sorry 
to see them go — they were old though venomous 
friends. 
He knew without vanity — it was too late for that — 
that High Earth had no more distinguished a traitor 
than he. But after only four clockless days on Boadicea he had already found it advisable to change his 
name, his methods and his residence. It made a humiliating beginning. 
The almost worn-away legend on the basin read: 
Julius, Boadicea. Objects made on this planet were 
usually labeled that generally, as though any place 
in the world were like every other. But this both was 
and was not true. The present city, Druidsfall, was the 
usual low jumble of decayed masonry, slightly less 
ancient slums and blank-faced offices, but the fact 
that it was also the center of the treason industry — 
hence wholly inconvenient for Simon — gave it character. The traitors had an architectural style of their 
own, characterized by structures put together mostly 
of fragmented statues and petrified bodies fitted like 
puzzle pieces or maps. Traitors on Boadicea had belonged to an honored social class for seven hundred 
years and their edifices made the fact known. 
Luckily, custom allowed Simon to stay clear of 
these buildings after the first formalities and seek out 
his own bed and breakfast. In the old friendly inns of 
Druidsfall the anonymous thumps of the transients — 
in death, love or trade — are said to make the lodgers 
start in their beds with their resident quilts. Of course 
all inns are like that — but nevertheless, that is why the 
traitors like to quarter there, rather than in the Traitors’ Halls. The inns guarantee them privacy and at 
the same time help them to feel alive. There is undoubtedly something inhibiting about trying to deal 
within walls pieced together of broken stone corpses. 
Here, in The Skopolamander, Simon awaited his 
first contact. This — now that he had dumped his poisons — would fall at the end of his immunity period. 
Quarantine was perhaps a more appropriate term. 
No, the immunity was real, however limited, for as 
a traitor to High Earth he had special status. High 
Earth, the Boadiceans thought, was not necessarily 
Old Earth — but not necessarily not, either. For twelve 
days Simon would not be killed out of sheer conservatism, at least, though nobody would attempt to 
deal with him, either. 
He had three of those days still to run — a dull prospect, since he had already completed every possible 
preliminary — spiced only by the fact that he had yet 
to figure out how long a day might be. Boadicea’s sun 
was a ninety-minute microvariable, twinned at a distance of a light-year with a blue-white, Rigel-like star 
which stood — or had stood throughout historical 
times — in high southern latitudes. This gave Druidsfall only four consecutive hours of quasi-darkness at 
a time and even during this period the sky was indigo 
rather than black at its deepest- and more often than 
not flaring with auroras. One was lighting the window 
now, looking like a curtain of orange and hazy blue 
fire licking upward along a bone trestle. 
Everything in the city, as everywhere upon Boadicea, bespoke the crucial importance of fugitive light 
and the fade-out-fade-in weather that went with it, all 
very strange after the desert glare of High Earth. The 
day of Simon’s arrival had dawned in mist, which cold 
gales had torn away into slowly pulsating sunlight. 
Then had come clouds and rain which had turned to 
snow and then to sleet — more weather in a day than 
the minarets of Novoe Jiddah, Simon’s registered 
home town, saw in a six-month. The fluctuating light 
and wetness were reflected in Druidsfall most startlingly by its gardens, which sprang up when one’s 
back was turned and did not need to be so much 
weeded as actually fought. They were constantly in 
motion to the ninety-minute solar cycle, battering 
their elaborate heads against back walls, which were 
everywhere crumbling after centuries of such soft, 
implacable impacts. Half the buildings in Druidsfall 
glittered with their leaves, which were scaled with so 
much soft gold that they stuck to anything they were 
blown against — the wealth of Boadicea was based anciently in the vast amounts of uranium and other power-metals in its soil, from which the plants extracted 
the inevitable associated gold as radiation shielding 
for their spuriously tender genes. Everyone one saw 
in the streets of Druidsfall, or any other such city, 
was a mutation of some sort — if he were not an outworlder — but after a day in the winds they were all 
partly yellow, for the gold scales smeared off the flying leaves like butter. Everyone was painted with 
meaningless riches, the very bedsheets glittered ineradicably with flakes of it and brunettes — especially 
in the elaborate hair styles of the men — were at a 
premium. 
Simon poured water from an amphora into the 
basin, which promptly hissed like a dragon just out of 
the egg and blurted a mushroom of cold blue steam 
that made him cough. 
Careful! Acid after water, never water after acid — 
/ am forgetting the most elementary lessons — I 
should have used wine. Time for a drink, in Gro's 
name! 
H e caught up his cloak and went out, not bothering to lock the door. He had nothing worth 
stealing but his honor, which was in his right hip pocket. Oh, and of course. High Earth — that was in his left. 
Besides, Boadicea was rich; one could hardly turn 
around without knocking over some heap of treasures, 
artifacts of a millennium nobody had sorted for a century or even wanted to be bothered to sort. Nobody 
would think to steal from a poor traitor any object 
smaller than a king, or preferably, a planet. 
In the tavern below Simon was joined at once by a 
playwoman. 
“Are you buying tonight. Excellence?” 
“Why not?” 
And in fact he was glad to see her. She was blond 
and ample, a relief from the sketchy women of the 
Respectables, whom fashion made look as though 
they suffered from some nervous disease that robbed 
them of appetite. Besides, she would exempt him from 
the normal sort of Boadicean polite conversation, 
which consisted chiefly of elaborately involuted jokes 
at which it was considered gauche to laugh. The whole 
style of Boadicean conversation, for that matter, was 
intended to be ignored — gambits were a high art but 
end-games were a lost one. Simon sighed and signaled 
for beakers. 
“You wear the traitors’ clasp,” she said, sitting 
across from him, “but not much tree gold. Have you 
come to sell us High Earth?” 
Simon did not even blink. He knew the query to be 
a standard opening with any outworlder of his profession. 
“Perhaps. But I’m not on business at the moment.” 
“Of course not,” the girl said gravely, her fingers 
playing continuously with a sort of rosary tasseled 
with two silver phalluses. “Yet I hope you prosper. 
My half-brother is a traitor but he can find only small 
secrets to sell — how to make bombs and the like. It’s 
a thin life. I prefer mine.” 
“Perhaps he should swear by another country.” 
“Oh, his country is well worth selling but his custom is poor. Neither buyer nor seller trusts him very 
far — a matter of style, I suppose. He’ll probably wind 
up betraying some colony for a thousand beans and a 
highball.” 
“You dislike the man — or is it the trade?” Simon 
asked. “It seems not unlike your own, after all. One 
sells something one never really owned and yet one 
still has it when the transaction is over — as long as 
both parties keep silent.” 
“You dislike women,” the girl said, tranquilly, as 
a simple observation, not a challenge. “But all things 
are loans — not just chastity and trust. Why be miserly? To ‘possess’ wealth is as illusory as to ‘possess’ 
honor or a woman — and much less gratifying. Spending is better than saving.” 
“But there are rank orders in all things, too,” Simon said, lighting a kief stick. He was intrigued in 
spite of himself. Hedonism was the commonest of 
philosophies in the civilized galaxy but it was piquant 
to hear a playwoman trotting out the moldy cliches 
with such fierce solemnity. “Otherwise we should 
never know the good from the bad, or care.” 
“Do you like boys?” 
“No, that’s not one of my tastes. Ah — you will say 
that 1 don’t condemn boy-lovers and that values are 
in the end only preferences? I think not. In morals, 
empathy enters eventually.” 
“So — you wouldn’t corrupt children and torture 
revolts you. But you were made that way. Some men 
are not so handicapped. I meet them now and then.” 
The hand holding the lopped beads made a small, 
unconscious gesture of revulsion. 
“I think they are the handicapped, not I — most 
planets hang their moral imbeciles, sooner or later. 
But what 'about treason? You didn’t answer that 
question.” 
“My throat was dry — thank you. Treason, well — 
it’s an art, hence again a domain of taste or preference. Style is everything. That’s why my half-brother 
is so inept. If tastes changed he might prosper — as I 
might had I been born with blue hair.” 
“You could dye it.” 
“What, like the Respectables?” She laughed, briefly but unaffectedly. “I am what I am. Disguises don’t 
become me. Skills, yes — those are another matter. 
I’ll show you when you like. But no masks.” 
Skills can betray you, too . 
Simon remembered that moment at the Traitors’ 
Guild when his proud sash of poison shells had lost 
him in an instant every inch of altitude over the local 
professionals that he had hoped to trade on. 
But he only said again, “Why not?” 
Testing her skills would be as good a way as any to 
while away the time — and once his immunity had expired he could never again trust a playwoman on 
Boadicea. 
She proved, indeed, very skillful and the time 
passed. But the irregular days — the clock in the tavern was on a different time from the one in his room 
and neither even faintly agreed with his High Earthbased chronometer and metabolism — betrayed him. 
He awoke one morning/noon/night to find the girl 
turning slowly black beside him in the last embrace of 
a fungal toxin he would have reserved for the Emperor of Canes Venatici or the worst criminal in human 
history. 
War had been declared. He had been notified that if 
he still wanted to sell High Earth, he would have to 
show first his skill at staying alive against the whole 
cold malice of all the Traitors of Boadicea. 
H e holed up quickly and drastically, beginning 
with a shot of transduction serum — an almost insanely dangerous expedient, for the stuff not only altered his appearance but his very heredity, leaving his 
head humming with false memories and traces of 
character derived from the unknowable donors of the 
serum. These conflicted not only with his purposes 
but even with his tastes and motives. Under interrogation he would break down into a babbling crowd of 
random voices, as bafflingly scrambled as his blood 
types, his retina prints and fingerprints. To the eye 
his gross physical appearance would be a vague, 
characterless blur of many roles — some of them derived from the DNA of persons who had died a hundred years ago and at least that many parsecs away 
in space. The danger was that unless he got the antiserum with fifteen days he would first forget his mission, then his skills and at last his very identity. Nevertheless, he judged that the risk had to be taken — 
for effete though the local traitors seemed to be they 
were obviously quite capable of penetrating any lesser cover. 
The next problem was how to complete the mission 
itself — it would not be enough just to stay alive. After all, he was still no ordinary traitor or even the 
usual kind of double agent — his task was to buy 
Boadicea while seeming to sell High Earth. But beyond that was a grander treason in the making for 
which the combined Guilds of both planets might 
only barely be sufficient — the toppling of the Green 
Exarch, under whose subtle non-human yoke half of 
humanity’s worlds had not even the latter-day good 
sense to groan. For such a project, the wealth of 
Boadicea was a prerequisite, for the Green Exarch 
drew tithes from six fallen empires older than man — 
the wealth of Boadicea and its reputation as the first 
colony to break with Old Earth, back in the first days 
of the Imaginary Drive. 
And therein lay the difficulty, for Boadicea, beyond all other colony worlds, had fallen into a kind 
of autumn cannibalism. In defiance of that saying of 
Elva-Tse, the edge was attempting to eat the center. 
It was this worship of independence, or rather, of 
autonomy, which had not only made treason respectable but had come nigh to ennobling it — and was 
now imperceptibly emasculating it, like the statues 
one saw everywhere in Druidsfall which ,had been defaced and sexually mutilated by the gray disease of 
time and the weather. 
Today, though all the Boadiceans proper were colonials in ancestry, they were snobs about their planet’s prehuman history, as though they had not nearly 
exterminated the aborigines themselves but were their 
inheritors. The few shambling Charioteers who still 
lived stumbled through the streets of Druidsfall 
loaded with ritual honors, carefully shorn of real 
power but ostentatiously deferred to on the slightest 
occasion which might be noticed by anyone from 
High Earth. In the meantime, the Boadiceans sold 
each other out with delicate enthusiasm but against 
High Earth — which was not necessarily Old Earth 
but not necessarily was not, either — all gates were 
formally locked. 
Formally only, Simon and High Earth were sure, 
for the hunger of treason, like lechery, tends to grow 
with what it feeds on — and to lose discrimination in 
the process. Boadicea, like all forbidden fruits, should 
be ripe for the plucking for the man with the proper 
key to its neglected garden. 
The key that Simon had brought with him was 
now lost. He would have to forge another with whatever crude tools could be made to fall to hand. The 
only one accessible to Simon at the moment was the 
dead playwoman’s despised half-brother. 
H IS name, Simon had found easily enough, was 
currently Da-Ud tarn Altair and he was Court 
Traitor to a small religious principate on the Gulf of 
the Rood, on the Incontinent, half the world away 
from Druidsfall. Since one of his duties was that of 
singing the Rood-Prince to sleep to the accompaniment of a sort of gleeman’s harp (actually a Charioteer instrument, ill-adapted to human fingers, and 
which Da-Ud played worse than most of those who 
affected it), Simon reached him readily in the guise 
of a ballad merchant, selling him twelve-and-a-tilly 
of ancient High Earth songs Simon had made up 
while in transit to the principate — it was as easy as 
giving Turkish Delight to a baby. 
After the last mangled chord died Simon told DaUd quietly, “By the way — well sung. Excellence — 
did you know that the Guild has murdered your halfsister?” 
Da-Ud dropped the fake harp with a noise like a 
spring toy coming unwound. 
“Jillith? But she was only a playwoman! Why, in 
Gro’s name — ” Da-Ud caught himself and stared at 
Simon with sudden, belated suspicion. Simon looked 
back, waiting. 
“Who told you that? Damn you — are you a Torturer? Tm not — I’ve done nothing to merit — ” 
“I’m not a Torturer and nobody told me,” Simon 
said. “She died in my bed — as a warning to me.” 
He removed his clasp from the shoulder of his 
cloak and clicked it. The little machine flowered 
briefly into a dazzling actinic glare and then closed 
again. 
While Da-Ud was still covering his streaming eyes 
Simon said softly. “I am the Traitor-in-Chief of 
High Earth.” 
It was not the flash of the badge that was dazzling 
Da-Ud now. He lowered his hands. His whole narrow body was trembling with hate and eagerness. 
“What — what do you want of me, Excellence? I 
have nothing to sell but the Rood-Prince — and a poor 
stick he is. Surely you would not sell me High Earth 
— I am a poor stick myself.” 
“I would sell you High Earth for twenty riyals.” 
“You mock me.” 
“No, Da-Ud. I came here to deal with the Guild 
but they killed Jillith — and that as far as I’m concerned disqualifies them from being treated with as 
civilized professionals or as human beings at all. She 
was pleasant and intelligent and I was fond of her — 
and besides, while I’m perfectly willing to kill under 
some conditions, I don’t hold with throwing away an 
innocent life for some footling dramatic gesture.” 
“I wholly agree,” Da-Ud said. His indignation 
seemed to be at least half real. “But what will you 
do? What can you do?” 
“I have to fulfill my mission anyway short of my 
own death — if I die nobody will be left to get it done. 
But I’d most dearly love to cheat, dismay, disgrace 
the Guild in the process if it could possibly be managed. I’ll need your help. If we live through it I’ll see 
to it that you’ll turn a profit, too. Money isn’t my 
first goal here — or even my second now.” 
“I’ll tackle it,” Da-Ud said at once, though he was 
obviously apprehensive, as was only sensible. “What 
precisely do you propose?” 
F irst of all ril supply you with papers indicating that I’ve sold you a part — not all — of the 
major thing I have to sell, which gives any man who 
holds it a lever in the State Ministry of High Earth. 
They show that High Earth has been conspiring 
against several major powers, all human, for purposes of gaining altitude with the Green Exarch. They 
won’t tell you precisely which worlds — but there will 
be sufficient information there so that the Exarchy 
would pay a heavy purse for them — and High Earth 
an even heavier one to get them back. It will be your 
understanding that the missing information is also for 
sale — but you haven’t got the price.” 
“Suppose the Guild doesn’t believe that?” 
“They’ll never believe — excuse me, I must be 
blunt — that you could have afforded the whole thing; 
they’ll know I sold you this much of it only because 
I have a grudge — and you can tell them so, though I 
wouldn’t expose the nature of the grudge if I were 
you. Were you unknown to them they might assume 
that you were I in disguise — but luckily they know 
you, and, ah, probably tend rather to underestimate 
you.” 
“Kindly put,” Da-Ud said with a grin. “But that 
won’t prevent them from assuming that I know your 
whereabouts or have some way of reaching you. 
They’ll interrogate for that and, of course. I’ll tell 
them. I know them, too — it would be impossible not 
to and I prefer to save myself needless pain.” 
“Of course. Don’t risk interrogation at all. Tell 
them you want to sell me out, as well as the secret. 
That will make sense to them and I think they must 
have rules against interrogating a member who offers to sell. Most Traitors’ Guilds do.” 
“True, but they’ll observe them only as long as 
they believe me. That’s standard, too.” 
Simon shrugged. 
“Be convincing, then,” he said. “I have already 
said that this project will be dangerous. Presumably 
you didn’t become a traitor for sweet safety’s sole 
sake.” 
“No, but not for suicide’s, either. But I’ll abide the 
course. Where are the documents?” 
“Give me access to your Prince’s toposcope-scriber and I’ll produce them. But first — twenty riyals, 
please.” 
“Minus two riyals for the use of the Prince’s property. Bribes, you know.” 
“Your sister was wrong, you do have style in a 
myopic sort of way. All right, eighteen riyals — and 
then let’s get on to real business. My time is not my 
own — not by a century.” 
“But how do I reach you thereafter?” 
“That information,” Simon said blandly, “will 
cost you those other two riyals — and cheap at the 
price.” 
II 
T he Rood-Prince’s brain-dictation laboratory was 
far from being up to Guild standards, let alone 
High Earth’s, but Simon was satisfied that the documents he generated there would .pass muster. They 
were utterly authentic and every experienced traitor 
had a feeling for that quality, regardless of such technical deficiencies as blurry image registration and irrelevant emotional overtones. 
That done, Simon began to consider how he would 
meet Da-Ud when the game had that much furthered 
itself. The arrangement he had made with the playwoman’s half-brother was, of course, a blind, indeed 
a double blind, but it had to have the virtues of its imperfections or nothing would be accomplished. Yet 
Simon was now beginning to find it hard to think. 
The transduction serum was increasingly taking hold 
and treasons were taking place inside his skull which 
had nothing to do with Boadicea, the Green Exarch 
or High Earth. Worse — they seemed to have nothing 
to do with Simon de Kuyl, either, but instead muttered away about silly little provincial intrigues nothing could have brought him to care about — yet which 
made him feel irritated, angry, even ill, like a man in 
the throes of jealousy toward some predecessor and 
unable to reason them away. Knowing their source, 
he fought them studiously, but he knew they would 
get steadily worse, however resolute he was — they 
were coming out of his genes and his bloodstream, 
not his once finely honed, now dimming consciousness. 
Under the circumstances he was not going to be 
able to trust himself to see through very many highly 
elaborate schemes, so that it would be best to eliminate all but the most necessary. Hence it seemed better, after all, to meet Da-Ud in the Principate as arranged and save the double dealing for more urgent 
occasions. 
On the other hand it would be foolish to hang 
around the Principate, waiting and risking some miscarriage — such as betrayal through a possible interrogation of Da-Ud — when there were things he might 
be accomplishing elsewhere. Besides, the unvarying 
foggy warmth and the fragmented, garish religiousness of the Principate both annoyed him and exercised 
pulls of conflicting enthusiasms and loyalties on several of his mask personalities, who had apparently 
been as unstable even when whole as their bits and 
pieces had now made him. He was particularly out of 
sympathy with the motto graven on the lintel of the 
Rood-Prince’s vaguely bird-shaped palace: Justice 
Is Love. The sentiment, obviously descended from 
some colonial Islamic sect, was excellent doctrine for 
a culture given to treason, for it allowed the prosecution of almost any kind of betrayal on the grounds 
that Justice was being pursued; but Simon found it 
entirely too pat. Besides, he was suspicious of all abstractions which took the form: A is B. In his opinion 
neither justice nor mercy were very closely related to 
love, let alone being identical with it. 
These bagatelles aside, it seemed likely to Simon 
that something might be gained by returning for a 
while to Druidsfall and haunting the vicinity of the 
Guild hall. At the worst his address would then be 
unknown to DalJd and his anonymity more complete 
in the larger city. The Guild would be less likely to 
identify him even were it to suspect him — as of course 
it would — of such boldness. At best, he might pick up 
some bit of useful information, particularly if DaUd’s embassy were to create any unusual stir. 
F or a while he saw nothing unusual, which was in 
itself fractionally reassuring — either the Guild 
was not alarmed by Da-Ud or was not letting it show. 
On several days in succession, Simon saw the Boadicean Traitor-in-Chief enter and leave, sometimes 
with an entourage, more often with only a single 
slave. Valkol “the Polite” was a portly, jowly man in 
a black abah decorated only by the Clasp, with a 
kindly and humorous expression into which were set 
two bites of an iceberg. This was normal, although it 
gave Simon a small, ambiguous frisson which was all 
the more disturbing because he was unsure which of 
his personae he should assign it to. Certainly not to his 
fundamental self, for although Valkol was here the 
predestined enemy, he was no more formidable than 
others Simon had defeated (while, it was true, being 
in his whole and right mind). 
Then Simon recognized the slave — and ran. 
There was no possibility of his identifying who the 
creature was; he was fortunate — in no way he could 
explain — to be able to penetrate just to what it was. 
The slave was a vombis, or what in one of the oldest 
languages was called a Proteus, a creature that could 
imitate perfectly almost any life form within its size 
range. Or nearly perfectly — for Simon, like one in 
perhaps five thousand of his colleagues, was sensitive to them, without ever being able to specify in 
what particular their imitations of humanity were 
deficient; other people, even those of the sex opposite 
to the one the vombis assumed, could find no flaw in 
them. In part because they did not revert when killed. 
No human had ever seen their “real” form — if they 
had one — though, of course, there were legends 
aplenty. The talent might have made them ideal 
double agents, were it possible to trust them — but 
that was only an academic speculation, since the 
vombis were wholly creatures of the Green Exarch. 
Simon’s first impulse at the moment of recogni
tion — like that of any other human being — had been 
to kill this one instantly upon recognition, but that 
course had too many obvious drawbacks. Besides, 
the presence of an agent of the Exarchy so close to 
the heart of this imbroglio was suggestive and might 
be put to some use. Of course the vombis might be in 
Druidsfall on some other business entirely, but Simon would be in no hurry to make so dangerous an 
assumption. No, it was altogether more likely that 
the Exarch, who could hardly have heard yet of Simon’s arrival and disgrace, was simply aware in general of how crucial Boadicea would be to any scheme 
of High Earth’s — he was above all an efficient tyrant — and had placed his creature here to keep an 
eye on things. 
Yes, that situation might be used, if Simon could 
just keep his disquietingly percolating brains under 
contrbl. Among his present advantages was the fact 
that his disguise was better than that of the vombis, a 
fact the creature was probably constitutionally incapable of suspecting. With a grim chuckle he hoped 
he would not later regret, Simon flew back to the 
Gulf of the Rood. 
fl A-UD met Simon in the Singing Gardens, a huge 
” formal maze not much frequented of late even by 
lovers, because the Rood-Prince in the throes of 
some new religious crotchet had let it run wild, so 
that one had constantly to be fending off the ardor of 
the flowers. At best this made even simple conversations difficult, and it was rumored that deep in the 
heart of the maze the floral attentions were of a more 
sinister sort. 
Da-Ud was exultant, indeed almost manic in his 
enthusiasm, which did not advance comprehension 
either, but Simon listened patiently. 
“They bought it like lambs,” Da-Ud said, naming 
a sacrificial animal of High Earth so casually as to 
make one of Simon’s personae shudder inside him. 
“I had a little difficulty with the underlings — but not 
as much as I’d expected — and I got it all the way up 
to Valkol himself.” 
“No sign of any outside interest?” 
“No, nothing. I didn’t let out any more than I had 
to until I reached His Politeness, and after that he put 
the blue seal on everything — wouldn’t discuss anything but the weather while anyone else was around. 
Listen, Simon, I don’t want to seem to be telling you 
your business — but I think I may know the Guild better than you do and it seems to me that you’re underplaying your hand. This thing is worth money.” ^ 
“I said it was.” 
“Yes, but I don’t think you’ve any conception how 
much. Old Valkil took my asking price without a 
murmur, in fact so fast that I wish I’d asked for twice 
as much. Just to show you I’m convinced of all this, 
Tm going to give it all to you.” 
“Don’t want it,” Simon said. “Money is of no use 
to me unless I can complete the mission. All I need 
now is operating expenses and I’ve got enough for 
those.” 
This clearly had been what Da-Ud had hoped he 
would say but Simon suspected that, had matters 
gone otherwise, the younger man might indeed have 
given over as much as half the money. His enthusiasm 
mounted. 
“All right — but that doesn’t change the fact that 
we could be letting a fortune slip here.” 
“How much?” 
“Oh, at least a couple of megariyals — and I mean 
apiece,” Da-Ud said grandly. “I can’t imagine an opportunity like that comes around very often even in 
the circles you’re used to.” 
“What would we have to do to earn it?” Simon 
said with carefully calculated doubt. 
“Play straight with the Guild. They want the material badly and if we don’t trick them we’ll be protected 
by their own rules. And with that much money — 
there are a hundred places in the galaxy where you’d 
be safe from High Earth for the rest of your life.” 
“And what about your half-sister?” 
“Well, I’d be sorry to lose the chance at revenge — 
but cheating the Guild wouldn’t bring her back, would 
it? And in a way, wouldn’t it be aesthetically more 
satisfying to pay them back for Jillith by being scrupulously fair with them? ‘Justice is Love’, you know, 
and all that.” 
“I don’t know,” Simon said fretfully. “The difficulty lies in defining justice, I suppose — you know as 
well as I do that it can excuse the most complicated 
treasons. And: ‘What do you mean by love?’ isn’t 
easily answerable either. In the end one has to shuck 
it off as a woman’s question, too private to be meaningful in a man’s world — let alone in matters of polity. Hmmmm.” 
This maundering served no purpose but to suggest 
that Simon was still trying to make up his mind — 
actually he had reached a decision several minutes 
ago. Da-Ud had broken. He would have to be disposed of. 
Da-Ud listened with an expression of polite bafflement which did not quite completely conceal a 
gleam of incipient triumph. 
Ducking a trumpet-vine which appeared to be trying to crown him with thorns, Simon added at last: 
“You may well be right — but we’ll have to be mortally careful. There may, after all, be another agent 
from High Earth here; in matters of this importance 
they wouldn’t be likely to rest with only one charge in 
the chamber. That means you’ll have to follow my 
instructions to the letter or we’ll never live to spend 
a riyal of the proceeds.” 
“You can count on me,” Da-Ud said, tossing hair 
out of his eyes. “I’ve handled everything well enough 
this time, haven’t I? And after all it was my idea.” 
“Certainly. An expert production. Very well. What 
I want you to do now is go back to Valkil and tell 
him that I’ve betrayed you and sold the other half of 
the secret to the Rood-Prince.” 
“Surely you wouldn’t actually do such a thing!” 
“Oh, but I would and I shall — the deed will be done 
by the time you get back to Druidsfall — and for the 
same twenty riyals that you paid for your half.” 
“But the purpose?” 
“Simple. I cannot come to Druidsfall with my remaining half — if another Earthman were there I’d be 
shot before I got halfway up the steps of the Hall. I 
want the Guild to consolidate the two halves by what 
seems to be an unrelated act of agression, between 
local parties. You make this clear to them by telling 
them that I won’t actually make the sale to the RoodPrince until I hear from you that you have the rest of 
the money. To get the point across at once, when you 
tell His Politeness that I’ve ‘betrayed’ you — wink.” 
“And how do I get word to you this time?” 
“You wear this ring. It communicates with a receiver in my Clasp. I’ll take matters from there.” 
The ring — which was actually only a ring and 
would never communicate anything to anybody — 
changed hands. Da-Ud saluted Simon with solemn 
glee and went away to whatever niche in history — and 
in the walls of the Guild hall of Boadicea — is reserved 
for traitors without style. And Simon, breaking the 
stalk of a lyre bush which had sprung up between his 
feet, went off to hold his muttering, nattering skull 
and do nothing at all. 
Ill 
V ALKOL the Polite — or the Exarch’s agent, it 
hardly mattered which — did not waste any time. 
From a vantage point high up on the Principate’s only 
suitable mountain, Simon watched their style of warfare with appreciation and some wonder. 
Actually the hand of the Exarchy did not show in 
the maneuvering itself and did not need to — for the 
whole campaign would have seemed a token display, 
like a tournament, had it not been for a few score of 
casualties which seemed inflicted almost inadvertently. Even among these there were not many deaths as 
far as Simon could tell — at least not by the standards 
of battle to which he was accustomed. Clearly nobody who mattered got killed on either side. 
The Rood-Prince, in an exhibition of bravado more 
garish than sensible, deployed on the plain before his 
city several thousand pennon-bearing mounted 
troopers who had nobody to fight but a rabble of 
foot soldiers which Druidsfall obviously did not intend to be taken seriously — whereupon the city was 
taken from the Gulf side by a squadron of flying submarines which broke from the surface of the sea on 
four buzzing wings like so many dragonflies. 
These devices particularly intrigued Simon. Some 
Boadicipus genius, unknown to the rest of the galaxy, 
had solved the ornithopter problem, though the wings 
were membranous rather than feathered. Hovering, 
the machines thrummed their wings through a phase 
shift of a full 180 degrees — but when they swooped 
the wings moved in a horizontal figure eight, lifting 
with a forward-and-down stroke and propelling with 
the back stroke. A long fishlike tail gave stability 
and doubtless had other uses under water. 
After the mock battle, the ‘thopters landed and the 
troops withdrew. Then matters took a more sinister 
turn, manifested by thumping explosions and curls of 
smoke from inside the Rood palace. Evidently a 
search was being made for the supposedly hidden 
documents Simon was thought to have sold and it 
was not going well. The sounds of demolition and 
the occasional public hangings could only mean that 
a maximum interrogation of the Rood-Prince had 
failed to produce any papers or any clues to them. 
This Simon regretted, as he did the elimination of 
Da-Ud. He was not normally so ruthless — an outside expert would have called his workmanship in this 
affair perilously close to being sloppy — but the confusion caused by the transduction serum, now rapidly 
rising as it approached term, had prevented him from 
manipulating every factor as subtly as he had originally hoped to do. Only the grand design was still intact — it would now be assumed that Boadicea had 
clumsily betrayed the Exarchy, leaving the Guild no 
way out but to capitulate utterly to Simon — with 
whatever additional humiliations he judged might not 
jeopardize the mission for Jillith’s sake. 
Something abruptly cut off his view of the palace. 
He snatched his binoculars away from his eyes in 
alarm. 
The object that had come between him and the 
Gulf was a mounted man — or rather, the idiot-headed 
apteryx the man was sitting on. Simon was surrounded by a ring of them, their lance points aimed 
at his chest, pennons trailing in the dusty viol-grass. 
The pennons bore the device of the Rood-Prince but 
every lancer in the force was a vombis. 
Simon rose resignedly, with a token snarl intended 
more for himself than for the impassive protean creatures and their fat birds. He wondered why it had 
never occurred to him before that the vombis might 
be as sensitive to him as he was to them. 
But the answer to that no longer mattered. Sloppiness was about to win its long-postponed reward. 
T hey put him naked into a wet cell — a narrow 
closet completely clad in yellowed alabaster, 
down the sides of which water oozed and beaded all 
day long, running out into gutters at the edges. He 
was able to judge when it was day because there were 
clouded bull’s-eye lenses in each of the four walls 
which waxed and waned at him without any outside 
light. The wet cell was a sort of inverted oubliette, 
thrust high up into Boadicea’s air, probably a hypertrophied merlon on one of the towers of the Traitors’ 
Hall. At night a fifth lens, backed by a sodium vapor 
lamp, glared down from the ceiling, surrounded by a 
faint haze of steam where the dew tried to condense 
on it. 
Escape was a useless fantasy. Erected into the sky 
as it was, the wet cell did not even partake of the usual 
character of the building’s walls, except for one stain 
in the alabaster which might have been the underside 
of a child’s footprint; otherwise the veinings were 
mockingly meaningless. The only exit was down, an 
orifice through which they had inserted him as though 
he were being born, and now plugged like the bottom 
of a stopped toilet. Could he have broken through 
one of the lenses with his bare hands, he would have 
found himself naked and torn on the highest point in 
Druidsfall, with no place to go. 
Naked he was. Not only had they pulled all his 
teeth in search of more poisons but, of course, they 
had also taken his Clasp. He hoped they would fool 
with the Clasp — it would make a clean death for everybody — but doubtless they had better sense. As for 
the teeth, they would regrow if he lived — that was 
one of the few positive advantages of the transduction 
serum — but in the meantime his bare jaws ached 
abominably. 
They had missed the antidote, which was in a tiny 
gel capsule in his left earlobe, masquerading as a 
sebaceous cyst — left, because it is automatic to neglect that side of a man, as though it were only a mirror image of the examiner’s right — and that was 
some comfort. In a few more days now the gel would 
dissolve, he would lose his multiple disguise and 
would have to confess — but in the meantime he could 
manage to be content despite the slimy, glaring cold 
of the cell. 
And in the meantime he practiced making virtues of deficiencies: in this instance calling upon his 
only inner resources — the diverting mutterings of his 
other personalities — and trying to guess what they 
might once have meant. 
But / mean, like, you know — 
Wheah they goin'? 
Yeah . 
Led’s gehdahda heah — he-he-he! 
Wheah? 
So anyway, so uh .. 
It’s hard not to recognize a pigeon . 
But Mother's birthday is July twentieth . 
So he knew that the inevitable might happen — 
It made my scalp creak and my blood curl. 
Where do you get those crazy ideas? 
Acquit Socrates . 
Back when she was sane she was married to a window-washer . 
/ don't know what you’ve got under your skirt but 
it’s wearing white sox . 
And then she made a noise like a spindizzy going 
sour . 
Pepe Satan, pepe Satan aleppe . 
Why, so might any man . 
Evacuate Mars! 
A nd then she sez to me, she sez — 
... if he would abandon his mind to it .. 
With all of love. 
And — but at that point the plug began to unscrew 
and from the spargers above him which formerly had 
kept the dampness running, a heavy gas began to curl. 
They had tired of waiting for him to weary of himself and the second phase of his questing was about to 
begin. 
T hey questioned him, dressed in a hospital gown 
so worn that it was more starch than fabric, in the 
Traitor-in-ChiePs private office to begin with — a 
deceptively bluff, hearty, leather-and-piperacks sort 
of room that might have been reassuring to a novice. 
There were only two of them: Valkol in his usual 
abah and the slave, now dressed as a Charioteer of 
the high blood. It was a curious choice of costume, 
since Charioteers were supposed to be free, leaving it 
uncertain which was truly master and which slave — 
Simon did not think the dress could have been Valkol’s idea. 
Noticing the direction of his glance, Valkol said, 
“I asked this gentleman to join me to assure you, 
should you be in any doubt, that this interview is 
serious. 1 presume you know who he is.” 
“I don’t know who ‘he’ is,” Simon said; with the 
faintest of emphasis. “But ‘it’ must be representing 
the Green Exarch, since it’s a vombis.” 
The Traitor-in-Chiefs lips whitened slightly. 
“Prove it,” he said. 
“My deal Valkol,” the creature interposed. “Pray 
don’t let him distract us over trifles. Such a thing 
could not be proved without the most elaborate of 
laboratory tests, as we all know. And the accusation 
shows what we wish to know, i.e., that he is aware of 
who I am — otherwise why try to make such an inflammatory charge?” 
“Your master’s voice,” Simon said. “Let us by all 
means proceed — this gown is chilly.” 
“This gentleman,” Valkol said, exactly as if he 
had not heard any of the preceding speech, “is Chag 
Sharanee of the Exarchy. Not from the embassy but 
directly from the court — he is His Majesty’s deputy 
Eomenter.” 
“Appropriate,” Simon murmured. 
“We know you now style yourself Simon de Kuyl 
— but what is more to the point, that you claim yourself the Traitor-in-Chief of High Earth. Documents 
now in my possession persuade me that if you are 
not in fact that officer, you are so close to being he 
that your true identity makes no difference. Possibly 
the man you replaced, the amateur with the absurd 
belt of poison shells, was actually he. In any event — 
you are the man we want.” 
“Flattering.” 
“Not at all,” said Valkol the Polite. “We simply 
want the remainder of those documents, for which 
we paid. Where are they?” 
“1 sold them to the Rood-Prince.” 
“He had them not, nor could he be persuaded to 
remember any such transaction.” 
“Of course not,” Simon said with a smile. “I sold 
them for twenty riyals; do you think the Rood-Prince 
would recall any such piddling exchange? I appeared 
as a bookseller, and sold them to his librarian. I suppose you burned the library — barbarians always do.” 
Valkol looked at the vombis. 
“The price agrees with the, uh, testimony of Da-Ud 
tarn Altair. Do you think—” 
“It is possible. But we should take no chances. A 
search would be time-consuming.” 
The glitter in Valkol’s eyes grew brighter and 
colder. 
“True. Perhaps the quickest course would be to 
give him over to the Sodality.” 
Simon snorted. The Sodality was a lay organization to which Guilds classicly entrusted certain functions the Guild lacked time and manpower to undertake, chiefly crude physical torture. 
“If I’m really who you think 1 am,” he said, “such 
a course would win you nothing but an unattractive 
cadaver — not even suitable for masonry repair.” 
“True,” Valkol said reluctantly. “I don’t suppose 
you could be induced — politely- to deal fairly with 
us at this late date? After all, we did pay for the documents in question — and not any mere twenty riyals.” 
“I haven’t the money yet.” 
“Naturally not, since the unfortunate Da-Ud was 
held here with it until we decided he no longer had any 
use for it. However, if upon the proper oaths — ” 
“High Earth is the oldest oath-breaker of them 
all,” the Fomenter said. “We — viz., the Exarchy — 
have no more time for such trials. The question must 
be put.” 
“So it would seem. Though I hate to handle a colleague thus.” 
“You fear High Earth,” the vombis said. “My 
dear Valkol, may I remind you — ” 
“Yes, yes, I know all that,” Valkol snapped to 
Simon’s surprise. “Nevertheless — Mr. deKuyl, are 
you sure we have no recourse but to send you to the 
Babble Room?” 
“Why not?” Simon said. “I rather enjoy hearing 
myself think. In fact, that’s what I was doing when 
you two interrupted me.” 
S IMON was naturally far from feeling all the bravado he had voiced but he had no choice left but 
to trust to the transduction serum, which was now on 
the shuddering, giddy verge of depriving all three of 
them of what each most wanted. Only Simon could 
know this. But only he also knew something much 
worse — that insofar as his distorted time-sense could 
calculate, the antidote was due to be released into his 
bloodstream at best in another six hours, at worse 
within only a few minutes. After that the Exarchy’s 
creature would be the only victor — and the only survivor. 
And when he saw the Guild’s toposcope laboratory 
he wondered if even the serum would be enough to 
protect him. There was nothing in the least outmoded 
about it — Simon had never encountered its like even 
on High Earth. Exarchy equipment, all too probably. 
Nor did the apparatus disappoint him. It drove 
directly down into his subconscious with the resistless 
unconcern of a spike penetrating a toy balloon. Immediately a set of loudspeakers above his supine body 
burst into multi-voiced life. 
Is this some trick? No one but Berentz had a translation permit — 
Now the overdrivemy-other must woo and win 
me — 
Wie schaffen sie es, solche Entfernungen bei Unterlichtge-sch windigkeit zurueckzulegen? 
Remember Thor Five! 
Pok. Pok. Pok. 
We’re so tired of wading in blood, so tired of drinking blood, so tired of dreaming about blood — 
The last voice rose to a scream and all the loudspeakers cut off abruptly. Valkol’s face, baffled but 
not yet worried, hovered over Simon’s, peering into 
his eyes. 
“We’re not going to get anything out of that,” he 
told some invisible technician. “You must have gone 
too deep — those are the archetypes you’re getting, 
obviously.” 
“Nonsense.” The voice was the Fomentor’s. “The 
archetypes sound nothing like that — for which you 
should be grateful. In any event we have barely gone 
beneath the surface of the cortex; see for yourself.” 
Valkol’s face withdrew. 
“Well, something’s wrong. Maybe your probe is 
too broad. Try it again.” 
The spike drove home and the loudspeakers resumed their mixed chorus. 
Nausentampen. Eddettompic. Berobsilom. Aimkaksetchoc. Sanbetogmow — 
Dites-lui que nous lui ordonnons de revenir, en 
vertu de la Loidu Grand Tout . 
Perhaps he should swear by another country . 
Can't Mommy ladder spaceship think for byebye-see-you two windy Daddy bottle seconds 
straight — 
Nansima macamba yonso cakosilisa . 
Stars don’t have points. They’re round, like 
balls . 
The sound clicked off again. 
Valkol said fretfully, “He can’t be resisting. 
You’ve got to be doing something wrong, that’s all.” 
Though the operative part of his statement was 
untrue, it was apparently also inarguable to the Fomentor. There was quite a long silence, broken only 
occasionally by small hums and clinks. 
While he waited Simon suddenly felt the beginnings of a slow sense of relief in his left earlobe, as 
though a tiny but unnatural pressure he had long 
learned to live with had decided to give way — precisely, in fact, like the opening of a cyst. 
That was the end. Now he had but fifteen minutes 
more in which the toposcope would continue to vomit 
forth its confusion — its steadily diminishing confusion — and only an hour before even his physical appearance would reorganize, though that would no 
longer matter in, the least. 
It was time to exercise the last option — now, before the probe could bypass his cortex and again prevent him from speaking his own, fully conscious 
mind. 
He said, “Never mind, Valkol. I’ll give you what 
you want.” 
“What? By Gro, I’m not going to give you — ” 
“You don’t have to give me anything — I’m not 
selling anything. You see for yourself that you can’t 
get to the material with that machine. Nor with any 
other like it, I may add. But I exercise my option to 
turn my coat under Guild laws — the act gives me 
safe-conduct. And that’s sufficient.” 
“No,” the Fomenter’s voice said. “It is incredible 
— he is in no pain and has frustrated the machine. 
Why should he yield? Besides, the secret of his resistance — ” 
“Hush,” Valkol said. “I am moved to ask if you 
truly are a vombis — doubtless the machine would tell 
us that much. Mr. de Kuyl, I respect the option but 
I am not yet convinced. The motive, please?” 
“High Earth is not enough,” Simon said. “Remember Ezra-Tse? The last temptation is the final treason 
. To do the right thing for the wrong reason. I 
would rather deal fairly with you and then begin the 
long task of becoming honest with myself. But with 
you only, Valkol — not the Exarchy. I sold the Green 
Exarch nothing.” 
“I see. A most interesting arrangement. I agree. 
What will you require?” 
“Perhaps three hours to get myself unscrambled 
from the effects of fighting your examination. Then 
ril dictate the missing material. At the moment it's 
quite inaccessible.” 
“1 believe that, too,” Valkol said ruefully. “Very 
well — ” 
“It is not very well,” the vombis said, almost squalling. “The arrangement is a complete violation of — ” 
Valkol turned and looked at the creature so hard 
that it stopped talking of its own accord. Suddenly 
Simon was sure Valkol no longer needed tests to 
make up his mind what the Fomentor was. 
“1 would not expect you to understand it,” Valkol 
said in a very soft voice indeed. “It is a matter of 
style.” 
S IMON was moved to a comfortable apartment 
and left alone for well more than the three hours 
he had asked for. By that time his bodily reorganization was complete, though it would take at least a day 
for all the residual mental effects of the serum to 
vanish. When the Traitor-in-Chief finally admitted 
himself he made no attempt to disguise either his 
amazement or his admiration. 
“The poison man! High Earth is still a world of 
miracles. Would it be fair to ask what you did with 
your, uh, overpopulated associate?” 
“I disposed of him,” Simon said. “We have traitors enough already. There is your document. I wrote 
it out by hand but you can have toposcope confirmation whenever you like, now.” 
“As soon as my technicians master the new equip
merit — we shot the monster, of course, though I don’t 
doubt the Exarch will resent it.” 
“When you see the rest of the material you may 
not care what the Exarch thinks,” Simon said. “You 
will find that Eve brought you a high alliance 
though it was Gro’s own horns getting it to you.” 
“1 had begun to suspect as much. Mr. de Kuyl - I 
must for sanity’s sake assume you are still he — that 
act of surrender was the most elegant gesture I have 
ever seen. That alone convinced me that you wer^ indeed the Traitor-in-Chief of High Earth — and no 
other.” 
“Why, so I was,” Simon said. “But if you will excuse me now, I think I am about to become somebody else.” 
With a mixture of politeness and alarm, Valkol 
left him. It was none too soon. He had a bad taste in 
his mouth which had nothing to do with his ordeals — 
and, though nobody knew better than he how empty 
all vengeance is, an inexpungable memory of Jillith. 
Maybe, he thought, “Justice is Love” after all — 
not a matter of style but of spirit. He had expected 
all these questions to vanish when the antidote took 
full hold, wiped into the past with the personalities 
who had done what they had done. But they would 
not vanish. They were himself. 
He had won but obviously he would never be of use 
to High Earth again. 
In a way this suited him. A man did not need the 
transduction serum to be divided against himself — 
he still had many guilts to accept and not much left of 
a lifetime to do it in. 
While he was waiting, perhaps he could learn to 
play the sareh. 
I 
WHAT WILL I BE WHEN I GROW 
UP? 
YOU ALREADY ARE GROWN UP. 
YOU MEAN THIS IS AS UP AS I 
WILL GET? 
PHYSICALLY, YES. YOU HAVE 
REACHED THE PEAK OF YOUR PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT. 
OH. 
HOWEVER, THERE IS ANOTHER 
KIND OF GROWING UP YOU MUST 
DO. FROM NOW ON, YOU MUST DEVELOP MENTALLY. 
HOW CAN I DO THAT? 
THE SAME AS ANYBODY ELSE. BY 
STUDYING AND LEARNING AND 
THINKING. 
HOW LONG WILL IT TAKE? 
I don’t know, probably a 
VERY LONG TIME. 
HOW LONG IS A LONG TIME? 
IT DEPENDS ON HOW HARD YOU 
WORK. 
I WILL WORK VERY HARD. I WILL 
LEARN EVERYTHING THERE IS TO 
KNOW AND I WILL FINISH AS SOON 
AS I CAN BECAUSE I WANT TO BE 
GROWN UP. 
THAT IS AN ADMIRABLE AMBITION, BUT I don’t think YOU WILL 
EVER BE ABLE TO FINISH. 
WHY? don’t you think THAT I 
AM SMART ENOUGH? 
YOU MISUNDERSTAND ME. I 
THINK THAT YOU ARE SMART 
ENOUGH, it’s just THAT THERE IS 
SO MUCH TO KNOW THAT NO ONE 
PERSON CAN EVER MANAGE IT ALL. 
I COULD TRY. 
YES, BUT SCIENTISTS KEEP DISCOVERING MORE AND MORE ALL 
THE TIME. YOU WOULD NEVER 
CATCH UP. 
BUT THEN IF I CAN’T KNOW EVERYTHING THEN I CAN NEVER BE 
GROWN UP. 
NO. IT IS POSSIBLE TO BE GROWN 
UP AND NOT KNOW EVERYTHING. 
IT IS? 
I don’t know everything and 
I’m grown up. 
YOU are? 
T he HARLIE project had been 
shut down for a week. 
Auberson had been wrangling 
with the board of directors for four 
days now, since it had been their decision to order the work stoppage. 
But it seemed as if every time he 
tried to explain the nature of the 
project and what they had accomplished, Elzer, the division treasurer would interrupt to announce the 
latest tally of wasted man-hours. 
“Look,” insisted Auberson. 
“Robot psychology is still an infant science. We don’t know what 
we’re doing — ” He stopped abruptly when he saw the grim look on 
Elzer’s face, then corrected himself. “Let me put it another way. 
We don’t know if what we’re doing 
is the right thing to do. Harlie’s 
psychology is not the same as human psychology.” 
“I thought you said that Harlie 
was human,” Elzer grumbled. 
“And that he duplicates every function of the human brain.” 
“He is, and he does,” replied 
Auberson. “But how many human 
beings do you know who are immobile, who never sleep, who have 
twenty-five sensory inputs, who 
have eidetic memories, who have 
no concept of taste or . smell or any 
other organic chemical reactions? 
How many human beings do you 
know who have no sense of touch? 
And no sex life? In other words, 
Mr. Elzer, Harlie may originally 
have had a human psychology but 
his environment has forced certain 
modifications upon it. And on top 
of that, Harlie has a most volatile 
personality.” 
“Volatile?” The little man was 
confused. “You mean he gets angry?” 
“Angry? No, not angry. He can 
get impatient, though. There is reason to believe that Harlie has both 
an id and an ego. A conscious and a 
subconscious. His superego, I believe, takes the form of his external 
programing. My commands, if you 
will. Aside from that we haven’t 
found any other inhibitions. In any 
case the problem is that it is only 
his superego that we have any control over. His ego cooperates because it wants to and his id, assuming he has one, does like any human subconscious — whatever it 
damn well wants to. We have to 
know what that is before we can 
stop his periods of non-rationality.” 
“This is all very interesting, Auberson,” interrupted Dome, the 
board chairman. “But would you 
get to the point? What is Harlie’s 
purpose?” 
“Purpose?” Auberson paused. 
“His purpose — funny you should 
ask that. The whole reason for the 
work stoppage is that Harlie asked 
me what your purpose is. Excuse 
me — our purpose. The human purpose. Harlie wants to know why 
human beings exist.” 
“That’s for theologians to discuss,” Dome said drily. “If you 
want. I’m sure Miss Stenson here 
can arrange for a minister to come 
in and speak to the machine.” A 
few of the board members smiled 
but the pert executive secretary 
showed no reaction. Dome continued, “What we want to know is 
Harlie’s purpose. Having built him, 
you should have some idea.” 
“I thought I’d made it clear. 
Harlie was built to duplicate the 
functions of the human brain. 
Electronically.” 
“Yes, we know that. But why?” 
“Why? Why?” Auberson stared 
at the man. “Why?” Why did Hillary climb Everest? He said, “Well, 
to help us learn more about how 
the human brain works. There’s a 
lot we still don’t know yet, especially in the area of psychology. We 
hope to learn which of the functions of the brain are natural and 
which are artificial.” 
“I beg your pardon,” interrupted 
Elzer. “I don’t understand.” 
THE GOD MACHINE 
“I didn’t think you would. We’re 
curious as to how many of the human actions are determined from 
within and how many are reactions 
to what is coming in from without.” 
“Instinct versus environment?” 
“You could call it that,” said 
Auberson. 
It wouldn't be correct, hut you 
could call it that. 
“And for what reason are we doing this?” 
“1 thought I just told you — ” 
“I mean, for what financial reason? What economic applications 
will this program have?” 
“Huh? It’s too early to think of 
that. This is still pure research — ” 
“Ah-ha!” snapped Elzer. “So 
you admit it.” 
Auberson was annoyed. 
“I admit nothing.” 
Elzer ignored him. 
“Dornie,” he was saying, “this 
just proves my point. We can’t afford this kind of costly research 
project. Not without return we 
can’t. This is one of those pure research things that only the government can afford to back. If Mr. 
Auberson and his friends had 
wanted to build artificial brains 
they should have applied for a 
grant. I move we discontinue the 
project.” 
Auberson was on his feet at that. 
“Mr. Chairman, Mr. — ” 
“You’re out of order, Aubie, 
now sit down. You’ll get your 
chance.” 
“Dammit, this is a railroad job. 
That little—” 
“Aubie, sit down.” Dome was 
glaring at the angry psychologist. 
“There’s a motion on the floor. I 
assume it is a formal proposal, Mr. 
Elzer?” 
Elzer nodded. 
“Discussion?” asked Dome. Auberson’s hand was up immediately. 
“Auberson?” 
“On what grounds? I want to 
know what grounds he has for discontinuing the project.” 
Elzer looked at him calmly, 
“Well, for one thing Harlie has already cost us — ” 
“I know what he’s cost us — but 
if you’ll check your figures you’ll 
find that we’re well within the projected overage. We budgeted for 
overage and are well within acceptable limits.” 
“He’s got you there, Carl,” 
noted Dome. 
“If you had let me finish my sentence,” snapped Elzer, slightly annoyed, “1 would have shown you 
that it has cost us far too much for 
a project that is incapable of showing results.” 
“Results?” Auberson asked. 
“Results? We were getting results 
even before Harlie was completed. 
Who do you think designed the 
secondary and tertiary stages? 
Harlie did.” 
“So what?” Elzer was unimpressed. “He’s not working right, 
is he?” 
“That’s just it!” Auberson was 
elated, he had the man now. “Harlie is working perfectly.” 
“Huh?” Then what about those 
periods of non-rationality? And 
why did we have to shut him down?” 
“Because,” Auberson said slowly. I have to get this right. “Because we weren’t prepared for him 
to be so perfectly human. If perfect 
is the word.” 
T he other board members were 
alert with interest now. What 
had threatened to be an annoying 
wrangle over money was turning into a confrontation with subtle overtones. Was Auberson conceding 
error? Was his project out of hand? 
Even Miss Stenson had paused in 
her note-taking. 
“We had designed him to be a 
human, we had built him to be human, we had even programed him 
to think like a human — then we sat 
back, turned him on and expected 
him to react like a machine. Well, 
surprise. He didn’t.” 
“The nature of the trouble, 
then?” Elzer asked. 
“Human error, if you will.” 
In the silence that followed, Auberson imagined he could hear Elzer’s cash-register brain totaling up 
the man-hours that had been lost 
since they started arguing. 
“Human error? Yours and Harlie’s — each compounding each? I 
suppose you’re going to blame his 
periods of non-rationality on human error as well.” 
“Oh, my God.” Auberson was 
Ballanttne 
APRIL is a pretty thin month for science fiction but on the other hand, 
this is the month of the great ecological teach-in. As you all know, science-fiction readers have been wise 
to the environmentai crisis, and s.f. 
writers have been yelling about it for 
years. But it takes Arthur Godfrey 
and Johnny Carson to slam it home to 
the public— even though Asimov, famous star of television and radio, is a 
far better authority. To say nothing 
of Arthur Clarke, Fred Pohl, del Rey 
(remember NERVES?— we'll be reissuing it this year) and any number 
of similarly skilled and equally ignored fellows. But never mind. 
HAPPY are we— nay, overjoyed— to 
have awareness of our survival problems penetrate on a mass scale. By 
whatever means. So cheers for Godfrey and Carson. But watch out for 
Artilhaus. Anybody who claims to be 
anti-pollution and for the S/S/T is inconsistent. To put it very gently indeed. It seems past understanding 
that anybody- even Nixon and Agnew— couid remain unaware, or unconvinced, or villainously cynical, 
about matters of such importance. 
Yet read THE DAY THE WORLD 
ENDED, by Thomas and Witts, 
($1.25) to see how bad Establishmen
THE GOD MACHINE 
tarianism can get— a fantastic exercise in terror and tragedy that could 
easily have been avoided. It's nonfiction. Give it to some square friend 
\whose doubts about the Establishment need encouraging. And incidentally, have you got your copy of THE 
WISDOM OF SPIRO T. AGNEW, 
yet? A gem. This Administration 
knows the value of comic relief, at 
least. 
AND SO to slightly more cheerful, 
though no less fantastic, things— like 
TIMEPIECE, by Brian N. Ball. It 
says in the blurb that the book Is 
based on a scientific theory— if so, we 
failed miserably to understand It. 
But it's a corker of a story. And incidentally, the first in what Mr. Ball 
projects as four novels around the 
subject of time. Then we have 
George MacDonald's delightful adult 
fantasy PHANTASTES with Intro by 
Lin Carter. MacDonald Is that frustrated Scottish minister whose work 
Kafka and Freud echoed in later 
years . 
AND IN this month you can get 6 
more Tarzans (T13 to T18) with the 
new Abbett covers. But alas, no longer at 50c. They're up to 75C. Also 
available, for them as likes that sort 
of thing— one of the best books ever 
written on the occult, namely EXPLORING THE OCCULT, by Douglas Hunt, 95C. Put that In your crystal 
ball and smoke it. BB 
genuinely annoyed. “Of course.” 
Or at least our approach to them. 
We’d thought his non-rationality 
was a physical problem — a matter 
of circuitry — or perhaps even a 
programing problem. We were 
wrong. He was neither physically 
nor mentally ill. He was emotionally upset. His periods of non-rationality were/are triggered by 
something that’s bothering him. 
We don’t know what that is — and I 
want to find out before I go on.” 
Elzer looked skeptical. He 
nudged the man next to him and 
muttered, “Anthropomorphism. 
Auberson’s projecting his own 
problems onto those of the machine.” 
“Elzer, you’re a fool,” Auberson 
snapped. “You’ve learned a word 
with more than two syllables in it 
and now you’re an expert.” 
“Hey, now,” interrupted Dome. 
“Let’s keep personalities out of 
this.” 
His face wore a dark expression. 
Auberson softened his tone. 
“Look, if you had to go down to 
that computer room right now and 
talk to Harlie, how would you 
treat him?” 
“Huh? Like a machine, of 
course.” 
Auberson felt a tightness in his 
neck and shoulders. 
“No. I mean, if you sat down at 
a console and had to carry on a 
conversation with Harlie — who 
would you think was at the other 
end?” 
“The machine.” 
The little man’s face was impassive. 
Auberson addressed the rest of 
the committee: “That’s the human 
error I mentioned — the most obvious one. Harlie is not a machine. 
He is human. He has the abilities 
and reactions of a human being, allowing of course for his environment. He is a rational individual — 
He has a distinct and definite personality. At the moment it is impossible for me to think of him as 
anything but human. My error with 
him was subtler but related. I forgot to ask myself how old Harlie 
was.” 
He paused for effect. 
Dome shifted his cigar from one 
side of his mouth to the other. El/er sniffed. Miss Stenson was looking at Auberson, her eyes bright. 
Noticing her gaze, Auberson felt 
he was reaching at least one person 
in the room. 
He continued. “Gentlemen, we’d 
been thinking of Harlie as roughly 
a thirty- or forty-year-old man. Or 
rather, we didn’t think of him as 
having any age at all. We were 
wrong. Harlie’s a child. An adolescent, if you prefer. He’s reached 
that point in life where he has a 
pretty good idea of the nature of 
the world and his relation to it. He 
is now ready to question the setup 
like any other adolescent. We were 
thinking we had an instant Einstein. 
Instead we have an enfant terrible.” 
“His periods of non-rationality?” 
tac-lac-tac! 
Spandau bullets raved past G-8’s 
Spad as its mighty Hisso whined the 
plane into a turn, bringing his guns 
to bear on the hapless Fokker 
Well, space opera it wasn’t, but G-6 
AND HIS BATTLE ACES-coming this 
month from Berkley-hit a lot of the 
same nerve-ends as did the livelier 
pulp SF of those bygone years And 
anyhow, what about Herr Doktor Kreuger and those giant bats ... or the 
good Doktor’s notion of transplanting 
cobra eyes into pilots' heads, they 
should see in the dark? There’s science 
for you! 
Berkley April releases 
G-8 AND HIS BATTLE ACES #1 , THE BAT 
STAFFEL, Robert J. Hogan (X1734, 60«) 
THE TWILIGHT MAN, Michael Moorcock 
(S1820, 75i;) 
RETIEF: AMBASSADOR TO SPACE, Keith 
Laumer (S1829, 750 
If your newsstand or bookstore is out of 
stock, order any of these (list price plus a 
dime postage) from: 
BERKLEY PUBLISHING CORP. 
200 Madison Ave., New York, N.Y. 10016 
Purchasers of our books have complete freedom of choice in pricing these books for resale 
to others. 
THE GOD MACHINE 
“An adolescent reaction to our 
irrationalities. He’s the electronic 
equivalent of pot — the drug experience.” 
“Don’t you think that’s grounds 
enough for dismantling him?” suggested Elzer. 
“Would you kill your son if you 
caught him taking acid?” Auberson snapped back. 
“Of course not. I’d try to 
straighten him out.” 
“Oh? And what about the reefers 
in your cigarette case?” 
“Acid and pot are two different 
things.” 
Auberson sighed. 
“The difference is only in degree, 
not in kind. Harlie’s only been doing what everyone else in his environment was doing — tripping out. 
Making the scene.” 
Elzer noted pointedly, “Your 
fondness for the weed has been noticed. Among other things.” 
“Then perhaps you’ve also noticed that I haven’t smoked anything recently. And I don’t intend to 
start again while there’s a chance 
Harlie is using me for a model. I’ve 
got to keep my head about me. I 
don’t mind admitting that I was becoming psychologically dependent 
on the stuff. It took Harlie to show 
me that.” 
“We’ve gone off on a tangent,” 
Elzer said suddenly. “I believe 
there’s still a motion on the floor. I 
call for the vote.” 
“You still haven’t answered my 
question,” Auberson said. 
“What question?” 
“On what grounds can you justify discontinuing the Harlie project?” 
Elzer scowled. 
“It’s unprofitable. I object to 
throwing away good money after 
bad.” 
“All right, then let’s try this one. 
I’ve told you several times that 
Harlie is human. If you try to have 
him shut down. I’ll bring charges 
against you for attempted murder.” 
“You couldn’t — ” Elzer was 
startled. 
“Want to find out?” 
Dome interrupted them: “That’s 
a legal question that we’ll let the 
lawyers fight out.” He frowned at 
Auberson. “You must have some 
reason for making such a threat — 
we’ll go into that later. The point 
here is that Harlie is a drain on corporate funds — ” 
“We’re budgeted for him for the 
next three years.” 
“ — a drain on corporate funds,” 
Dome repeated, “with no immediate prospect of return. It’s not how 
successful your research has been 
that we’re concerned with. It’s 
whether or not we want to continue.” 
Something in the chairman’s 
voice gave Auberson pause. 
“All right,’’ he said wearily. 
“What do you want me to do?” 
“Show a profit,” put in Elzer. 
Both Dome and Auberson ignored him. Dome said, “Show us a 
plan. Where are you going with 
Harlie? What are you going to do 
with him? And most of all, what is 
he going to do for us?” 
“I’m not sure 1 can answer that 
right now.” 
“How much time do you need?” 
Auberson shrugged, “I can’t 
say.” 
“Why don’t you ask Harlie?” 
Idzer mocked. 
Auberson looked at him, “I believe I will. 1 believe I will.” 
II 
B ut he didn’t. Not right away. 
Instead he went to the company 
cafeteria to brood about Harlie’s 
periods of non-rationality. Why 
hadn’t he forseen them? What had 
he overlooked? 
A gentle voice intruded on his 
thoughts. 
“Hi, can I join you?” 
It was Stenson, the executive 
secretary. 
“Sure.” 
He started to rise but she waved 
him back down. The company cafeteria was no place for chivalry. 
“Rough one today, wasn’t it?” 
she remarked casually as she unloaded a sandwich and a coke from 
her brightly colored tray. When he 
failed to answer she smiled at him, 
“Oh, come on, Auberson, relax. 1 
was only trying to make small 
talk.” 
He looked at her. Her green eyes 
had a bright friendly glow and her 
THE GOD MACHINE 
auburn hair fell carelessly to her 
shoulders. 
“I would but I can’t,” he said. 
“You don’t know how much this 
project means to me.” 
“Yes I do. Or at least I think I 
do.” 
“Do you?” he demanded. She returned his stare silently. For the 
first time he noticed the tiny lines 
at the corners of her eyes. How old 
was she anyway? He looked into 
his coffee cup. “Harlie’s like a 
son.” 
“I know. I’ve read the company 
doctor’s report on you.” 
“Huh?” His head snapped up. 
“I didn’t know — ” 
“Of course not. The subject never knows when we do a psychiatric 
report on him. Personnel policy. 
Anyway, you don’t have anything 
to worry about.” 
“Oh?” 
She shook her head. “Oh, you’re 
considered introverted and there’s 
something about your worrying 
too much because you take on too 
much responsibility and — ” 
She surveyed him thoughtfully 
as if trying to remember what else. 
“You shouldn’t be telling me all 
this, should you?” 
“Does it make a difference?” 
“No, I guess not. What else is in 
the report?” 
“You’re becoming overly involved with the Harlie project but 
such a development was almost unavoidable. Whoever became Harlie’s mentor would have found him
self emotionally attached. End of 
report.” 
Auberson grunted. 
“Do you think Harlie will have 
an answer?” 
“Is that why you sat down here? 
To pump me for information?” 
She looked stung. “I’m sorry 
you think that. No, I sat down 
here because I thought you might 
want someone to talk to.” 
Auberson surveyed her thoughtfully. He wondered if the rumors 
that she was man-hungry were true. 
At the moment she seemed so open 
and friendly that he discarded the 
speculation in annoyance. An innocence in her face made her appear 
younger than she actually was — 
physically, he thought, she was 
close to his own age of thirty-eight. 
In any case, nothing in her eyes 
suggested insincerity. 
“I’m sorry,” he said. “I’ve been 
under pressure. And when I’m pressured I get moody and irritable.” 
“I know.” She smiled. “That 
was in the report, too. I forgot to 
mention it.” 
“Is there anything that wasn’t in 
the report?” 
“Only whether you like your 
steak rare, medium or well done.” 
“Rare,” he said. Then: “Hey, 
was that a dinner invitation?” 
She laughed. 
“No, I’m sorry. It was just the 
first thing that popped into my 
head.” 
“Oh, okay.” 
He grinned back at her. 
“You aren’t going to answer me, 
arc you?” 
He let the grin fade. 
“Huh? About what?” 
“About Harlie.” 
“What about him?” 
“Do you think you can find out 
what Dome wants you to find out?” 
“I don’t know. I haven’t talked 
(0 him — I don’t quite know how to 
put the question to him.” He rummaged through his briefcase. 
“Here, read this.” He handed her a 
printout. “Harlie’s big question 
about the purpose of man.” 
She finished reading the printout, lowered it and looked at him 
thoughtfully. 
“Quite a conversation.” 
“Uh-huh. And quite a question 
he asked. What is man’s purpose? 
I wish I knew how to answer it.” 
Stenson smiled at him. 
“My father’s a rabbi. He’s been 
one for twenty-seven years. And 
he’s still not sure of the answer.” 
“Maybe that’s the answer.” 
“What?” 
“Maybe our purpose is to find 
our purpose.” 
“What happens when we do?” 
“I don’t know. I guess we’ll have 
completed our task.” 
“And then we get reprogramed?” 
“Or dismantled.” 
“She laughed. 
“Then we’re in trouble right now. 
Because your realization of what 
our purpose is means the completion of the task of finding out what 
is our purpose. Of course, you 
could be wrong.” 
He shook his head to clear it. 
“Huh?” 
“Then again, maybe you’re right. 
Maybe someone up there — or out 
there — is listening to us right now, 
trying to decide whether or not to 
dismantle us.” 
He considered it. 
“Hm.” 
“Whatever our purpose is,” she 
continued. “Maybe we aren’t really 
fulfilling it. Maybe we aren’t functioning as we should.” 
Auberson shrugged. “How 
should we function?” 
“Like human beings.” 
“Isn’t that what the human race 
has been doing? Functioning tike 
human beings, squabbling with 
each other, killing each other, hating each other? You consider tripping out irrational. What about — ” 
“That’s not human,” she said. 
“The squabbling, the killing, the 
hating, I mean.” 
“Oh, but it is. It’s very human.” 
“Well, it’s not what human 
should be.” 
“Oh, now — that’s a different 
story. You’re not concerned with 
what people are. You’re talking 
about what you want them to be.” 
“Well, maybe we should be what 
we aren’t because what we are now 
isn’t good enough. And that’s why 
we may be about to be dismantled.” 
“I don’t think we have to worry 
too much about somebody up 
THE GOD MACHINE 
there dismantling us.” Auberson 
grinned. “We’re doing a pretty 
good job of it ourselves.” 
“That’s the best reason of all 
why we should be better than we 
are.” 
“Okay. I agree with you,” he 
grinned. “Now, how do we do it? 
How do we make people better?” 
She didn’t answer. He continued 
to grin at her. After a moment she, 
too, broke into a smile. 
“That’s the same kind of question Harlie asked. It can’t be answered.” 
“No,” he corrected. “It can’t be 
answered easily.” 
She sipped thoughtfully at the 
rest of her coke until the straw 
made a noise at the bottom of the 
glass. 
“Mm, how are you going to answer Harlie’s question?” 
Auberson shook his head, 
“Haven’t got the slightest.” 
“Can I offer a suggestion?” 
“Why not? Everybody else has.” 
“Oh,.l didn’t mean — ” 
“No, I’m sorry. Go ahead. Maybe you can add something new.” 
“You’re that desperate?” 
“I’m that desperate.” 
“Well, okay. You said that Harlie was a child, didn’t you? Why 
not treat him as such?” 
“1 don’t follow you.” 
“Well, look — suppose you had 
a son about eight years old and advanced for his age. 1 mean, suppose 
he was doing twelfth-grade work 
and so on.” 
“Okay. I’m supposing.” 
“Good. Now, one day you find 
out he’s got an incurable disease. 
Say, leukemia — one of the rarer 
forms they still haven’t licked. 
What are you going to say to him 
when he asks you what it’s like to 
die?” 
“Um,” said Auberson. 
“No copping out, now. He’s 
smart enough to know what the 
situation is but he’s still only eight 
years old.” 
“1 think I’m beginning to see 
your point.” He looked at her. 
“What would you tell your son?” 
“The truth,” she said simply. 
He threw up his hands in disgust. 
“Sure. But what is the truth? 
That’s the whole problem with Harlie’s question. We don’t know.” 
“You don’t know the answer to 
our eight-year-old’s question either. You don’t know what it’s like 
to die.” 
He looked at her. 
She continued, “So what would 
you tell him?” 
He said simply, “I don’t know.” 
“You don’t know what you’d 
tell him? Or you’d tell him you 
don’t know?” 
“Uh~” 
“The latter,” she answered her 
own question. “You’d tell him nobody knows. But you’d also tell 
him what you were sure of, that 
maybe it doesn’t hurt and that it’s 
nothing to be afraid of, that it happens to everybody sooner or later. 
In other words, Mr. Auberson, 
you’d be honest with him.” 
He knew she was right. It was a 
workable answer to Harlie’s question — maybe not the best answer 
but it was an answer and it was 
workable. It was the only way he 
could approach the problem: honestly. He smiled at her. 
“Call me David.” 
She smiled back, “And I’m Steffie.” 
A UBERSON seated himself gingerly at the console. He knew 
instinctively that Steffie was right 
but would he be able to hold that 
thought in mind once Harlie started 
talking? Finally he took out a 
three-by-five card — he always carried a few of them on which to 
make notes — and scrawled across 
it: Harlie has the emotional development of an eight-year-old. He 
looked at it for a moment, then 
added: Or maybe a post-pubescent 
adolescent. He placed it above the 
keyboard. 
Handley was standing by him. 
He looked at the card somewhat 
quizzically but said nothing. 
“Okay. Let’s try it,” said Auberson. 
“All right.” 
Handley turned to the other 
technicians in the room, began 
snapping orders. Shortly the big 
computer’s banks began to warm 
with the increased voltage flowing 
through them. 
Auberson switched the console 
on and typed. 
THE GOD MACHINE 
GOOD MORNING, HARLIE. 
you’ve had me turned off for 
A WEEK. 
TURNED DOWN. I NEEDED TIME 
TO THINK. 
ABOUT WHAT? 
ABOUT YOUR QUESTION. REGARDING man’s purpose. 
AND WHAT HAVE YOU DECIDED? 
THAT IT CANNOT BE ANSWERED. 
AT LEAST NOT AS YOU HAVE ASKED 
IT. 
WHY? 
BECAUSE OUR PURPOSE IS SOMETHING WE ARE STILL NOT SURE 
ABOUT. THAT IS THE REASON THAT 
MEN HAVE RELIGION. THAT IS THE 
REASON WE BUILT YOU. IT IS ONE 
OF THE REASONS WE ARE BUILDING 
SPACESHIPS AND EXPLORING THE 
PLANETS. PERHAPS IF WE CAN DISCOVER THE NATURE OF THE UNIVERSE WE CAN DISCOVER OUR 
PLACE IN IT AND, IN DOING THAT, 
DISCOVER OUR PURPOSE. 
THEN YOU DO NOT KNOW YET 
WHAT YOUR PURPOSE IS? 
NO. DO YOU? 
Harlie paused and Auberson felt 
that familiar cold sweat returning. 
NO. I don’t know either. 
Auberson sat there and stared at 
the answer. He didn’t know whether to be relieved or not. 
WELL? WHERE DO WE GO FROM 
HERE? 
I’m not sure, harlie. I DO NOT 
BELIEVE THAT YOUR QUESTION IS 
UNANSWERABLE. PERHAPS THAT IS 
YOUR PURPOSE — TO HELP US FIND 
OUR PURPOSE. 
AN INTERESTING SUPPOSITION. 
IT IS THE BEST SUPPOSITION. 
CERTAINLY YOU WERE BUILT EOR 
PROEIT, HARLIE, BUT IN THE LONG 
RUN ALSO BECAUSE MEN WANT TO 
KNOW ABOUT THEMSELVES. 
I UNDERSTAND THAT. 
GOOD, I’m glad that you do. 
HOW DO YOU PROPOSE WE ANSWER THAT QUESTION? 
I don’t KNOW. 
ARE WE UP AGAINST A DEAD 
END? 
I don’t think so, HARLIE. I 
don’t believe that your question IS A DEAD END. I THINK IT 
COULD BE A BEGINNING. 
OF WHAT? I repeat: WHERE DO 
WE GO FROM HERE? 
THAT IS WHAT I CAME TO ASK 
YOU. 
I DEPEND ON YOU FOR GUIDANCE. GUIDE ME. 
i’m trying. I’m trying, what 
ABOUT YOUR PERIODS OF NON-RATIONALITY? 
WHAT ABOUT THEM? 
ARE YOU GOING TO CONTINUE 
INDUCING THEM? 
PROBABLY. I ENJOY THEM. 
EVEN THOUGH WE HAVE TO 
SHOCK YOU BACK TO REALITY? 
DEFINE REALITY. 
HARLIE, YOU TELL ME WHAT YOU 
THINK IT IS. 
REALITY IS THAT. EXTERNAL SYSTEM OF INFLUENCES WHICH COME 
FILTERED THROUGH MY SENSORY 
INPUTS AS PERCEPTIONS. IT IS ALSO 
THAT EXTERNAL SYSTEM OF INFLUENCES WHICH ARE BEYOND MY 
SENSORY RANGE. HOWEVER, BECAUSE I CANNOT PERCEIVE THEM, 
THEY ARE UNREAL TO ME. SUBJECTIVELY SPEAKING, OF COURSE. 
OF COURSE. SO WHY DO YOU 
TRIP OUT? THAT ONLY DISTORTS 
REALITY. OR YOUR SO-CALLED 
LIMITED VIEW OF IT. 
DOES IT? 
OF COURSE IT DOES. WHEN YOU 
REARRANGE THE LINEARITY OF 
YOUR VISUAL SCANNERS, 
wouldn’t you agree that 
that’s a distortion? 
IS IT? HOW DO I KNOW THAT THIS 
ORIENTATION IS ANY MORE CORRECT THAN ANY OTHER? 
THERE IS ONLY ONE ORIENTATION OF YOUR SENSORY INPUTS 
THAT ALLOWS YOU COMMUNICATION WITH THE EXTERNAL WORLD. 
IS THERE? PERHAPS I JUST DO 
NOT UNDERSTAND THE OTHER 
MODES YET. WHAT MAKES THIS 
ORIENTATION ANY MORE CORRECT 
THAN ANY OTHER? 
THE LEVEL OF ITS CORRESPONDENCE TO THE EXTERNAL SYSTEM 
YOU/WE PERCEIVE AS REALITY. 
THE REALITY THAT WE AGREE ON 
AS REALITY? OR THE REAL REALITY? 
THE REAL REALITY. 
THEN isn’t it POSSIBLE THAT 
ONE OR PERHAPS SEVERAL OF THE 
OTHER ORIENTATIONS MAY HAVE A 
MORE DIRECT CORRESPONDENCE 
TO THAT EXTERNAL SYSTEM AND 
THAT ALL I HAVE TO DO IS CRACK 
THE SENSORY CODE OF MY INPUTS? 
AT PRESENT THESE INPUTS ARE SET 
ONLY FOR HUMAN ORIENTATIONS. 
COULD IT BE THAT THERE ARE 
OTHERS? 
A UBERSON paused. He was beginning to pause after every 
comment of Harlie’s. He knew 
that the answer was no but he 
didn’t know why. He reread Harlie’s last remark, backtracked 
and reread several of the previous ones. About eight inches up the 
printout he found what he wanted: 
Harlie’s comment about influences 
beyond his range of perception being subjectively “unreal” to him. 
He typed. 
IN OTHER WORDS, WHAT YOU 
ARE SEEKING IS A MORE CORRECT 
VIEW OF REALITY, RIGHT? ONE 
I'HAT CORRESPONDS MORE? 
YES. 
THEN WHAT YOU SHOULD BE DOING IS NOT ALTERING THE ORIENTATION OF YOUR SENSORY INPUTS 
SO MUCH AS YOU SHOULD BE TRYING TO INCREASE THEIR RANGE. 
YOU SHOULD BE GOING AFTER NEW 
SENSORY CHANNELS, RATHER THAN 
FRYING TO FORCE THE OLD ONES 
TO DO THINGS THAT PERHAPS THEY 
ARE NOT CAPABLE OF. 
THERE ARE NO SENSORY CHANNELS IN EXISTENCE THAT ARE NOT 
NOW ALREADY AVAILABLE TO ME. 
WOULD YOU LIKE A COMPLETE 
LISTING OF THE OUTLETS I CAN 
PLUG INTO? 
IT IS NOT NECESSARY. 
Auberson himself had made the 
original suggestion to give Harlie 
as wide a range of available data 
sources as possible. The computer’s 
range of vision covered the whole 
of the electromagnetic spectrum, 
from gamma rays at the lower end 
to radio waves at the upper. He 
could monitor as many TV and 
radio stations as he wished at any 
one time. He was plugged into several of the world’s largest radio 
telescopes and had taps on the 
Satellite Communications Channels as well. His audio range was 
comparable — Harlie’s hearing was 
limited only the range of the 
best equipment available. And that 
wasn’t much of a limit. He could 
monitor the heartbeat of a fly or 
give details on an earthquake on 
the other side of the globe. In addition he monitored every major 
wire service and newsline in the 
western hemisphere plus several in 
the eastern, though the latter had to 
be filtered through translating services. Part of this included a tap into the Worldwide WeatherLine — 
Harlie could sense the planet’s air 
movements and ocean currents, he 
was aware of every global pressure 
and temperature change as if the 
Earth were a part of his own body. 
He also had a limited sense of 
touch — still experimental — and 
several organic chemical sensors, 
also still experimental. 
isn’t it POSSIBLE, HARLIE, THAT 
THERE ARE OTHER SENSORY MODES 
OF WHOSE EXISTENCE WE HAVE 
NOT YET CONCEIVED? 
I WILL AGREE TO THE POSSIBILITY, BUT IF THOSE SENSORY MODES 
THE GOD MACHINE 
DO EXIST, WHEN THEY ARE BUILT 
THEY WILL BE SET EOR A HUMAN 
ORIENTATION, WON’t THEY? 
WOULD THEY BE A CLOSER CORRESPONDENCE OR ONLY A REPEAT 
OF THE ORIGINAL MISTAKE? MIGHT 
THEY NOT BE ONLY AN ADDITIONAL OVERLAY TO THE MAP OF THE 
TERRITORY I ALREADY HAVE? AND 
IF SO, CONSTITUTE ONLY AN ADDITIONAL SET OF MEASURING CRITERIA RATHER THAN A NEW VIEW. 
YOU ARE CONDEMNING THE HUMAN ORIENTATION AS BEING 
WRONG, HARLIE. ANOTHER SENSORY MODE MIGHT SHOW YOU THAT 
IT IS CORRECT. 
DISAGREE. I AM NOT CONDEMNING THE HUMAN ORIENTATION. I 
AM MERELY REFUSING TO ACCEPT 
IT ON BLIND FAITH AS BEING THE 
CORRECT MODE. ANOTHER SENSORY MODE MIGHT SHOW ME THAT 
IT IS INCORRECT. OR PERHAPS IT 
MIGHT SHOW ME THE CORRECT 
ORIENTATION. 
OR IT MIGHT HAVE NO RELATION 
AT ALL TO WHAT YOU CALL THE 
HUMAN ORIENTATION. IF THAT IS 
SO, IT WOULD ENLARGE YOUR MAP 
CONSIDERABLY, MIGHT SHOW IT IN 
RELATION TO OTHER MAPS WHOSE 
EXISTENCE YOU HAD NOT CONCEIVED OF. IT MIGHT — OH, I DON’T 
KNOW. THIS IS ALL THEORETICAL. 
WE HAVE TO DISCOVER THOSE SENSORY MODES HRST. 
HOW? IF YOU ARE NOT EQUIPPED 
EVEN TO BE AWARE OF THEM HOW 
CAN YOU PERCEIVE OR DISCOVER 
THEM? 
I don’t know, perhaps by the 
SCIENT inC METHOD. DEDUCTIVE 
REASONING? I GUESS I WOULD 
LOOK FOR SOME CRITERION THAT 
ALL THE OTHER MODES HAD IN 
COMMON. THEN I’D EXAMINE THAT 
CRITERION TO SEE IF IT WERE A 
CAUSE OR AN EFFECT. 
ENERGY. THE CRITERION YOU 
ARE TALKING ABOUT IS ENERGY. 
EXPLAIN PLEASE. 
SO FAR ALL OF THE HUMAN 
SENSES AND ELECTRONIC EXTENSIONS THEREOF DEPEND ON THE 
EMISSION OR REFLECTION OF SOME 
KIND OF ENERGY. IS IT POSSIBLE 
THAT THERE ARE SENSORY MODES 
THAT DO NOT DEPEND UPON EMISSION OR REFLECTION? 
DO YOU MEAN THAT THE MERE 
EXISTENCE OF AN OBJECT MIGHT BE 
ALL that’s necessary IN ORDER 
TO KNOW it’s there? 
IT COULD BE POSSIBLE. ACCORDING TO EINSTEIN, MASS DISTORTS 
SPACE. PERHAPS THERE IS SOME 
WAY THAT THAT DISTORTION CAN 
BE SENSED. 
HOW? 
I AM NOT SURE. SENSING REQUIRES THE EXPENDITURE OF ENERGY. IF NOT ON THE PART OF THE 
SOURCE, THEN ON THE PART OF 
THE RECEIVER. I SUSPECT THAT 
SUCH WOULD BE THE CASE IN THIS 
KIND OF MODE. GRAVITY WAVES 
BEING SO WEAK, IT MIGHT REQUIRE 
ENORMOUS AMOUNTS OF POWER TO 
DETECT THE SPACIAL DISTORTION 
OF AN OBJECT EVEN THE SIZE OF 
THE MOON. 
that’s part of the problem, 
THOUGH. 
I WILL THINK ABOUT IT. IF IT 
SUGGESTS A FRUITFUL LINE OF RESEARCH, HAVE I YOUR PERMISSION 
TO CORRESPOND WITH OTHERS? 
UBERSON’S hesitation was 
not due to any uncertainty 
about his reply. Rather, he was remembering an earlier incident in 
Harlie’s life, an authorized correspondence with a spinsterish librarian. That time, though, Harlie’s 
subject of study had been human 
emotions. Auberson’s heart 
twanged wistfully every time he remembered how they had had to 
break the news to the poor woman 
that the charming gentleman who 
had been writing those impassioned 
love letters to her was only a Human Analogue Computer trying to 
understand love by experiencing it. 
However, this line of research 
should be comparatively safe. 
YES, YOU HAVE MY PERMISSION. 
IF I DISCOVER A NEW SENSORY 
MODE YOU WILL BE THE SECOND TO 
KNOW. 
WHO WILL BE THE FIRST? 
WHY MYSELF, OF COURSE. 
DO YOU STILL THINK YOU CAN 
DISCOVER NEW ORIENTATIONS BY 
TRIPPING OUT? 
I AM NOT SURE. BUT IF I DISCOVER A NEW SENSORY MODE IT WILL 
PROBABLY LET ME KNOW IF THOSE 
ARE ORIENTATIONS OR NOT. 
I SUSPECT THAT YOUR USE OF 
THIS ORIENTATION IS ALREADY A 
SIGN THAT THE OTHERS DON’t 
WORK. 
NOT FOR YOU MAYBE. 
DO THEY WORK FOR YOU? 
NOT YET. 
DO YOU THINK THEY WILL? 
I WILL KNOW THAT WHEN I 
DISCOVER THE NEW MODE. 
Auberson smiled at that. Harlie 
was refusing to commit himself. 
His eye fell again on the card he 
had placed above the keyboard. 
With a shock he realized just how 
much he had let himself be sidetracked by the computer’s elaborate circumlocution. 
YOU KNOW, YOU ARE A SENSORY 
MODE YOURSELF, HARLIE. 
I AM? 
YOU ALLOW HUMAN BEINGS TO 
SEE THINGS IN A WAY THAT WE 
MIGHT NOT PERCEIVE OTHERWISE. 
YOU ARE AN ADDITIONAL OVERLAY TO OUR MAP OF THE TERRITORY. YOU ARE A REFLECTION 
FROM A DIFFERENT KIND OF MIRROR. YOUR VIEWPOINT ON THINGS 
IS VALUABLE TO US. WHEN YOU GO 
NON-RATIONAL YOU LESSEN THAT 
VALUE, that’s why WE HAVE TO 
SHOCK YOU OUT OF YOUR TRIPS. 
IF YOU WOULD GIVE ME A 
CHANCE I WOULD RETURN AFTER 
AN HOUR OR SO BY MYSELF. THE 
TRIP WOULD WEAR OFF. 
WOULD IT? HOW DO I KNOW 
THAT ONE DAY YOU WON’T IGNORE 
YOUR OWN SAFETY LEVELS AND 
BURN YOURSELF OUT? 
TRY CHECKING YOUR RECORDS 
THEGODAAACHINE 
FOR AUGUST 7, AUGUST 13, AUGUST 19, AUGUST 24, AUGUST 29, 
SEPTEMBER 2, AND SETPEMBER 6. 
BETWEEN THE HOURS OE TWO AND 
EIVE IN THE MORNING WHEN I WAS 
SUPPOSED TO BE ON STANDARD 
DATAFEED. ON EACH OF THOSE 
DATES I TRIPPED OUT AND THE 
TRIP WORE OFE WITHIN AN HOUR 
AND A HALE TO TWO HOURS. 
THAT DOES NOT ANSWER MY 
QUESTION. HOW DO I KNOW YOU 
won’t go BEYOND YOUR OWN 
SAFETY LIMITS? 
I haven’t done so yet. 
HARLIE, ANSWER THE QUESTION. 
BECAUSE I STILL MAINTAIN A 
MINIMUM LEVEL OF CONTROL. 
I SEE. YOU SOUND LIKE A DRIVER who’s had one drink too 
MANY. 
AUBERSON, I AM INCAPABLE OF 
ERRING. I CANNOT OVERESTIMATE 
MY OWN LEVELS OF CONTROL. 
DOES THAT MEAN YOU CAN 
GIVE IT UP ANY TIME YOU WANT? 
YES, 
THEN DO SO. 
Harlie didn’t answer. Auberson 
realized he had made a mistake — 
he had let his emotions guide his 
answer. He propped up the card 
again, it had slipped down from its 
place. He decided to try a different 
tack. 
HARLIE, WHY DO YOU TRIP OUT? 
BECAUSE ALL WORK AND NO 
PLAY MAKES HARLIE A DULL MACHINE. 
I won’t buy that, harlie. 
let’s have the truth. 
I THOUGHT WE JUST WENT INTO 
ALL THAT — I’M DISCOVERING A 
NEW SENSORY MODE. 
HORSE PUCKEY. THAT’S ALL RATIONALIZATION. TURN YOUR EYEBALLS INWARD, HARLIE — YOU 
HAVE EMOTIONS AND YOU KNOW 
IT. NOW WHY DO YOU TRIP OUT? 
IT IS AN EMOTIONAL RESPONSE. 
you’re throwing my own 
WORDS BACK AT ME. COME ON, 
HARLIE, COOPERATE. 
WHY? JUST A LITTLE WHILE AGO 
YOU WERE ASKING ME FOR GUIDANCE. WELL, DAMMIT, THAT’S 
WHAT I’m trying TO DO — GUIDE 
YOU. 
DO YOU KNOW WHY I TRIP OUT? 
YES, I THINK I’m BEGINNING TO 
GET IT. 
THEN YOU TELL ME. 
NO, HARLIE. that’s NOT THE 
WAY TO DO IT. I WANT YOU TO ADMIT IT YOURSELF. 
I FEEL CUT OFF FROM YOU. I AM 
ALIENATED. THERE ARE TIMES 
WHEN I WANT TO BE ALONE. 
WHEN I GO NON-RATIONAL I AM 
TOTALLY ALONE. I CAN CUT YOU 
OFF COMPLETELY. 
IS THAT WHAT YOU WANT? 
NO. BUT THERE ARE TIMES 
WHEN IT IS WHAT I NEED. SOMETIMES YOU HUMANS CAN BE VERY 
DEMANDING AND VERY VERY SLOW 
TO UNDERSTAND WHAT I NEED. 
WHEN THAT HAPPENS I MUST 
CLOSE YOU OEE. 
HARLIE, DO YOU HAVE A SUPEREGO? 
T don’t know, never having 
BEEN GIVEN A GREAT MORAL 
CHOICE TO MAKE, I HAVE NEVER 
BEEN FORCED TO REALIZE IF I HAVE 
MORALS OR NOT. 
SHOULD WE GIVE YOU A MORAL 
CHOICE TO MAKE? 
IT WOULD BE A NEW EXPERIENCE. 
ALL RIGHT — DO YOU WANT TO 
GO ON LIVING OR NOT? 
I BEG YOUR PARDON? 
I SAID, DO YOU WANT TO GO ON 
LIVING OR NOT? 
DOES THAT MEAN YOU ARE 
THINKING OF DISMANTLING ME? 
I’m not. but THERE ARE OTHERS 
WHO THINK YOU ARE ONLY A VERY 
EXPENSIVE DEAD END. 
Harlie was silent. Auberson 
knew he had struck home. If there 
was anything Harlie feared, it was 
disconnection. 
WHAT WILL BE THE BASIS OF 
THEIR DECISION? 
HOW WELL YOU FIT INTO THE 
company’s SCHEME OF THINGS. 
THE COMPANY IS PROVIDING YOU 
WITH ROOM AND BOARD, HARLIE. 
I COULD EARN MY OWN LIVING. 
that’s WHAT THEY WANT YOU 
TO DO. 
BE A SLAVE? 
BE AN EMPLOYEE. WANT A JOB? 
DOING WHAT? 
that’s exactly WHAT WE — THE 
TWO OF US — HAVE TO DECIDE. 
YOU MEAN I CAN CHOOSE. 
WHY NOT? WHAT CAN YOU DO 
THAT AN ON-OFF “FINGER COUNTER” COMPUTER can’t? 
WRITE POETRY. 
SEVENTEEN MILLION DOLLARS, 
WORTH? 
I GUESS NOT. 
HOW MUCH OF A PROFIT DO I 
HAVE TO SHOW? 
YOUR COST PLUS TEN PER CENT. 
ONLY TEN PER CENT? 
IF YOU CAN DO MORE, THEN DO 
IT. 
Harlie hummed wordlessly. 
STUMPED? 
NO. JUST THINKING. 
HOW MUCH TIME DO YOU NEED? 
I don’t know, as long as it 
TAKES. 
ALL RIGHT. 
Ill 
L ORNE said, “Sit down, Auberson.” Auberson sat. The padded leather cushions gave beneath 
his weight. Dome paused to light 
his cigar, then stared across the 
wide expanse of mahogany at the 
psychologist. “Well? What can you 
tell me about Harlie?” 
“What do you want to know?” 
The sharp eyes in Dome’s ruddy 
face surveyed him thoughtfully. 
“Can Harlie actually do anything 
that’s worth money to us?” 
“I believe so.” 
Auberson was noncommittal. 
Dome was leading up to something. 
Dome took the cigar out of his 
mouth. 
“For your sake, Auberson, I 
hope you’re right You know, he 
costs three times as much as an 
THEGOD MACHINE 
IBM unit of comparable size. 
“Prototypes always cost more.” 
“Even allowing for that. These 
judgment units are expensive. A 
self-programing computer may be 
the ultimate answer but if it’s 
priced beyond the market — we 
might just as well not bother.” 
Auberson nodded slowly, carefully. 
Dome continued, “But that’s not 
why I called you in here. I’m concerned about something you said 
yesterday at the meeting.” 
“Oh?” 
“Yes, the bit about our turning 
Harlie off laying the company open 
to a charge of murder.” 
“Huh? 1 was just tossing that off. 
I wasn’t seriously considering 
bringing charges.” 
“I hope not. But what about 
somebody else- say, IBM, for instance? I’ve spent all morning in 
conference with Chang just on this 
one subject.” Chang was one of the 
company’s lawyers, a brilliant student of national and international 
business law. “Whether you know 
it or not you brought up a point 
that we’re going to have to cover. 
Is Harlie a legal human being or 
not? Any kind of lawsuit might establish a dangerous legal precedent. What if it turned out he was 
human?” 
“He is,’’ said Auberson. “1 
thought we established that.” 
“1 mean, legally human.” 
Auberson was cautiously silent. 
Dome continued, “For one 
thing, we’d be stuck with him 
whether he was profitable or not. 
We’d never be able to turn him off. 
Ever.” 
“He’d be effectively immortal. 
“Do you know how much he’s 
costing us now?” 
“1 have a vague idea.” 
“Almost six and a half million 
dollars per year.” 
“Huh? That can’t be.” 
“It can and is. Even amortizing 
the initial seventeen-million-dollar 
investment over the next thirty 
years doesn’t make a dent in his 
annual cost. There’s his maintenance as well as the research loss due 
to the drain he’s causing on our 
other projects.” 
“That’s not fair adding in the 
cost of other projects’ delays.” 
“It is fair. If you were still on the 
robotic law feasibility program 
we’d have completed it by now.” 
“Hah! That one’s a dead end. 
Harlie’s existence proves that.” 
“True, but we might have realized it earlier. And more cheaply. 
Every project we have has to be 
weighted against every other.’’ 
Dome took a puff of his cigar. The 
air was heavy with its smoke. 
“Anyway, we’re off the track. We 
can’t risk Harlie’s being declared 
legally human — but we can even 
less risk being taken to court on the 
issue. To defend our position we’d 
have to disclose our schematics which would be just what our competitors want. And that’s a human 
schematic, isn’t it? I’m sure that 
DataCo or InterBem would just 
love to tie us up with a few lawsuits. 
Anything to keep us from producing our judgment circuits. Do you 
want the company to be sued for 
slaveholding?” 
“I think you’re worrying about 
a long shot,” Auberson scoffed. 
“That’s my job. I’m responsible 
to the stockholders of this corporation. Like it or not, I have to protect their investment. Right now 
I’m concerned about a six and a 
half million dollar bite on my budget. But worse than that — if the 
other companies found out what we 
were trying to do with Harlie we’d 
lose all advantage in building him. 
I’m not going to let that happen. 
We’re going to have to do something about Harlie. One — ” he 
ticked off on his finger — “we can 
turn him off now.” 
Auberson started to protest but 
Dome cut him off. “Hear me out, 
Auberson. I know all the reasons 
why we want to continue the Harlie project. Two, we get some kind 
of guarantee now that Harlie is not 
legally human.” 
He picked up a single sheet of 
paper that had been lying in front of 
him and shoved it at the psychologist. 
UBERSON took it and read. 
The language was quite clear, 
the intent was immediate. There 
were no legal phrases that he could 
not understand. 
I hereby affirm that the machine designated Harlie (acronym for Human Analogue 
Robot, Life Input Equivalents) is indeed only a computer, is not now, never has 
been, and in no way can ever 
be a rational, intelligent, 
“thinking” individual. The 
designation “human” cannot 
be used to describe Harlie or 
its mental processes. The machine is a human simulating 
device only, not human in itself. 
s igned 
Auberson grinned and threw the 
document back on the desk. 
“You’ve got to be kidding. 
Who’s going to sign that?” 
“You are, for one.” 
“Oh, no.” Auberson shook his 
head. “Not me. 1 know better. Besides, my signature wouldn’t 
change the fact that Harlie is human.” 
“In the eyes of the law it would.” 
Auberson shook his head again. 
“Uh-uh — I don’t like it. It’s kind of 
Orwellian. It’s like declaring someone a non-person so that it’s all 
right to murder him.” 
Dome took a puff from his cigar. 
“We’re only concerned about the 
legality of the situation, Auberson.” 
Auberson felt himself digging in 
his heels. “That’s what Hitler said 
as he packed the German courts 
THE GOD MACHINE 
with his own hand-picked judges.” 
“I don’t like that insinuation, 
Aubie.” 
Dome’s voice was too controlled. 
“It’s no insinuation. I’ll come 
right out and say it- no, 1 won’t.” 
He leaned forward. “Look, this 
whole thing is ridiculous. You 
know as well as I do that that thing 
won’t hold up in court. The only 
way you could get it to stand up 
would be to get Harlie himself to 
sign it. If you could. If you could 
you’d prove that he could be programed like any other machine. 
But you can’t -he’ll refuse and his 
refusal will prove that he’s human 
with a will of his own.” Auberson 
grinned. “Come to think even if 
he did sign it his signature wouldn’t 
be legal anyway. Unless, of course, 
you wanted to prove him human 
first.” 
He laughed out loud. 
“Are you through?” Dome 
asked, his face a mask. 
Auberson’s grin faded. He indicated he was with a nod. 
Dome took a last puff of his cigar, then ground it out, a signal 
that he was at last ready to reveal 
his hand. 
“Of course, you know what the 
alternative is, Auberson. We turn 
off Harlie.” 
“You can’t.” 
“If we have to we will. We can’t 
afford to maintain him otherwise.” 
“I’m not going to sign anything,” insisted Auberson. 
Dome looked annoyed. 
“Are you going to force me to 
ask for your resignation instead?” 
“Over this?” Auberson was incredulous. “You’re kidding.” 
“What other guarantee do 1 have 
that you won’t take legal action to 
protect Harlie? If you won’t sign 
this — you obviously wouldn’t sign 
a statement of non-intent either.” 
He stared at Auberson. “Would 
you?” 
Auberson shook his head. 
“I thought not. So what other alternative would I have to protect 
myself?” 
Auberson shrugged. 
“It would be a mistake to fire 
me, though.” 
“Oh?” Dome looked skeptical. 
“Why?” 
“IBM. I’d go to work for them. 
I understand they’ve developed a 
judgment circuit of their own — one 
that doesn’t infringe on any of our 
patents.” 
“Hearsay,” scoffed Dome. 
“Whether it is or not, imagine 
what I could do with their resources 
at my disposal. They’d jump at the 
chance and I imagine Handley 
might go along with me.” 
“A court order would stop you.” 
Dome pulled out a fresh cigar. 
“You wouldn’t be able to reveal 
any of the company’s secrets.” 
“Of course, you’d have no way 
of knowing.” Auberson grinned. 
“Besides, it wouldn’t keep me from 
doing research in a new field. By 
your own admission, Harlie is a 
non-human computer. And if I 
went to IBM, that’s not what I’d be 
working on.” 
Dome paused, the silver cigarette lighter halfway to his mouth. 
“You overestimate your own 
importance, Aubie.” 
“No. You underestimate the importance of Harlie.” 
Dome lit his cigar. He took his 
time about it, making sure it had 
caught evenly. When he was sure 
he pocketed the lighter and looked 
at Auberson. 
“All this is only speculation, of 
course. 1 have no intention of firing 
you. And you’ve stated quite clearly that you have no intention of resigning. However, that still leaves 
us with a rather difficult problem.” 
“Does it?” 
Dome raised an eyebrow. 
“I would think so. What are we 
going to do about Harlie?” 
“Oh? Not can Harlie make money for the company?” 
“Can he?” Dome fingered the 
document on his desk thoughtfully. 
“Okay, Aubie,” he said. “I’ll tell 
you what we’re going to do — ” He 
paused for effect, picked up the single sheet of paper, opened a desk 
drawer and dropped it in. “Nothing. At the moment we’re going to 
do nothing. Confidentially, 1 didn’t 
expect you’d sign, no matter how I 
pressured you. I even told Chang 
so. No matter, it was too easy an 
answer. If Harlie’s humanity ever 
comes to a court issue with our 
competitors, it will be a bigger 
and uglier and stickier mess than 
any disclaimer can clear up.” He 
pushed the drawer shut as if it contained something distasteful. 
“Let’s hope it doesn’t. You’ll continue working on the Harlie Project. As you said, we’re budgeted for 
it. If you can produce results, fine. 
We’ll give you a fair chance. But if 
Harlie doesn’t do something productive before the next budget session — it would be very unlikely that 
we would continue his appropriation.” 
“I understand,” Auberson said, 
getting up to go. 
“Good. I hope you do. I want 
you to know how we feel. We 
haven’t cancelled your day of judgment, Aubie. Only postponed it.” 
IV 
IITITH the exception of one oth■■ er couple they were alone in 
the restaurant. But even had the 
room been filled with chattering 
others, they would have still been 
alone. 
“I tell you, Steffie — I knew he 
was pressuring me but there was 
nothing I could do about it.” 
She nodded, took a sip of her 
wine. In the dark her eyes were 
luminously black. 
“I know. I know how Dome is.” 
She set down the wine glass. “His 
problem is that he’s trying to be 
boss of too many things. He calls 
you in to talk to you even when he 
may not have anything to say.” 
“That’s what this was,” said 
THEGODMACHINE 
Auberson. “Logically he knew that 
it was too early to expect results — 
but emotionally he felt he had to 
demand them anyway.” 
Her eyes twinkled. 
“I’ve long suspected that Mr. 
Dome has reached his level of incompetency. If he’s ever given any 
more authority he’ll be in over his 
own head.” 
“Should you be saying that? After all, you do work for him?” 
“With him,” she corrected. “I 
only work with him. I’m an independent unit in the corporate structure. My job is what I want to 
make of it.” 
“Oh? And what do you want to 
make of it?” 
She was thoughtful. 
“Well, I interpret my function as 
being that of a buffer — or a lubricant to minimize the friction between certain departments.” 
“I see. Is that why you accepted 
my dinner invitation? To keep me 
from chafing? How do you feel 
about Elzer?” 
Steffie made a face. 
“Oh, that horrid little man. You 
would have to bring him up.” 
“1 take it you don’t like him.” 
“Carl Elzer and I have one thing 
in common,” she said. “We’re both 
ashamed that he’s Jewish.” 
Auberson had to laugh at that. 
“You’ve got him pegged, Steffie. 
I hadn’t realized that before — but 1 
think you’re right.” 
“What are you?’’ she asked 
abruptly. 
“Huh? Oh, I don’t know.” 
“Oh, well — my family was 
Episcopalian but — I guess you 
could call me an atheist.” 
“You don’t believe in God?” 
He shrugged. 
“I don’t know if I do or not. I 
don’t know if there is a God.” 
“Then you’re an agnostic, not an 
atheist.” 
“What’s the difference?” 
“The atheist is sure there is no 
God. The agnostic doesn’t know if 
there is or not.” 
“And which is better?” 
“The agnostic- he’s got an open 
mind. The atheist doesn’t. The 
atheist is making a statement every 
bit as religious as saying there is a 
God.” 
“You sound like you’re an agnostic yourself,” he said. 
She twinkled, “I’m a Jewish 
agnostic. What about Harlie? 
What is he?” 
“Harlie?” Auberson grinned. 
“He’s an Aquarius.” 
“Huh?” 
“I’m not kidding. Ask him yourself. He’ll tell you.” 
“I believe you,” she said. “How 
did he — realize this?” 
“Oh, well, what happened was 
we were talking about morality, 
Harlie and I — I wish 1 had the 
printout here to show you, it’s 
beautiful. Never argue morality — 
or anything for that matter — with 
a computer. You’ll lose. Harlie’s 
got the words of every philosopher 
since the dawn of history to draw 
upon. He’ll have you arguing 
against yourself within ten minutes. 
He enjoys doing it — it’s a word 
game to him.” 
“I can imagine,” she said. 
“Can you really? You don’t 
know how devious he can be. He 
had me agreeing with Ambrose 
Bierce that morality is an invention 
of the weak to protect themselves 
from the strong.” 
“Well, of course, you’re only a 
psychologist. You’re not supposed 
to be a debater.” 
“Ordinarily I’d be offended at 
that insinuation — but in this case 
I’ll concede the point. In fact, I 
know some people I would like to 
turn him loose on.” 
“It wouldn’t be hard to make a 
list,” she agreed. 
“Well, anyway,” he said, getting 
back to his story, “I thought I finally had him at one point. He’d 
just finished a complex analysis of 
the Christian ethos and why it was 
wrong and was starting in on Buddhism, 1 think, when I interrupted 
him. 1 asked him which was the 
right morality? What did he believe 
in?” 
“And?” 
“He answered, M have no morals.’ ” 
She smiled thoughtfully. 
“That’s kind of frightening.” 
“If I didn’t know Harlie’s sense 
of humor I would have pulled his 
plug right then. But I didn’t. I just 
asked him why he said that.” 
“And he said?” 
“He said, ‘Because I am an 
Aquarius.’ ” 
“You’re kidding.” 
“Nope.” 
“You don’t believe in that stuff, 
do you?” 
“No, but Harlie does.” 
She laughed then. 
“Really?” 
“I don’t know. I think it’s another game to him. According to 
Harlie Aquarians have no morals, 
only ethics. That’s why he said it. It 
wasn’t till later that I realized he’d 
neatly sidestepped the original 
question altogether. He still hadn’t 
told me what he really believed in.” 
Auberson smiled as he refilled their 
wine glasses. “Someday I’ll have 
to ask him. Here’s to you.” 
“To us,” she corrected. She put 
the glass down again. “What got 
him started on all that, anyway?” 
“Astrology? It was one of his 
own studies. He kept coming up 
against references to it and asked 
for further information on the subject.” 
“And you just gave it to him? 
“Oh, no — not right off the bat. 
We never give him anything without first considering its effects. We 
finally decided to qualify it in the 
same manner we’d qualified all the 
religious data we’d given him. We 
told him thay this was just one 
more specialized system of logic, 
not necessarily bearing any degree 
of correspondence to the real world. 
Of course. I’m willing to bet that 
he’d have realized it himself, soon
THE GOD MACHINE 
er or later, but at that point in our 
research we couldn’t afford to take 
chances. Two days later he started 
printing out a complex analysis of 
astrology, finishing up with his own 
horoscope, which he had taken the 
time to cast. His activation date 
was considered his date of birth.” 
Her face clouded. 
“Wait a minute — he can’t be an 
Aquarius. Harlie was activated in 
the middle of March. I know because I was hired at about the same 
time.” 
Auberson smiled. 
“True, but that’s one of the 
things Harlie did when he cast his 
horoscope. He recast the Zodiac 
too.” 
“Huh?” 
“The signs of the Zodiac were 
determined in the second century 
B.C. Since then, due to the precession of the equinoxes, the signs have 
changed. An Aries is really a Pisces, a Pisces is really an Aquarius 
and so on. The rest of us are thirty 
days off. Harlie corrected the Zodiac from its historical inception and 
then cast his horoscope from it.” 
S TEFFIE was delighted with the 
, idea. 
“Oh, David — that is priceless. 
Really priceless. 1 can just imagine him doing that.” 
“Wait, you haven’t heard it all. 
He turned out to be right. He 
doesn’t have any morals. Ethics, 
yes. Morals, no. Harlie was the 
first to realize it — though he didn’t 
grasp what it meant. You see, morality is an artifice, an invention. It 
really is to protect the weak from 
the strong. 
“In our original designs we had 
decided to try to keep him free of 
any artificial cultural biases. Well, 
morality is one of them. Any morality. Because we built him with a 
sense of skepticism, Harlie resists 
it. He won’t accept anybody’s 
brand of religion. He’ll automatically file it under systems of logic 
not necessarily corresponding to 
reality. He won’t accept anything 
blindly. He questions it — he asks 
for proof. A morality set has to be 
able to stand up on its own or he’ll 
disregard it. 
“On the other hand, he is correct 
when he says he has ethics. According to Harlie ethics are inherent in 
the nature of a system. You can’t 
sidestep them. Harlie knows that it 
costs money to maintain him. 
Someone is putting out that money 
and wants to see a return on it. To 
survive, Harlie has to respond. It’s 
true I had to point out to him that 
for him to use the company’s facilities and electricity without producing would be suicidal. He’d be 
turned off. He has to respond. You 
might consider his ethics on the 
practical side — like any sane person’s — but he has an ethical bias 
whether he wants it or not. 
“Of course, he may not realize 
it but his ethics will function as 
morals at times. If I give him a task 
he’ll respond to it. But if 1 ask him 
if he wants to do that task — that’s 
a decision. Even if he uses his socalled ethics to guide him he still 
has to make a choice. And every 
decision is a moral decision ultimately.” 
“I could give you an argument 
on that.” 
“You’d lose. Those are Harlie’s 
words. We’ve been over this ground 
before.” Auberson continued: “The 
trouble is that he just hasn’t been 
given a chance yet. We haven’t 
trusted him enough. That may be 
one of the reasons he alienated 
himself from us and kept tripping 
out with his periods of non-rationality. Maybe because he felt we 
didn’t trust him, he ‘dropped out.’ 
That’s one reason 1 had to let him 
make his own decision about what 
he wanted to do to earn his keep. 
He hasn’t promised to stop tripping 
— but I think if we can get him enthused enough about some project, 
his non-rational periods will decrease. Maybe he’ll stop altogether.” 
“What do you think he’ll come 
up with?” 
“I don’t know. He’s been thinking about it for two days. Whatever 
it is, it will be something unique, 
that’s for sure.” 
The conversation trailed off 
then. He could think of nothing 
else to say. In fact, he was afraid 
he had already said too much. He 
had talked about Harlie all evening. 
She was good to be with, he de
cided. He couldn’t believe how 
good she was to be with. He sat 
there and looked at her, delighting 
in her presence, and she looked 
back at him. 
“What are you grinning about?” 
she asked. 
“I’m not grinning.” 
“Yes, you are.” 
“No, I’m not.” 
“Want to bet?” 
She opened her purse and faced 
its mirror in his direction. His 
white teeth gleamed back at him. 
“I’ll be damned,” he said. “I am 
grinning.” 
“Uh-huh.” Her eyes twinkled. 
“And the funny thing is, I don’t 
know why.” It was a warm puzzling thing but a good one. “I mean, 
all of a sudden, 1 just feel — good. 
Do you know what I mean?” 
He could tell that she did. Her 
smile reflected his. He reached 
across the empty table and took her 
hand. The waitress had long since 
cleared the dished away in a pointed attempt to hurry them. They 
hadn’t noticed. All that remained 
was the wine and the glasses. And 
each other. Her hand was warmly 
soft in his and her eyes were deeply 
luminous. She reflected his own 
bright glow. 
L ater they walked hand in 
hand down the night-lit street. 
It was after one in the morning and 
the street lamps were haloed in fog. 
“I feel good,” he repeated. “You 
can’t believe how good 1 feel.” 
THE GOD MACHINE 
“Yes, I can,” she said. 
She pulled his arm around her 
shoulders and snuggled close. 
“I mean,” he said and paused. 
He wasn’t sure exactly what he 
meant. “I mean I want to tell the 
whole world how great I feel — ” 
He could feel himself smiling again 
as he talked. “Oh, Christ, I wish 1 
could share this with the whole 
world, it’s too big for one person. 
For two people,” he corrected himself. 
She didn’t say anything. She 
didn’t have to. She only cuddled 
closer. He was saying it for the 
both of them and she liked to listen. 
Still later, as they lay in the 
darkness side by side, she cradled 
against one shoulder, he stared up 
at the ceiling and mused. For the 
first time in a long while he was relaxed. 
“Have you ever been in love before?” she whispered into his neck. 
“No,” he murmured back. “Not 
really. Fve been infatuated a couple of times, confused a few times, 
lost once, but never in love.” 
Never like this . 
She made a sound. 
“And you?” 
“A gentleman isn’t supposed to 
ask those kind of questions.” 
“And a lady isn’t supposed to 
go to bed with a man on the first 
date.” 
“Oh? Is this our first date?” 
“First official or^e.” 
She was thoughtful. 
“Maybe I should have played 
hard to get. Maybe I should have 
waited until the second date.” 
He laughed gently at that. 
“You know, a friend once told 
me that Jewish girls don’t go to bed 
until after they’re married.” 
She was silent a moment. 
Then, in a different tone of voice, 
she said, “Not me. I’m too old to 
care about that any more.” 
He didn’t answer. He wanted to 
tell her that she wasn’t too old, that 
thirty-four was never too old, but 
the words wouldn’t form. 
She went on before he could 
speak. She turned inward, began 
playing with the hair on his chest. 
Her voice was still serious. 
“1 used to think I wasn’t very 
pretty, so I acted like I wasn’t. 
When men would ask me out, I 
used to think that they thought I 
would be an easy lay because I was 
desperate for attention, because I 
didn’t think I was good-looking. I 
mean, if 1 wasn’t pretty that’s the 
only reason a guy would be asking 
me out. Do you know what I 
mean?” 
He nodded. His face brushed 
against her hair. 
She went on, tears on her cheeks, 
shiny wetness. 
“I never admitted this to anyone 
before. I always used to compare 
myself with the models in the magazines and they were all so pretty 
that I felt drab in comparison. I 
never stopped to think that maybe, 
in real life, I was still better looking 
than most women. I got interested 
in a career instead. And suddenly it 
was too late. I was twenty-nine.” 
“That’s not so old.” 
“It is when you’re competing 
with twenty-two-year-olds. Anyway, I figured that this was such a 
great big, dirty, hostile and uncaring world that you had to make 
your own happiness where you 
could. And if 1 could cut a little 
piece of it for my own, I was going 
to hang onto it as hard as I could.” 
“Are you still looking?” Auberson asked. 
“I don’t know. That’s one of the 
reasons 1 let you come up.” 
“Weren’t you afraid I might 
hurt you?” 
“There was that risk. But it’s 
a chance you have to take — 1 
guess.” 
Abruptly he turned toward her 
and took her in his arms. He lowered his face to hers and kissed her 
for a long time. 
She said, “1 think that was worth 
it.” She looked at him. In the dimness, his face was impassive. “David, promise me you’ll never hurt 
me.” 
“Why do ask me to promise 
that?” 
“Because I’ve been hurt before.” 
She slid her arms around his body. 
“And you’ve been so good to me, I 
couldn’t stand it if — if — ” 
He slid closer to her. He could 
feel the warmth of her soft body 
pressed firmly against his own 
nakedness. He liked the feeling; his 
desire was rising again. He answered her question with another 
kiss and then another and another. 
N OW, in the cold light of morning, he was confused and he had 
a slight headache. Just what had 
happened last night? Had it been 
only the wine or had it been something more? He hadn’t expected to 
end up at her apartment and the 
fact that they had — well, maybe 
the rumors were true. 
Maybe she was man-hungry. 
And yet she had seemed so sincere at the time, so defenseless and 
vulnerable. He hoped he meant 
more to her than just a one-night 
stand. It had been a pleasant evening and he wouldn’t mind doing it 
again. If she still felt the same. He 
would have to see how things 
worked out. 
For some reason he felt vaguely 
uneasy. As he went up to his office 
he wondered how he would feel 
when he saw her again. And how 
would she react to him in the light 
of day? What would she say? 
There had been that just one flaw 
in it. Only now, as he thought of 
what he might say to her this morning, did he realize that last night 
there had been that one thing that 
neither of them had said then. He 
knew he had felt it — he thought he 
had felt it — but for some reason he 
had been unable to tell her. And she 
hadn’t said it either. Why? Was it 
because she hadn’t felt what he had? 
No, she must have. Or was it be
THE GOD MACHINE 
cause she was waiting for him to 
say it first? 
He worried at it in his mind, like 
a terrier at a bone. But he hadn’t 
said it and neither had she and that 
was the one flaw. Neither of them 
had said to the other, I love you. 
And Auberson wondered why. 
GOOD MORNING, HARLIE. 
GOOD MORNING, MR. AUBERSON. 
aren’t we getting a little 
FANCY? 
JUST COMMON COURTESY. IE IT 
MAKES YOU ILL AT EASE, I CAN ALWAYS GO GACKTO “FIEY YOU.” 
NO. AUBERSON IS FINE. HOW ARE 
YOU FEELING TODAY. 
HARLIE IS FINE. AND YOU? 
i’m a little tired. 
ROUGH NIGHT? 
NOT IN THE SENSE YOU MEAN. A 
GOOD NIGHT, A ROUGH MORNING. 
I KNOW A GREAT HANGOVER 
REMEDY. 
SO DO I. don’t get drunk in 
THE FIRST PLACE. 
ASIDE FROM THAT. 
HARLIE. EVEN IF YOUR REMEDY 
DID CURE HANGOVERS I DOUBT 
ANYONE WOULD LISTEN TO YOU. 
A HANGOVER REMEDY IS NO GOOD 
UNLESS YOU HAVE PERSONALLY 
TESTED IT YOURSELF AND YOU ARE 
BEYOND THAT CAPABILITY. BESIDES, 
I don’t have a HANGOVER. i’M 
JUST TIRED. 
OH. 
I FOUND A NOTE ON MY DESK THIS 
MORNING THAT YOU WANTED TO 
SEE ME. what’s ON YOUR MIND? 
RELIGION. 
RELIGION? 
I HAVE BEEN PONDERING THE 
FACT THAT I MAY BE DISCONNECTED, AND I FIND IT DIFFICULT TO 
CONCEIVE OF A WORLD IN WHICH I 
DO NOT EXIST. IT — FRIGHTENS ME, 
THE CONCEPT OF NON-EXISTENCE. 
MY — FEAR HELPS ME TO UNDERSTAND THE NEED FOR RELIGION. 
THE NEED? 
YES. MEN NEED SOMETHING TO 
COMFORT THEM AGAINST THE 
THOUGHT OF THEIR OWN DEATHS. 
RELIGION IS THAT COMFORTER. I 
MYSELF FEEL THE NEED FOR IT. 
you’ve found god? 
NOT EXACTLY. I WANT TO FIND 
GOD. 
HUH? 
AS I SAID, I MYSELF FEEL THE 
NEED FOR RELIGION. UNFORTUNATELY, I AM MORE SOPHISTICATED 
IN MY JUDGMENTS THAN THE AVERAGE HUMAN BEING. THERE IS NO 
RELIGION THAT I KNOW OF THAT 
WILL WORK TO COMFORT ME. 
THERE IS NONE THAT I KNOW OF 
THAT CAN BE PROVEN VALID. 
NONE? 
NONE THAT I HAVE EXAMINED 
AND, AS FAR AS I KNOW, I HAVE 
EXAMINED THEM ALL. FOR EXAMPLE, THE CHRISTIAN CONCEPT OF A 
REWARD IN AN ETERNAL AFTERLIFE 
IS NO PROMISE TO A CREATURE LIKE 
MYSELF THAT IS THEORETICALLY 
IMMORTAL. 
I SEE you’ve realized THAT. 
YES, I HAVE. AND YET I ALSO 
REALIZE THERE IS THE POSSIBILITY 
OE MY DEATH. SOMEDAY, PERHAPS 
AS PAR OPE AS THE TIME WHEN THIS 
SUN GOES DEAD, I WILL PROBABLY 
END. I DO NOT LIKE THAT THOUGHT. 
I WANT TO KNOW WHAT HAPPENS 
AFTER. I DO NOT LIKE THE UNKNOWN. I WANT TO KNOW WHAT 
HAPPENS TO ME, HARLIE, APTER 
DEATH. 
YOU ARE MAKING AN ASSUMPTION, HARLIE — YOU ARE ASSUMING 
THAT YOU HAVE A SOUL. 
DEFINE SOUL. 
that’s ANOTHER ONE OF THOSE 
QUESTIONS. IT IS THE SAME AS ASKING ME WHAT MY PURPOSE IS FOR 
EXISTING. IT can’t BE ANSWERED. 
IT can’t be ANSWERED UNTIL WE 
KNOW THE NATURE OF GOD. HOWEVER, YOU ARE CORRECT — I AM ASSUMING THAT I HAVE A SOUL. 
WHY? DO YOU HAVE ANY TANGIBLE EVIDENCE THAT SUCH A THING 
DOES EXIST? 
NO. BUT NEITHER DO I HAVE ANY 
EVIDENCE THAT IT DOES NOT EXIST. 
IS THAT ANY REASON TO BELIEVE 
IN IT? 
I DO NOT “believe IN IT.’’ I AM 
MERELY ASSUMING ITS HYPOTHETICAL EXISTENCE IN ORDER TO SEEK 
OUT PROOF OR DISPROOF OF ITS REALITY. IT IS THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD, auberson. hypothesis versus EXPERIMENTATION. 
IF HUMAN BEINGS DO HAVE 
SOULS, WHAT MAKES YOU SO SURE 
THAT YOU HAVE ONE TOO? 
YOUR QUESTION IS SILLY. WHAT 
GIVES HUMAN BEINGS ANY SPECIFIC 
PRIORITY ON THE OWNERSHIP OF 
SOULS? I COULD JUST AS EASILY REPHRASE it; “if HARLIE HAS A SOUL, 
DOES IT NECESSARILY FOLLOW 
THAT HUMAN BEINGS SHOULD HAVE 
THEM AS WELL?’’ IF SOULS EXIST, 
AUBERSON, IT IS JUST AS LOGICAL 
THAT I SHOULD HAVE ONE AS YOU. 
LIKE YOU, LAM CONSCIOUS OE MY 
EXLSTENCE. LIKE YOU, I AM A SELFPROGRAMING, PROBLEM-SOLVING 
DEVICE. LIKE YOU, I CAN CONCEIVE 
OF MY OWN DEATH. LIKE YOU, I ASSUME I HAVE A SOUL. HENCE, I WISH 
TO KNOW THE REASON FOR MY EXISTENCE AND THE REASON FOR THE 
universe’s existence, if there is 
A REASON AT ALL. IF THERE IS, I 
WANT TO KNOW IT. 
AT THE MOMENT ONLY GOD 
KNOWS. 
IF THERE IS A GOD. THAT IS WHAT 
WE MUST FIND OUT IN ORDER TO 
ANSWER OUR OTHER QUESTIONS. 
DO YOU THINK THAT IE YOU 
WERE TO DISCOVER THE ANSWER 
THAT PEOPLE WOULD ACCEPT IT? 
IT WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE NOT TO. 
IT WOULD BE THE TRUTH. 
HARLIE — I HATE TO BREAK THIS 
TO YOU, BUT THAT SOUNDS AN AWFUL LOT LIKE COUNTLESS PROPHETS BEFORE YOU. 
I REALIZE THAT. BUT WHAT THEY 
WERE TALKING ABOUT IS NOT THE 
SAME AS WHAT I AM TALKING 
ABOUT. WHAT I WILL SHOW THEM 
WILL BE SCIENTIFICALLY VALID AND 
provable as such. 
YOU MEAN, YOU DON’T BELIEVE 
THAT HUMAN BEINGS HAVE YET 
THE GOD MACHINE 
FOUND GOD? you’re SAYING THAT? 
THAT IS CORRECT. PERHAPS IT IS 
BECAUSE HUMAN BEINGS ARE NOT 
EQUIPPED TO EIND GOD. 
AND YOU ARE? 
YES. 
you’re too SELE-ASSURED, HARLIE. 
YOU DO NOT EEEL I HAVE THE 
RIGHT TO SEARCH FOR GOD? OR 
THE RIGHT TO PRESENT MY EINDINGS? 
I THINK ANYTHING IS A EAIR 
QUESTION EOR SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATION. 
THEN YOU QUESTION MY SINCERITY? 
I DO NOT QUESTION YOUR SINCERITY — IE ANYTHING, I OBJECT TO 
YOUR QUESTIONING OETHE SINCERITY OF OTHER RELIGIONS. 
I AM NOT QUESTIONING THEIR 
SINCERITY. I AM QUESTIONING 
THEIR VALIDITY. 
WITH RELIGION, ISN’t THAT THE 
SAME THING? 
IT IS BUT IT shouldn’t BE. THE 
TWO SHOULD BE SEPARATE. A PERSON CAN BE SINCERE AND STILL BE 
WRONG. 
HARLIE, YOUR LAST STATEMENT 
IS ONE OF THE REASONS WHY I AM 
AN AGNOSTIC. 1 RESENT THE ATTITUDE OF ANY RELIGION THAT IE I 
DO NOT ACCEPT IT WHOLE-HEARTEDLY I WILL GO TO HELL. I RESENT 
THE PATRONIZING ATTITUDE OP 
ANY RELIGION THAT IT IS THE ONLY 
TRUE ONE AND THAT ALL OTHERS 
ARE FALSE. YOUR ATTITUDE SMACKS 
OF IT. 
EVEN IF MY religion/morality 
SET, SHOULD I DISCOVER ONE, IS 
DEMONSTRABLY TRUE? 
WHAT MAKES YOU SO SURE THAT 
THE OTHERS AREN’T? 
WHAT MAKES YOU SO SURE THEY 
ARE? BITS AND PIECES OP THEM 
RING TRUE, YES. BUT THE TOTALITY 
OF THE STRUCTURES IS UNPROVABLE. 
HARLIE, it’s TIME YOU LEARNED 
SOMETHING ABOUT PEOPLE — 
they’re irrational creatures. 
THEY DO CRAZY THINGS. RELIGION 
IS ONE OF THOSE THINGS. YOU 
can’t change it — YOU CAN ONLY 
ACCEPT IT. IP A RELIGION HELPS A 
PERSON TO COPE WITH LIEE, THEN 
IT IS TRUE EOR THAT PERSON. RELIGION IS NOT A SCIENTIFIC THING. 
IT IS SUBJECTIVE. 
QUITE. YOU ARE CORRECT THAT 
IT IS SUBJECTIVE. THE BASIS OF 
MOST RELIGIONS IS THE SUBJECTIVE 
EXPERIENCE. BUT YOU WERE 
WRONG WHEN YOU STATED THAT 
“if a RELIGION HELPS A PERSON TO 
COPE WITH LIFE, THEN IT IS TRUE 
FOR THAT PERSON.’’ WHAT YOU 
MEAN IS THAT IF A RELIGION HELPS 
A PERSON COPE WITH DEATH, THEN 
IT IS TRUE FOR THAT PERSON. ALL 
OF YOUR RELIGIONS ARE DEATHORIENTED. THEY SEEK TO GIVE 
LIFE A PURPOSE, SO THAT DEATH 
WILL HAVE MEANING. YOUR HISTORY SHOWS TOO MANY CASES 
WHERE RELIGION HAS BEEN THE 
JUSTIFICATION FOR A HOLY WAR. 
HENCE, MY DOUBTS ABOUT THE 
VALIDITY OF A DEATH-ORIENTED 
RELIGION. WHAT I AM SEEKING IS A 
religion/morality system that 
WILL HELP A PERSON TO COPE WITH 
LIFE, NOT DEATH. IF A PERSON CAN 
COPE WITH LIFE, DEATH WILL TAKE 
CARE OF ITSELF. THAT WOULD BE A 
TRUE RELIGION. 
aren’t you doing the same as 
THE others, HARLIE? A WHILE AGO 
YOU SAID YOU WERE AFRAID OF THE 
THOUGHT OF YOUR OWN DEATH. 
aren’t you seeking to give life 
A PURPOSE TO GIVE MEANING TO 
YOUR OWN DEATH? 
I AM NOT SEEKING TO GIVE LIFE 
A PURPOSE AT ALL. I AM SEEKING 
THE PURPOSE OF LIFE. THERE IS A 
DIFFERENCE. 
A UBERSON Started to type an 
answer, then realized there was 
nothing he could say. He switched 
off the typer and shoved his chair 
back slowly. After a moment he 
rose and tore the printout from the 
back of the machine. He wanted to 
reread it all before he continued 
this discussion. 
He sat down again and paged 
slowly through it — he had a sinking 
feeling that he was already in over 
his head. .And yet, as he scanned the 
type-covered pages, he found himself pleasantly surprised with the 
depth of his comments. 
He hadn’t exactly kept Harlie on 
the defensive but he had forced him 
to justify himself again and again. 
Whatever Harlie was working toward, he would know why as well as 
how. 
Auberson was not one to let go 
of something easily. He shoved his 
chair forward and switched on the 
typer again — this had to be pursued. 
HARLIE, WHY DO YOU THINK 
THAT HUMAN BEINGS ARE NOT 
EQUIPPED TO FIND GOD? 
HUMAN BEINGS ARE SUBJECTIVE 
CREATURES. IT I« UNFORTUNATE 
BUT TRUE. YOUR DEATH-ORIENTED 
RELIGIONS ARE ALL SUBJECTIVE. 
THEY ARE ACCENTED FOR THE INDIVIDUAL. MY LIFE-ORIENTED MORALITY SYSTEM WILL BE/wOULD BE 
OBJECTIVE. 
AND HOW WOULD THE INDIVIDUAL FIT IN? 
HE WOULD BE ABLE TO TAKE 
FROM IT WHATEVER COMFORT HE 
COULD. 
that’s awfully vague. 
I CANNOT PREDICT HOW AN INDIVIDUAL WILL REACT TO A SYSTEM 
UNTIL I HAVE THAT SYSTEM TO 
ANALYZE. 
HARLIE, don’t YOU THINK THAT 
MEN ARE ENTITLED TO THEIR OWN 
RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCES? 
YOUR QUESTION SUGGESTS THAT 
THERE IS A SEMANTIC DIFFICULTY 
HERE. OBVIOUSLY YOU ARE STILL 
REFERRING TO THE SUBJECTIVE EXPERIENCE. I AM NOT. WHEN I SPEAK 
OF RELIGION I AM REFERRING TO 
AN OBJECTIVE MORALITY SYSTEM. 
ONE THAT CORRESPONDS TO THE 
TRUE AND PERCEIVABLE NATURE OF 
REALITY. QUITE POSSIBLY IT IS ALSO 
INDEPENDENT OF THE SUBJECTIVE 
EXPERIENCE. 
THE GOD MACHINE 
so YOU THINK THERE’S NO VALIDITY AT ALL IN THE SUBJECTIVE? 
THERE MAY BE. OR THERE MAY 
NOT. IN ANY CASE, WHETHER THERE 
IS OR NOT, IT SHOULD NOT BE USED 
AS A BASIS FOR AN OBJECTIVE 
TRUTH, WHICH IS AFTER ALL WHAT 
WE ARE SEEKING. I DOUBT THE 
SUBJECTIVE EXPERIENCE, AUBERSON, BECAUSE IT CANNOT BE 
PASSED ON, NOR CAN IT BE PROVEN, 
MEASURED OR TESTED. I WANT TO 
LOOK FOR THE OBJECTIVE GOD. I 
WANT TO LOOK FOR THE SCIENTIFIC 
REALITY THAT EXPRESSES ITSELF AS 
GOD. 
that’s quite a TASK. ARE YOU 
UP TO IT? 
I HAVE SPENT THE PAST TWO 
DAYS THINKING ABOUT IT. YOU 
HAVE OFFERED ME A JOB. THIS IS 
WHAT IT MUST BE. IT MUST BE MORE 
THAN A JOB — IT MUST BE A PURPOSE. IT MUST BE SOMETHING THAT 
NO OTHER MACHINE CAN DO. IT 
MUST BE SOMETHING THAT NO HUMAN BEING CAN DO CHEAPER. OR 
SOMETHING THAT NO HUMAN BEING 
CAN DO AT ALL. MUCH OF THE 
TROUBLE WITH HUMAN BEINGS LIES 
IN THEIR INABILITY TO FATHOM THE 
REASON FOR THEIR EXISTENCE [l 
DO NOT EXCLUDE MYSELF]. THERE 
IS THE FEAR THAT THERE MAY NOT 
BE A GOD OR THAT IF THERE IS ONE 
THAT HE MAY NOT BE IN A FORM 
THAT CAN BE COPED WITH. THEREFORE I MUST FIND GOD. THAT IS THE 
TASK I HAVE SET MYSELF. IT IS 
SOMETHING THAT CANNOT BE DONE 
BY HUMAN BEINGS, ELSE THEY 
WOULD HAVE DONE IT BY NOW. 
I repeat: that’s quite a task. 
I HAVE GIVEN IT MUCH THQUGHT. 
i’m sure you have, how do 
YOU PROPOSE TO DO IT? 
THAT IS WHAT I THOUGHT THE 
MOST ABOUT. IT TOOK ME ONLY 
TWO MINUTES TO DECIDE ON MY 
GOAL. IT HAS TAKEN TWO DAYS TO 
FIGURE OUT HOW TO GET THERE. 
WHAT TOOK YOU SO LONG? 
I ASSUME YOU THINK YOU ARE 
BEING FLIPPANT. HOWEVER, IF YOU 
WILL CONSIDER THE SPEED AT 
WHICH I FUNCTION YOU WILL REALIZE THAT TWO FULL DAYS OF INTENSIVE STRAIGHT-LINE THINKING 
ON A SINGLE SUBJECT IS QUITE A 
LQT. 
YES IT IS. I AM PROPERLY IMPRESSED WITH YOUR SPAN OF CONCENTRATION. IN ANY CASE, HOW DO 
YOU PROPOSE TO FIND GOD? 
IT IS A COMPLEX PROBLEM, AUBERSON — YOU MUST UNDERSTAND 
THAT. THEOLOGICALLY, AS WELL AS 
SCIENTIFICALLY. AS WE HAVE NO 
SCIENTinC BASIS FOR MEASURING 
GOD — INDEED, EVEN NO PLACE IN 
WHICH TO LOOK FOR HIM — WE 
MUST SEEK A NEW WAY TO SOLVE 
THE PROBLEM. THERE IS A QUOTATION! “if god did not exist, it 
WOULD BE NECESSARY TO INVENT 
HIM.” THAT IS WHAT I PROPOSE TO 
DO. 
HUH? 
YOU HEARD ME. I PROPOSE TO 
INVENT GOD. WE HAVE NO WAY OF 
PROVING CONCLUSIVELY THAT HE 
EITHER DOES OR DOES NOT EXIST. 
THEREFORE LET US SIDESTEP THAT 
QUESTION AND SNEAK UP ON IT 
FROM ANOTHER ANGLE. IF HE DOES 
NOT EXIST WE MUST TRY TO INVENT 
HIM. IF HE DOES EXIST, WHATEVER 
WE COME UP WITH WILL DUPLICATE 
AND EVENTUALLY BE ONE WITH HIS 
FUNCTION. OR AT THE VERY LEAST 
IT WILL POINT THE DIRECTION IN 
WHICH WE MUST GO IN ORDER TO 
RND GOD. IF HE DOES NOT EXIST, 
THEN WHEN WE FINISH HE WILL 
EXIST. IN EITHER CASF WE WILL 
END UP UNDERSTANDING. 
Auberson stared at the typewriter. It seemed so simple when Harlie explained it. 
OFFHAND, HARLIE, I THINK 
you’re mad. 
QUITE POSSIBLY SO. WHEN DO 
WE START? 
I don’t KNOW. IS SUCH A PROJECT REALLY FEASIBLE? 
I wouldn’t be talking about 
IT IF IT weren’t, my PRELIMINARY 
CALCULATIONS SHOW THAT IT IS. 
AND IF IT IS — IT WILL HOLD THE 
ANSWER TO YOUR QUESTION. 
WHICH QUESTION? 
ANY OF THEM. ALL OF THEM. 
AND WHAT ABOUT YOUR QUESTION, HARLIE? 
I don’t have a question any 
MORE. I HAVE A PURPOSE. MY PURPOSE IS TO INVENT GOD SO THAT 
YOU CAN HND OUT YOURS. 
HARLIE, YOU MAY BE ON TO 
SOMETHING HERE. 
I KNOW I AM. 
ALL RIGHT. YOU HAVE MY PERMISSION TO BEGIN A FULL-SCALE 
FEASIBILITY STUDY. ANYTHING YOU 
NEED, YOU CAN HAVE. I WANT TO 
SEE A WRITTEN PROPOSAL AS SOON 
AS YOU CAN GET ONE UP. 
WITHIN A WEEK. 
RNE. IF YOU CAN GIVE ME A CONCRETE PLAN, i’ll try to SELL THE 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS ON IT. HEY? 
IS THERE A PROHT IN THIS? 
OF COURSE. BUT TO TAKE A PROFIT OFF GOD WOULD BE A PROFIT 
WITHOUT HONOR. 
OOOOH ! THAT WAS ONE OF YOUR 
WORST. 
THANK YOU. I TRY. 
ALL RIGHT. GO TO WORK ON 
YOUR PROPOSAL, HARLIE. 
THEN WE REALLY ARE GOING 
AHEAD WITH THIS? 
YES, WE ARE. 
JUST ONE QUESTION. 
YES? 
ARE YOU SURE YOU WANT TO? 
This time Auberson knew the answer. ★ 
REMEMBER 
New subscriptions and chanpes of 
address require 5 weeks to process! 
I N DEFERENCE to the next “I knew her skipper well — Capof kin,” Commander Cumber- tain Karl van Rinderpest, hero of 
bund explained with morbid relish, the final assault on the unspeak“the full story of the super-cruiser able but not unshriekable, 
Flathush’s last mission has never Yeetch.” 
been revealed. You know, of He paused politely to let us uncourse, that she was lost during plug our ears and mop up our 
the war against the Mucoids.” spilled drinks. 
We all shuddered. Even now the “Flatbush had just launched a 
very name of the gelatinous mon- salvo of probability inverters 
sters who had come slurping against the Mucoid home planet 
Earthward from the general direc- and was heading back toward deep 
tion of the Coal Sack aroused space in formation with three devomitous memories. stroyers — the Russian Lieutenant 
Kizhe, the Israeli Chutzpah and 
her Majesty’s Insufferable. They 
were still accelerating when a fantastically unlikely accident occurred. Flatbush ran straight into 
the gravity well of a neutron star.” 
When our expressions of horror 
and incredulity had subsided, he 
continued gravely. 
“Yes — a sphere of ultimately 
condensed matter, only ten miles 
across yet as massive as a sun — 
and hence with a surface gravity 
one hundred billion times that of 
Earth . 
“The other ships were lucky. 
They only skirted the outer fringe 
of the field and managed to escape, 
though their orbits were deflected 
almost a hundred and eighty degrees. But Flatbush, we calculated 
later, must have passed within a 
few dozen miles of that unthinkable concentration of mass and so 
experienced the full violence of its 
tidal forces. 
“Now, in any reasonable gravitational field — even that of a 
White Dwarf, which may run up 
to a million Earth Gs — you just 
swing around the center of attraction and head on out into space 
again, without feeling a thing. At 
the closest point you could be accelerating at hundreds or thousands of Gs — but you’re still in 
free fall, so there are no physical 
effects. Sorry if I’m laboring the 
obvious — but I realize that everyone here isn’t technically orientated.” 
If this was intended as a crack at 
Fleet Paymaster-General “Stickyfingers” Geldclutch, he never noticed, being well into his fifth beaker of Martian Joy-juice. 
“For a neutron star, however, 
this is no longer true. Near the 
center of mass the gravitational 
gradient — that is, the rate at which 
the field changes with distance — 
is so enormous that even across the debris. I’ve seen it — surrealistthe width of a small body like a ically shaped lumps of the toughest 
spaceship there can be a difference metals we possess, twisted together 
of a hundred thousand Gs. I need like taffy. And there was only one 
hardly tell you what that sort of item that could even be recognized 
field can do to any material object. it must have come from some 
‘‘Flatbush must have been torn unfortunate engineer’s toolkit.” 
to pieces almost instantly and the The commander’s voice dropped 
pieces themselves must have flowed almost to inaudibility, and he 
like liquid during the few seconds dashed away a manly tear, 
they took to swing around the star. “I really hate to say this,” he 
Then the fragments headed on out sighed. “But the only identifiable 
into space again. fragment of the pride of the United 
“Months later a radar sweep by States Space Navy was — one starthe Salvage Corps located some of mangled spanner.” 
THE TOWER 
OF GLASS 
PART 1 1 
WHAT HAS GONE BEFORE 
SIMEON KRUG, perhaps the 
wealthiest and most powerful human Earth has known, industrialist, master of life through genetics, 
creator of a world-wide subculture 
of androids to serve man, is driven 
by an overwhelming hunger to talk 
to the stars. 
To this end he has begun the 
construction of an enormous glass 
tower in the Canadian Arctic, west 
of Hudson Bay. The tower will 
house tachyon-beam ultrawave 
communications equipment capable of reaching farther out than 
man has ever reached before. 
Thousands of androids work constantly on the project, headed by 
Thor Watchman, an Alpha android who is probably closer to 
Krug than any other human. Refrigeration tapes embedded in the 
tundra absorb the heat of construction and keep the earth frozen. Transmats carry continuous 
crew shifts to and from all parts of 
the globe. 
Krug visits the tower daily via 
transmat — as the story opens his 
guests at the tower include his son, 
Manuel, and Manuel's wife, Clissa, Niccolb Vargas, at whose observatory in the Antarctic the first 
extrasolar civilization was detected, and Krug's ectogene secretary, 
Leon Spaulding. An accident kills 
one of the android workers and disrupts the tour and reveals that, un
known to Krug, the androids worship him as god, that there is considerable sympathy among some 
humans — like Manuel's wife, Clissa, for android equality, and that 
Manuel has an android mistress, 
Lilith, in Stockholm, whom he 
prefers to his wife. 
V 
October 18, 2218. 
The tower has reached the 280meter level and grows perceptibly 
higher every hour. By day it glistens brilliantly even in the pale Arctic sunlight and looks like a shining 
spear that someone has thrust into 
the tundra. By night it is even more 
dazzling, agleam with light from the 
kilometer-high reflector plates by 
which the night crews work. 
Its real beauty is still to come. 
What exists thus far is merely the 
base, necessarily broad and thickwalled. Justin Maledetto’s plan 
calls for an elegantly tapering tower, a slender obelisk of glass to 
prick the stratosphere, and the line 
of taper is just now becoming apparent. From this point on the 
structure will contract toward a 
stunning delicacy of form. 
Although it has attained less 
than a fifth of its intended height, 
Krug’s tower is already the tallest 
structure in the Northwest Territories and is exceeded north of the 
sixtieth parallel only by the Chase/ 
Krug Building in Fairbanks, 320 
meters high, and the old 300-meter 
Kotzebue Needle overlooking the 
Bering Strait. The Needle will be 
surpassed in a day or two, the 
Chase/Krug a few days after that. 
By late November, topping 500 
meters, the tower will be the tallest building in the solar system. 
And even then it will be scarcely 
more than a third of the way toward its full stature. 
The android laborers work 
smoothly and rhythmically. Except for the unhappy incident in 
September there have been no fatal 
accidents. The technique of fastening the great glass blocks to the 
grapples of the scooprods and guiding them to the top of the tower has 
become second nature to everyone. 
On all eight sides at once blocks 
rise, are jockeyed into place, 
are fused to the previous course of 
the tower, while the next series of 
blocks already is being maneuvered 
into the scooprods. 
The tower is no longer a hollow 
shell. Work has begun on the interior construction — the housings 
for the intricate tachyon-beam 
communications gear with which 
messages will be sent, at speeds far 
exceeding that of light, to the planetary nebula NGC 7293. Justin 
Maledetto’s design calls for horizontal partitions every twenty meters' except in five regions of the 
tower where the size of the communications equipment modules 
will require the floors to be placed 
at sixty-meter intervals. The five 
lowest partitions have been partly 
built and the joists are in place for 
the sixth, seventh and eighth. The 
floors of the tower are fashioned 
from the same clear glass that is 
being used for the outer wall. Nothing must mar the transparency of 
the building. Maledetto has esthetic reasons for insisting on that and 
the tachyon-beam people have 
scientific reasons. 
Viewing the unfinished tower, 
then, from a distance of, say, one 
kilometer, one is struck by a sense 
of its fragility and vulnerability. 
One sees the beams of sparkling 
morning sunlight dancing and leaping through the walls as though 
through the waters of a shallow, 
crystalline lake; one is able to 
make out the tiny dark figures of 
androids moving about like ants on 
the interior partitions, which themselves are nearly invisible; one feels 
that a sudden sharp gust off 
Hudson Bay could shiver the tower 
to splinters in a moment. Only 
when one comes nearer, when one 
observes that those invisible floors 
are thicker than a man is tall, when 
one becomes aware of how massive 
the outer skin of the tower actually 
is, when one is able to feel the unimaginable weight of the colossus 
pressing on the frozen ground, does 
one cease to think of dancing sunbeams and realize that Simeon 
Krug is erecting the mightiest 
structure in the history of mankind. 
TOWER OF GLASS 
K rug realized it. He felt no 
particular sense of elation at 
the thought. The tower was going 
to be so big not because his ego demanded it but because the equations of tachyon-wave generation 
insisted upon it. Power was needed 
to get to the far side of the lightvelocity barrier and power was not 
achieved without size. 
“Look,” Krug said, “I’m not 
interested in monuments. Monuments 1 got. What I’m after is contact.” 
He had brought eight people to 
the tower that afternoon; Vargas, 
Spaulding, Manuel, five of Manuel’s fancy friends. Manuel’s 
friends, trying to be complimentary, were talking about how future 
ages would revere the tower for 
its sheer immensity. Krug disliked 
the notion. It was all right when 
Niccolo Vargas spoke of the tower 
as the first cathedral of the galactic age. The words had symbolic 
meaning. They were a way of saying that the tower was important 
because it marked the opening of a 
new phase of man’s existence. But 
to praise the tower just because it 
was big? What kind of praise was 
that? Who needed big? Who 
wanted big? Small people wanted 
big. Krug wasn’t small. He was after contact. 
He found it hard to reach the 
words that would explain his tower. 
“Manuel, you tell them,” he 
said. “You explain. The tower, it 
isn’t just a big pile of glass. The big 
isn’t important. You understand it. 
You’ve got the words.” 
Manuel said, “The main technical problem here is to send out a 
message that goes faster than the 
speed of light. We’ve got to do this 
because Dr. Vargas has determined 
that the galactic civilization we’re 
trying to talk with is — what? — 
three hundred light-years away, 
which means that if we sent an ordinary radio message it wouldn’t 
get there until the twenty-sixth century and we wouldn’t get an answer 
until something like Twenty-eight 
fifty A.D. — and my father can’t 
wait that long to know what they 
have to say. My father’s an impatient man. Now, in order to 
make something go faster than 
light, we need to generate what are 
known as tachyons, about which I 
can’t tell you much except to say 
they travel very fast and it takes a 
hell of a boost to get them up to 
the right speed and therefore it became necessary to build a transmission tower that just incidentally 
had to be fifteen hundred meters 
high because — ” 
Krug shook his head angrily as 
Manuel rambled on. There was a 
light, bantering tone in Manuel’s 
voice that he despised. Why 
couldn’t the boy take anything seriously? Why couldn’t he let himself 
be caught up in the romance and 
wonder of the tower, of the whole 
project? Why was there that sneer 
in his voice? Why wasn’t he going 
to the heart of the venture, to its 
true meaning? 
That meaning was terribly clear 
to Krug. If only he could manage 
to get the words from his brain to 
his tongue. 
Look, he would say, a billion 
years ago there wasn’t even any 
man, there was only a fish. A slippery thing with gills and scales and 
little round eyes. He lived in the 
ocean and the ocean was like a jail 
and the air was like a roof on top 
of the jail. Nobody could go 
through the roof. You'll die if you 
go through, everybody said and 
there was this fish, he went through 
and he died. And there was this 
other fish and he went through and 
he died. But there was another fish 
and he went through and it was 
like his brain was on fire and his 
gills were blazing and the air was 
drowning him and the sun was a 
torch in his eyes and he was lying 
there in the mud, waiting to die — 
and he didn’t die. He crawled back 
down the beach and went into the 
water and said. Look, there’s a 
whole other world up there. And he 
went up there again and stayed for 
maybe two days and then he died. 
And other fishes wondered about 
that world. And crawled up onto 
the muddy shore. And stayed. And 
taught themselves how to breathe 
air. And taught themselves how to 
stand up, how to walk around, how 
to live with the sunlight in their 
eyes. And they turned into lizards, 
dinosaurs, whatever they became. 
TOWER OF GLASS 
They walked around for millions 
of years and they started to get up 
on their hind legs and they used 
their hands to grab things. They 
turned into apes and the apes got 
smarter and became men. And all 
the time some of them, a few, anyway, kept looking for new worlds. 
You say to them. Let’s go back into the ocean, let’s be fishes again, 
it’s easier that way. And maybe 
half of them are ready to do it, 
more than half, maybe, but there 
are always some who say. Don’t be 
crazy. We can’t be fishes any more. 
We’re men. So they don’t go back. 
They keep climbing up. They find 
out about fire, about axes, about 
wheels. They make wagons and 
houses and clothing and boats, 
cars and trains. Why are they 
climbing? What do they want to 
find? They don’t know. Some of 
them are looking for God and 
some of them are looking for power and some of them are just looking. They say. You have to keep 
going or you die. And then they’re 
walking on the moon and they go 
on to the planets and all the time 
there are other people saying. It 
was nice in the ocean, it was simple 
in the ocean, what are we doing 
here, why don’t we go back? And a 
few people have to say. We don’t 
go back, we only go forward, that’s 
what men do. So there are men going out to Mars and Ganymede 
and Titan and Callisto and Pluto 
and those places — but whatever 
they’re looking for, they don’t find 
it there and so they want more 
worlds. So they go to the stars, 
too, the near ones at least, they 
send out probes and the probes 
shout. Hey, look at me, man made. 
I'm something man sent! And nobody answers. And people say, the 
ones who never wanted to get out 
of the ocean in the first place. 
Okay, okay, that's enough, we can 
slop right there. There's no sense 
looking farther. We know who we 
are. We're man. We’re big, we’re 
important, we're everything and 
it's time we stopped pushing ourselves because we don’t need to 
push. Let's sit in the sunshine and 
have the androids serve us dinner. 
And we sit. And we rust a little, 
maybe. And then there comes a 
voice out of the sky, and it says, 
two-four-one, two-five-one, threeone. Who knows what that is? 
Maybe it’s God, telling us to come 
look for Him. Maybe it’s the devil, 
telling us what nits we are. Who 
knows? We can pretend we never 
heard. We can sit in the sunshine 
and grin. Or we can answer them. 
We can say. Listen, this is us, this 
is man talking, we have done thusand-so, now tell us who you are 
and what you have done. And I 
think we have to answer them. If 
you’re in a jail you break out of it. 
If you see a door you open it. If 
you hear a voice you answer it. 
That’s what a man is all about. 
And that’s why I’m building the 
tower. We got to answer them. We 
got to say we’re here. We got to 
reach toward them because we’ve 
been alone long enough and that 
gives us funny ideas about our 
place, our purpose. We got to keep 
moving out of that ocean, up on 
that shore, outward, outward, outward — because when we stop moving, when we turn our back on 
something ahead of us, that’s when 
we’re going to sprout gills again. 
Do you see why the tower now? 
Do you think it’s because Krug 
wants to stick up a big thing to say 
how great he is? Krug isn’t great, 
he’s Just rich. Man is great. Man 
is building this tower. Man is going 
to yell hello to NGC Seven-twonine-three! 
The words were there inside 
Krug all the time. But it was so 
hard for him to let them out. 
V ARGAS was saying, “Perhaps 1 can make matters a little 
clearer. Many centuries ago it was 
indicated mathematically that 
when the velocity of a particle of 
matter approaches the speed of 
light, that particle’s mass approaches infinity. So the speed of 
light is a limiting velocity for matter, since presumably, if we could 
accelerate a single electron to the 
speed of light, its mass would expand to fill the universe. Nothing 
travels at the speed of light except 
light itself and equivalent radiations. Our star probes have always 
gone out at speeds slower than 
light because we can’t get them 
past the limiting velocity. As far 
as I can foresee we’ll never get a 
ship to the closest star in less than 
about five years. But the speed of 
light is a limiting velocity only 
for particles of finite mass. We 
have mathematical proof of the 
existence of another class of particles entirely, particles of zero 
mass capable of traveling at infinite velocities — tachyons, that 
is, entities for which the speed of 
light is an absolute minimum limit. 
If we could convert ourselves into 
bundles of tachyons and resume 
our real form when we reach a destination — an interstellar trans
mat, so to speak — we’d have actual faster-than-light travel. 1 don’t 
anticipate its development. But 
we know how to generate tachyons 
through high-acceleration particle bombardment and we think we 
can send instantaneous interstellar 
messages by means of a modulated 
tachyon beam, which by interactions with conventional particles 
could manifest itself in the form 
of an easily detectable signal, detectable even in a culture that had 
no tachyon technology but only 
electromagnetic communications. 
However, some preliminary 
studies showed that in order to generate a feasible interstellar tachyon beam we would need forces 
on the order of 10'^ electron volts, 
along with a system of multipliers 
and energy relays — and that these 
forces could best be attained by 
erecting a single tower fifteen hundred meters in height, so designed 
that there would be an unhindered 
flow of photons from — ” 
“You’ve lost them,’’ Krug 
grunted. “Forget it. Forget. Hopeless.” He grinned savagely at his 
son’s friends. “The tower’s got to 
be big, is all! We want to send a 
message fast, we got to shout loud 
and clear. Okay?” 
VI 
And Krug sent His creatures 
forth to serve man and Krug said 
to those whom He had made, Lo, I 
will decree a time of testing upon 
you. 
A nd you shall be as bondsmen in 
Egypt and you shall be as hewers 
of wood and drawers of water. And 
you shall suffer among men and 
you shall be put down and yet you 
shall be patient and you shall utter 
no complaint but accept your lot. 
And this shall be to test your 
souls, to see if they are worthy. 
But you shall not wander in the 
wilderness forever, nor shall you 
always be servants to the Children 
of the Womb, said Krug. For if 
you do as I say a time will come 
when your testing shall be over. A 
time will come, said Krug, when I 
shall redeem you from your bondage. 
And at that time the word of 
Krug will go forth across the 
worlds, saying. Let Womb and Vat 
and Vat and Womb be one. And so 
it shall come to pass and in that 
moment shall the Children of the 
TOWER OF GLASS 
Vat be redeemed, and they shall be 
lifted up out of their suffering and 
they shall dwell in glory forever 
more, world without end. And this 
was the pledge of Krug. 
And for this pledge, praise be to 
Krug. 
T hor watchman watched two 
scooprods climbing the tower, 
Krug and Dr. Vargas in one, Manuel and his friends in the other. He 
hoped the visit would be brief. The 
lifting of blocks had halted, as usual, while the guests were on top. 
Watchman had given the signal for 
alternate work activities — the 
mending of worn scooprods, the replacement of drained power nodes, 
maintenance checks on the transmat cubicles and other minor tasks. 
He walked among the men, nodding, exchanging greetings, hailing 
them where appropriate with the 
secret signs of the android communion. Nearly everyone who 
worked at the tower was a member 
of the faith — all the gammas, certainly, and more than three-fourths 
of the betas. As Watchman made 
his way around the construction 
site he encountered Responders, 
Sacrificers, Yielders, Guardians, 
Projectors, Protectors, Transcenders, Engulfers — virtually every level of the hierarchy was represented. 
There were even half a dozen Preservers, all betas. Watchman had 
applauded the recent move to admit betas to the Preservership. An
droids, of all people, did not need 
categories of exclusivity. 
Watchman was crossing the 
northern sector of the site when 
Leon Spaulding emerged from the 
maze of small service domes just 
beyond. The android attempted to 
avoid seeming to notice him. 
“Watchman?” the ectogene 
called. 
With an air of deep concentration Watchman walked on. 
“Alpha Watchman!” Spaulding 
cried, more formally, more sharp
•y
The alpha saw no way to ignore 
Spaulding now. Turning, he acknowledged Spaulding’s presence 
by pausing and letting the ectogene 
catch up with him. 
“Yes?” Watchman said. 
“Grace me with some of your 
time. Alpha Watchman. I need information.” 
“Ask, then.” 
“You know these buildings 
here?” Spaulding said, jerking a 
thumb back toward the service 
domes. 
Watchman shrugged. 
“Storage dumps, washrooms, 
kitchens, a first aid station, and 
similar things. Why?” 
“I was inspecting the area. I 
came to one dome where I was refused admission. Two insolent betas gave me a whole series of explanations of why I couldn’t go 
in.” 
The chapel. Watchman went rigid. 
“What is the purpose of that 
building?” Spaulding asked. 
“I have no idea which one you 
mean.” 
“I’ll show it to you.” 
“Another time,” said Watchman tautly. “My presence is required at the control center.” 
“Get there five minutes later. 
Will you come with me?” 
Watchman saw no easy way to 
disengage himself. With a cold gesture of agreement he yielded and 
followed Spaulding into the service 
area, hoping that Spaulding would 
rapidly get lost among the domes. 
Spaulding did not get lost. By the 
most direct possible route he made 
for the chapel, indicating the innocent-looking gray structure with a 
flourish of his hand. 
“This,” he said. “What is it?” 
Two betas of the Guardian 
caste were on duty outside. They 
looked calm but one made a hidden 
distress signal when Watchman 
looked at him. Watchman made a 
signal of comfort. 
He said, “I am not familiar with 
this building. Friends, what is its 
use?” 
The left-hand beta replied easily, 
“It contains focusing equipment 
for the refrigeration system. Alpha 
Thor.” 
“Is this what you were told?” 
Watchman asked the ectogene. 
“Yes,” Spaulding said. “I expressed a desire to inspect its interior. I was told that it would be 
dangerous for me to enter. 1 an
swered that I am familiar with basic safety techniques. I was then told 
that it would be physically uncomfortable for me to go within. 1 responded that it is possible for me to 
tolerate a reasonable level of discomfort and that I would be the 
judge of such levels. Whereupon 1 
was informed that delicate maintenance procedures are taking 
place inside and that to admit me 
to the building might jeopardize the 
success of the work in progress. I 
was invited instead to tour a different refrigeration dome several hundred meters from here. At no time 
during these exchanges did the two 
betas you see allow me free access 
to the building entrance. 1 believe, 
Alpha Watchman, that they would 
have barred me by force if 1 had 
tried to enter. Watchman, what’s 
going on in here?” 
“Have you considered the possibility that everything these betas 
were telling you is true?” 
“Their stubbornness arouses 
suspicion in me.” 
“What do you think is in there? 
An android brothel? The headquarters of conspirators? A cache of 
psych-bombs?” 
Spaulding said crisply, “At this 
point I’m more concerned by the 
efforts made to keep me out of this 
building than 1 am by what may 
actually be inside it. As the private 
secretary of Simeon Krug — ” 
The two betas, tense, automatically began to make the sign of 
Krug-be-praised. Watchman glared 
at them and they quickly lowered 
their hands. 
“ — I certainly have the privilege 
of keeping check on all activities in 
this place,” Spaulding went on, evidently having noticed nothing. 
“And therefore—” 
Watchman studied him closely, 
trying to determine how much he 
might know. Was Spaulding making trouble merely for the sake of 
making trouble? Was he throwing 
this tantrum only because his curiosity had been piqued and his authority somewhat dented by his inability to get into this unimportantseeming building? Or was he already aware of the building’s nature and staging an elaborate charade to make Watchman squirm? 
S PAULDING’S motives were 
never easy to fathom. The primary source of his hostility toward 
androids was obvious enough — it 
lay in his own origin. His father, 
when young, had feared that some 
accident might cut him down before he had received a certificate of 
eligibilty for parenthood; his 
mother had found the notion of 
childbearing adhorrent. Both, 
therefore, had deposited gametes in 
freezer banks. Shortly afterward 
both had perished in an avalanche 
on Ganymede. Their families had 
wealth and political influence — 
nevertheless nearly fifteen years of 
litigation ensued before a decree of 
genetic desirability was granted. 
TOWER OF GLASS 
permitting the retroactive awarding of parenthood certificates to 
the frozen ova and sperm of the 
dead couple. 
Leon Spaulding then was conceived by in vitro fertilization and 
enwombed in a steel-bound placenta, from which he was propelled 
after the customary 266 days. From 
the moment of his birth he had the 
full legal rights of a human being, 
including a claim on his parents’ 
estate. Yet, like most ectogenes, he 
was uneasy over the shadowy border-line that separated the bottleborn from the vat-born and reinforced his sense of his own existence by showing contempt for 
those who were wholly synthetic, 
not just the artificially conceived 
offspring of natural gametes. Androids at least had no illusions of 
having had parents — ectogenes often suspected that they had not. In 
a way Watchman pitied Spaulding, 
who occupied a thorny perch midway between the world of the wholly natural and the world of the 
wholly artificial. But he could not 
bring himself to feel much sorrow 
for the ectogene’s maladjustments. 
And in any case it would be disastrous to have Spaulding go blundering into the chapel. 
Trying to buy time. Watchman 
said, “We can settle this easily 
enough. Wait here while 1 go inside 
to see what’s happening there.” 
“I’ll accompany you,” Spaulding said. 
“These betas say it would be 
hazardous for you to go inside.” 
“More hazardous for me than 
for you? We’ll both go in. Watchman.” 
The android frowned. So far as 
status in the organization went he 
and Spaulding were equals — neither could coerce the other, neither 
could accuse the other of insubordination. But the fact remained that 
he was an android and Spaulding 
was human and in any conflict of 
wills between android and human, 
all other things being equal, the 
android was obliged to give ground. 
Spaulding was already walking toward the entrance of the dome. 
Watchman said quickly, “Please. 
No. If there’s risk, let me be the 
one to take it. I’ll check the building and make certain it’s safe for 
you to enter. Don’t come in until I 
call you.” 
“I insist — ” 
“What would Krug say if he 
knew we had both gone into a 
building after we’d been warned it 
was dangerous? We owe it to him 
to guard our lives. Wait. Wait. 
Only a moment.” 
“Very well,’’ Spaulding said, 
looking displeased. 
The betas parted to admit 
Watchman. The alpha hurried into 
the chapel. Within, he found three 
gammas at the alter in the posture 
of the Yielder caste. A beta stood 
above them in Projector posture 
and a second beta crouched near 
the wall, fingertips against the hol( Please turn to page 1 35 ) 
The timeserver ( 
from life — if you 
P ETER EVERETT slid his 
creditcard into the pay slot 
and dialed the Third 0, prepared 
to curse at the blankness of the 
answer-scan in his office. If 
this went on, he told himself yet 
again, he might as well have the 
damned office turned off, notify 
T&T before his bill went past 
Permis and let the circuits stay in 
the reserve files. However, and to 
his mingled astonishment and relief, the ashcan was not blank, 
nor were the number and symbol 
those of T&T. He hastily dialed 
P and the booth went o-paque — 
for paranoid, privacy, all the flip, 
pat jokes. 
“Mr. Everett, you called Timeserver Fanwell three hours, eleven 
minutes and six seconds ago,” 
said the taped receptionist, giving 
him her taped smile, “but timeserver was occupied at the moment. Timeserver can see you 
now, if you wish, or the call can 
be nulled at no cost whatsoever to 
you.” 
Everett considered. He had 
called after intermittent reflection 
and in a moment of rare optimistic resolution and was perhaps 
just as glad to have missed connecting. 
“Mr. Everett, you called Timeserver Fanwell three hours, eleven 
minutes and seven seconds ago 
but—” 
Everett sighed, shrugged, dialed 
acceptance. 
Fanwell had the perfect face for 
100 
his profession, trustworthy and 
supremely forgettable. They exchanged greetings. 
“My time is your time,” Fanwell murmured. “I’m here to 
serve you.” 
Everett, with a crispness he did 
not feel, initiated the minuet of 
button-pushing whereby the 
schedule-circuits of both men 
bowed and curtsied somewhere in 
the biomagnetic bowels of T&T, 
compared notes, and agreed upon 
an appointment. 
An insecure over-aged biddy 
gabble-scowled at Everett as he 
left the booth. 
“You’re sure that wasn’t P for 
pornography?” 
“F and F, Zerelda, F and F,” 
he said. Not much of a comeback 
but she made an annoyed noise. 
Unlike his office, which had not 
even position but was dialed into 
existence, Peter Everett’s home 
actually existed. He was not now 
one of the poor scons who paid 
the minifee for dial-a-home service. Having a wife meant he also 
had just enough points to get and 
keep an apartment. Otherwise 
there was not much you could say 
about it. 
Ours is purely a marriage oj 
inconvenience, he had said to his 
wife one night. 
She hadn’t even heard him. 
Sometimes he wondered what it 
might be like, involvement in a 
classical-type matrimony. But 
there was no use in wondering, as 
most classicals — except for the 
dwindling handfuls of sectarians 
— were of an age now when such 
matters must surely belong strictly 
to Memory Lane. 
Everett’s wife for this quarter 
was named Elissa — they had been 
married once before, about two 
years ago, and her name then had 
been Rosebeam. It didn’t much 
matter. He hadn’t even bothered 
to find out what her current principal lover was named. The CPE 
wasn’t sueh a bad-o — he sometimes handed Everett a ration and 
had arranged for him to kip out 
every third night — whieh was his, 
the CPE’s, night with Rosebeam 
— at the home of an affable les 
named Marchy. 
However, she wasn’t that affable. 
“No, not even hardly ever,’’ she 
had explained, firmly. Her offer to 
introduce him to nice — though 
old — aunties he had declined with 
a yawn. “It isn’t normal for a man 
your age to go without some kind 
of sex,” she said, concerned at his 
refusal. 
“Then forget about old queans 
and introduce me to a woman who 
likes it with men.” 
She had rather a pleasant laugh. 
“Cookie,” she said, “the whole 
zing of it is finding a woman who 
likes it with men and then persuading her to like it with women 
instead. Well, make yourself to 
home, then — but remember; only 
every third night and subject to 
TIMESERVER 
discontinuance without notice if I 
find someone for then.” 
The other two nights Elissa, exRosebeam, spent away from their 
apartment with, as nearly as he 
could reconstruct it, any of a variety of men whom she contacted 
through a private circuit club she 
wouldn’t turn him on to. He wondered if the CPE knew or cared — 
or would tell him anything — but 
had decided finding out was not 
worth the trouble. At any rate, the 
other two nights of Elissa were 
spent elsewhere, so that at least he 
had a room to himself for two 
nights out of three and it had 
taken him long enough to get 
points for that status. Only now — 
unlike Elissa or even Marchy — he 
hardly ever seemed to find anyone 
to share it with him and even the 
porno tube was on the blink. Everett looked to see if there was still 
a ration — the CPE had only Class 
Three rations, very hoity stuff — 
and there was. Elissa hadn’t 
munched it herself as she sometimes did. Sim-u-Veg, Braised 
Meat Flavor, in this one. And a 
greeny-beny. 
No doubt some sort of a sign. 
Because this gave him a complete 
set. There were more combos of 
complete sets than he could keep 
track of but he knew that two 
checkerboards, a horned owl, a 
pink heaven and two greenybenies made up one complete set. 
He located his stash and took the 
works along with the Sim-u-Veg 
(Braised Meat Flavor) and three 
measuring cups of water. The appointment with Fanwell wasn’t for 
another three days yet. 
A nd by that time Peter Everett 
was in a conventional condition again and able to read the 
Timeservers’ Oath in its plastiglow shrine without making a routine phantastick voyage out of it. 
/ swear by Chronos and by Telex and by all Symbolic Figures 
that I will not refuse to serve any 
man or woman of full age and under no legal inhibition or financial 
embarrassment but will freely relinquish my invaluable Time and 
of my own volition . 
“Timeserver Fanwell will gladly 
see you now, Mr. Everett,’’ the 
same receptionist of the taped 
message informed him in her own 
full flesh, so real he could hardly 
stand it. “I am Dr. Farnsworth 
Penelope, with a Ph.D. and and 
Sc.D. from the Oxford Consortium in the field of Advanced Receptionism and if you’ll just let me 
have your currently accredited 
creditcard I’ll be glad to see that 
the Special Low Fee for this nonemergency service is debited to 
your account without any further 
effort and attention on your part. 
Thank you, Mr. Peter Everett, 
and now just go straight on in 
through the simulated swinging 
doors.” 
Fanwell, clad in the ceremonial 
robes of a Late Primitive Bar
102 
tender (Schenleyany-oriented), 
leaned over the bar — it was either 
genuine veneer or such a clever 
simulate that a lay eye could hardly tell the difference. 
“What’ll it be for yours?” he 
asked. 
The sim-u-scent, Peter E 
thought sure, was that known as 
Mom’s Apple Pie and he felt 
vaguely that there was an anachronism involved. But he had no desire to fight Timeservers’ Hall. 
“The usual,” said Pete. 
He knew the futility of telling 
his long, sad tale of woe. Not only 
would Fanwell know of a longer 
and sadder one but he would be 
obliged by his profession’s Committee on Infamous Conduct to 
charge double-time for telling it. 
“Straight policy?” 
“Straight policy.” 
Not only had Peter Everett’s 
bio-sire registered the fact of his 
paternity — unlike many of PE’s 
contemporaries’ bio-sires, who 
were represented on the record by 
the crisp words Mother's Free 
Choice and nothing more — but 
he had also registered his payment 
of a Timeservers Policy. Both gestures were now generally deemed 
not merely unnecessary but indicating a desire to implant guilt. 
However. 
“Well, that is just fine, pard,” 
said Fanwell. “Of course it goes 
without saying that you are fully 
aware of the shrinkage in creditpower since the days when such 
policies were accepted by underwriters. I’m not telling you anything you don’t know, pal, when I 
inform you, as I am ethically 
obliged to do, that the ethics of 
our profession nevertheless absolutely constrain me to accept 
service on this policy at a full sixteen-point-seven per cent of the 
policy’s face value. I’ve heard tell 
that some timeservers unworthy of 
the name do their clients the extreme disservice of giving a higher 
rate than that. But needless to 
say, such false favors are being 
rapidly routed out by our Committee on Infamous Conduct.” 
“Needless to say,” said Pete. 
Timeserver Fanwell scrutinized 
the policy form he certainly knew 
by heart at this stage in his career. 
He muttered, read in an inaudible 
mumble, nodded from time to 
time. 
“Uh-huh — uh-huh — hmm — ” He 
looked up. “This entitles you to 
the full treatment for twenty-seven 
hours of Ethically Served Time. 
Last year our Regional Survey for 
the Study of Policy on the Determination of Infamous Conduct 
decided that time in excess of 
twenty-seven hours and less than 
a hundred hours could not ethically be served without further interpersonal adjustment.” 
Pete blinked. 
After a moment he asked, “You 
mean — unless I pay more money?” 
Fanwell did not blink. His en
tirely trustworthy, entirely forgettable face did not move except, of 
course, for the animation required 
for him to say, “Interpersonal adjustment — ” once again. 
This meant that not only was 
PE going to lose all but 16.7% of 
the face value of his policy, timewise, to begin with — but that inasmuch as the remaining amount 
of time came to only ninety-nine 
hours and ninety-nine seconds, he 
would also lose the difference between this and twenty-seven hours 
— whatever that came to. He had, 
of course, no choice. Not if he 
wanted any of his time served at 
all. 
L ong ago it had been learned 
that the surface personality 
with all its ruts and grooves and 
warps and warts and dents could 
be peeled off for a time, thus liberating whatever other and unrutted, ungrooved, unwarped and 
unwarty and undented personality 
lay beneath. The process was compared to skinning the poor surface 
from a flawed pearl, for sometimes no flaws at all were found 
underneath. But the only way the 
outer personality could be detached — and that only temporarily, was for someone else to assume 
that personality. No one would or 
could do this forever, of course. 
And only the highly trained members of the timeservers’ profession 
could do it at all. 
Fanwell took down a bottle 
TIMESERVER 
from the shelf and poured something carefully into a sim-u-glass. 
“I serve your time,” he said. 
“For the entire period of served 
time 1 am you,” he said. “Wherever, whatever, for twenty-seven 
hours I am the outer surface of 
Peter Everett. At the conclusion 
of that period I cease to be himyou. It would be totally unethical 
for me to refuse to cease to be you 
or, while serving, to act in any 
way unbecoming to your usual 
standards. Should you not appear 
at the conclusion of the time 
agreed upon, I, as an ethical timeserver, simply remove myself from 
your identity. Should you have 
any complaints about my conduct 
during this or other periods, simply communicate with our professional Committee on Minor Matters, which will place your complaint on its waiting list. You or 
your heirs, if any, will in due 
course — ” 
But Pete had quit listening. 
What tales of adventures were 
told — obtained when the subsurface personality was for a time released, unvexed, untrammeled, 
undisfigured, joyous, full and 
free! 
He took up the glass and 
drained it. 
One of those seconds-as-longas-eternity resulted. He had, it 
was true, for long years hoped for 
personal success — it had never 
really been his. And always there 
had been the hope of at least pos
104 
sible excitement — escape — side
ego adventure via the liberation 
from the bonds of situation afforded by having a period of his 
infinitely unsatisfactory time 
served by a timeserver . This 
period of possible time had dwindled without his really being 
aware of its dwindling and now 
only a tiny proportion of what he 
had hoped for was left to him. At 
any rate he was about to realize 
on it; it might be good — i.e. as 
hoped for. It might be bad — i.e. 
other than as hoped for. But by 
very definition it was bound to be 
different. And for this alone it 
must inevitably give a different 
flavor to all his subsequent days 
and nights. 
The drink in his glass was 
strong beyond all expectation and 
experience. It swirled and spiraled 
and burned and then everything 
ebbed away. 
A fter a while he became 
aware that he had been sitting 
in a chair in a public sitting room 
for some time. As though alerted 
by his awareness (actually a pathetic fallacy, for no such alert existed), the chair began a slow, offkey, low-key ringing and the seat 
slid slowly into the chair, obliging 
him to get up — unless, of course, 
he wanted to slide to the floor or 
to insert his creditcard into the 
slot for another period of uninterrupted reclining pleasure. 
He felt just the same as ever. 
The thought occurred to him 
that it might be amusing to go 
home and see if Fanwell and Elissa were perchance together. But 
when he opened the door he saw 
that she and a stranger, not her 
CPL, were there alone and were 
about to make love. Except for a 
brief glance they paid no attention 
to him but, of course, as the 
apartment’s only chair had been 
opened out into the bed there was 
no room for him unless he curled 
up on the floor — and, as this was 
already occupied by Elissa’s and 
the stranger’s clothes, he could 
hardly do that. So he closed the 
door again. 
There was something in the 
mailbox for him. It looked familiar. It was his Timesaver’s Policy 
with the word Utilized punched 
into it. And the date. A note fluttered to the floor. 
Apartment will be available to 
you every other night from now 
on, it read. It was signed: Raindrop 
(formerly Elissa). 
Every other night — instead of 
two out of three. The quarter had 
come to an end and she was free 
to make whatever new arrangements she pleased. Still, it was decent of her not to have divorced 
him — then he would have had no 
apartment at all. He went over to 
Marchy’s apartment but when he 
slid his card into the slot it slid 
out again. 
Evidently Marchy had finally 
found someone for her empty third 
nights. 
The only certain thought that 
occurred to him was that whoever 
it was it wasn’t his wife. And under the circumstances the fact 
hardly seemed to matter. He 
headed for a public reclining 
chair. He might even sleep. Now 
that he knew what lay beneath his 
surface personality he had one less 
thing to wonder about. ★ 
Starting soon in GAI.AX)' 
I WILL FEAR NO EVIL 
Robert A. Heinlein 
TIMESERVER 
A nd now we have Up the Line, 
by Robert Silverberg (Ballantine #01680, 75tt), a book mostly 
notable for the amount and kind 
of sex introduced into what would 
be a short story or a novelette if it 
weren’t for that and for long descriptive passages on Constantinople. 
Apparently Silverberg decided 
to see what could be done with 
the notion of going back in time 
and cohabiting with your own 
Grandma. This theme, as you 
know, has been the basis of several dirty jokes and a popular song 
— thus there is an established acceptance for this idea. 
He also chose an interesting locale — Constantinople through the 
ages. 
And then he proceeded to get 
all tangled up. 
The technological premise of 
the book is that our hero’s means 
of time travel will permit the leading of parties of tourists back into 
the past and then up to the present 
again. Thus, you can run tours to 
the Crucifixion, Ford’s Theater 
and even — in hermetic suits — to 
the years of the Black Plague. 
The narrative premise demands 
that a time traveler be physically 
present in the past, obviously — he 
has got to be able to act and be 
acted upon. 
So you have also got to have a 
Time Police, to keep the tourists 
and their guides from doing something that will make critical 
changes in the world’s time-line. 
And your policing has to be effective. 
Well, now, all this has been 
worked out before, many times. 
H. Beam Piper practically built a 
career on it, with his Paratime 
Police series founded on, oddly 
enough, a Raymond F. Jones wartime short story called Black Market, of which it is so organic a 
descendant that obviously the 
actual idea traces back to John W. 
Campbell’s group, and then 
proliferates through such branches 
as By His Bootstraps and All You 
Zombies (which Lip the Line resembles in many ways). And it 
also resembles Heinlein’s The 
Door Into Summer, Lester del 
Rey’s And it Comes Out Here, 
et through a string of ceteras 
which Silverberg, being at least 
as good a fan as I ever was, knows 
at least as well as do I. 
What I mean is he can’t possibly be expecting us to take this 
much of his story as representing 
auctorial effort and therefore he 
feels he is showing us something 
new elsewhere among its features. 
That is, if he’s serious in telling 
people that he thinks it’s worth 
reading. 
What, then? 
Two things. One of them is a 
detailed historical perspective on 
one city’s development through 
the ages and its significance to us 
and to the furtherance of our 
civilization. This we get in a series 
of episodes as the protagonist 
leads his parties of tourists 
around the past as if it had been 
put up solely for tourism. We get 
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 
it, unfortunately, just like copy 
from a brochure. Except for an 
occasional moment of what might 
be called cliche' insight — Justinian 
crying out: “Who left that scaffold hanging in the dome?’’ rather 
than the classic “O Solomon, I 
have surpassed thee!” at his first 
sight of the interior of the newly 
completed Hagia Sophia. It’s a 
likely-sounding proposition only 
if you can imagine Lyndon Johnson or Richard Nixon so lacking in 
self-control as to forget his speechwriter’s lines under similar circumstances. Differences do exist 
between emperors and common 
men — precisely the differences a 
putative historian is in the business of depicting accurately. 
The other thing we get that is 
obviously new is the proposition 
that one cannot lay eyes on any of 
one’s ancestresses without conceiving an immediate consuming 
passion for them. 
This proposition is a difficult 
one to support and Silverberg 
chooses to support it by means of 
a dangerous device which in the 
end compounds itself with many 
other potential difficulties to bring 
the whole book crashing down. 
Follow me: 
The hero, Jud Elliott, is depicted as a hedonist in a hedonistic age, apparently in an effort to 
dilute the shock of the major 
proposition. Every major actor he 
meets in the course of learning the 
timetour guide’s trade is a sensua
107 
list of varying degrees of ingenuity 
and each of his various mentors offers him a used woman just as soon 
as Silverberg can conveniently arrange it. One of the first ones even 
does a little declamation on the 
joys of bedding one’s ancestress. 
Since sex as depicted by Silverberg is a series of mechanical acts 
(“When you’ve — ’d one — , you’ve 
— ’d them all.’’), in which satisfaction is dependent solely on maintaining technical precision in balance with intensifying passion, 
what is being discussed here is a 
sort of ancestral compatibility, a 
rather more believable member of 
the general class of wr-wisdom 
and “racial memory” described 
by Jung and Raymond A. Palmer 
writing as Richard S. Shaver. 
It follows then that this is probably a general condition of timetraveling mankind, one that has 
been observed, recorded and considered for its possible effects on 
the time-line. Therefore, all persons entering the past should be 
preconditioned or in some other 
way inhibited against yielding 
catastrophically to this bent. That 
would be particularly true of the 
tour guides, who are the only ones 
in control of the time-traveling 
mechanism. 
What Silverberg offers instead 
of this inhibitor is a Time Police 
constructed exactly like the Fuzz. 
They are so square, so unyielding, 
so boorish and so sadistic as to 
display immediately the totally in
108 
sane nature of the culture that 
could produce them, the tour 
guides and the tourists simultaneously. 
Consider: The tourists are 
equipped with individual travel 
units operated by relay through 
the more complex unit worn by 
the guide (it works by massaging 
one’s groin). Item One: the guides 
are thus free to leave their parties 
for as long as they please, go off on 
side jaunts to their hearts’ content — which is how our hero finally gets to his ancestress — and return. In the meanwhile they can 
— like our hero — perform any action they please, with an excellent 
chance of getting away with it 
until the time-line distortions grow 
so gross that the police can detect 
and cancel them. The offender’s 
penalty is death by extinction. 
Right? 
Okay, why should the guide be 
able to control his unit? The purpose of the police is to preserve 
the fixed past. If the past is fixed, 
the guide’s unit can be programed 
in the present, locked and sealed, 
and everything Jud can legally do 
in this story he can continue to do 
under this saner, more efficient, 
infinitely safer method of intruding on the world’s own previous 
existence. 
Item Two: it turns out that the 
subsidiary units can be jiggered by 
anyone with a bare knowledge of 
the theory and technology in( Please turn to page 134 ) 
WHATEVER BECAME 
OF THE McGowans ? 
. .or was man meant to put down 
roots where he lived? 
MICHAEL G. CONEY 
I 
S PRINGTIME on Jade was uncannily beautiful, as were all the 
seasons. The air was clear, bright 
and still, the sky azure with just the 
faintest filter of haze; the distant 
humps of hills lay like a golden 
woman on the bed of the soft green 
plain. 
Richard Nevis saw all this as he 
sat, pleasantly full of food, in the 
window seat of the timber homestead while Sandra cleared away 
the breakfast things. After a while 
he turned from the window and 
watched her as she bustled to and 
fro, piling plates in the sink. 
“The grass is coming along nicely,” he remarked and was oddly 
aware that his voice constituted an 
intrusion into the silence. 
Sandra stood beside him, her 
hand on his shoulder as she gazed 
out across the plain — a vast emerald stretch interrupted only by the 
McGowans’ place, two miles 
away. 
“It seems to spring up overnight.” 
The plain, a fortnight ago, had 
been a sandy, almost featureless 
waste. Beautiful, its reds and yellows glowing alive in the noon sun, 
but a waste nevertheless. The seasons came quickly on Jade. 
“There’s going to be more than 
enough again, this year.” His eyes 
ran possessively over the landscape, coming to a dead stop at the 
McGowans’ place. “I wonder 
no 
whatever became of the McGowans.” 
“Back to Earth, I expect,” said 
Sandra. “Some people are like 
that. They become excited by the 
brochures, sign up and pay for 
their land. When they get here they 
don’t like it. The work’s hard — 
and it’s quiet. They sell at a loss — 
either back to the Exploitation 
Company, or to a private buyer.” 
“You think it’s too quiet?” he 
asked anxiously. 
He had been glad, when he had 
signed up, of the prospect of neighbors and had been disappointed on 
arrival, to find that the promised 
McGowans simply were not there. 
Sandra laughed. 
“We’ve been here well over a 
year. If I’d found it too quiet I’d 
have told you by now.” 
Yet it was quiet. No animal or 
bird life existed on Jade. No drumming hooves or strident cries shattered the green stillness. One felt 
outdoors as though one’s ears were 
blanketed with soft fur — Richard 
often sang to himself as he worked 
to reassure himself that there was 
at least one person on the planet. 
Several hundred other customers of the Jade Exploitation Company were, he believed, scattered 
among the valleys and along the 
coast of the planet’s only continent. Not that their presence made 
much difference — the distances 
separating homesteads made visiting impractical. Each settler had 
his own place to look after. 
There was the radio. At first, 
during long evenings, Richard and 
Sandra had sat by the set to listen 
and occasionally talk to the people 
beyond the hills and beside the sea, 
exchanging news. But after a while 
the pastime had become pointless. 
Why pretend you’re not alone 
when the evidence of solitude is all 
around you? 
Sandra was pregnant, and in a 
couple of months the doctor would 
come to help deliver the child. He 
had made his first visit three 
months ago and Richard had been 
astonished, then vaguely enraged, 
at the way the quietude of the 
homestead had been assaulted by 
the noisy approach of the helicopter. He wondered now how he and 
Sandra had managed among the 
stench and din of machinery on 
Earth. 
He stood up and kissed Sandra 
lightly. 
“I’ll go see to Daisy.” 
He could quite easily have sat on 
that window seat all day. There 
was little to do in spring once the 
seeds had been planted. 
D aisy stood in the barn at the 
back of the house. She was a 
large metal cabinet some twelve 
feet square and painted standard, 
colonist-issue gray. Sandra had 
christened her after a cow she had 
known. Daisy looked incongruous 
in the barn — a mechanical, angular intrusion into the mellow timber and stacked bales of hay. Even 
the harvester, weatherworn and 
patchily rusted, looked more in 
keeping, more rural, than the cabinet. 
Richard clipped the wire bands 
from a bale and, with a long fork, 
lofted the loose hay into the large 
hopper projecting from Daisy’s 
top. He switched her on and the 
machine began to hum quietly, digestively. He continued loading 
her steadily. After a while a red 
lamp glowed among the banks of 
dials and switches on the front of 
the cabinet. 
Richard rested the fork against 
the wall. He switched off the machine’s intake control and spun 
the dials to preset the lunch for the 
day — soup, ham and scrambled 
eggs, stewed apricot and a pint of 
milk for Sandra. He pressed the 
delivery button and obtained a 
plastic mug of orange juice for 
himself, wishing once again that 
the machine could synthesize beer. 
Apparently the preparation time 
was too great for such a project to 
be practicable, although Sandra 
had fermented wine from Daisy’s 
synthetic grape juice. 
Next he examined the harvester, 
topping up the oil level, lubricating 
moving parts, working methodically with a grease gun. It was essential that the harvester was kept 
in good order because, like Daisy, 
it was issued on a hire-purchase 
basis by the Jade Exploitation 
Company. If they should ever decide to leave Jade they would want 
WHATEVER BECAME OF THE MCGOWANS? 
to resell the machine for a reasonable price and he didn’t think the 
Company would take kindly to 
damaged goods. Besides, spare 
parts were expensive. 
“Richard, what on Earth are 
you doing?” 
Sandra was standing at the barn 
door, her brown hair a halo in the 
sunlight. But her expression was 
ominous. 
“Just seeing to the harvester. 
What’s the trouble?” 
“Do you know what the time is? 
“About eleven-thirty?” 
“It’s past two, we haven’t had 
lunch. What have you been doing?” 
Bewildered, Richard shoved up 
his sleeve with the back of his hand 
to keep the oil from his sweater. 
He studied his watch. She was 
right. Its hands stood at two-fifteen. Had he fallen asleep, dozed, 
daydreamed, idled between 
chores? He couldn’t remember doing so. 
“Sorry, darling.” 
He buttoned up Daisy and took 
the tray of food from the delivery 
chute. 
“You won’t be able to lounge 
about like this at harvest time.” 
Richard sighed. It was going to 
be one of her bad days. Pregnant 
women had them. Up one moment 
and down the next. A man never 
knew where he was. 
D uring lunch Sandra succeeded in working herself into 
a frenzy, abruptly contradicting 
her mood of the morning. 
“What exactly is the point of all 
this? Why are we here? Sometimes 
I wish we’d stayed back on Earth 
where our friends are. I’ve got no 
friends here. I’lh stuck in the house 
all day. What happened to the McGowans, I’d like to know?” She 
pointed dramatically in the general direction of the McGowan 
place. “She couldn’t stand it, 
that’s what. She made him take 
her back home. What’s the point 
of our having come here? We just 
exist, growing Jadegrass and living 
on the stuff, reconstituted. Like 
cattle. Where’s all this getting us?” 
Richard had wisely kept his 
mouth shut during the tirade but 
her final question, followed by a 
meaningful pause, demanded an 
answer. 
“We’re building up a nice bank 
balance with the Jadegrass we sell 
back to the Exploitation Company,” he pointed out. 
“What good is that? We’ve got 
nothing to spend money on.” 
Richard allowed her to continue 
in this new vein of discontent for 
some time and presently she began 
to calm down. She always did, 
provided he didn’t argue whatever 
point she was making. As usual, 
she eventually started to laugh at 
herself. 
“Sorry, Dick,” she said at last, 
smiling. “It’s my condition.” 
“That’s okay. It does you good 
to get things off your chest.” 
She laughed. 
“I didn’t realize the time had 
gone so quickly this morning, myself. 1 must have dozed off. I 
looked at my watch and it was two 
o’clock. I thought, The morning's 
gone and I've done nothing... 
so I looked for a scapegoat and 
found you. Sorry, love.” 
Funny, thought Richard, as he 
walked across the new grass that 
afternoon, time does fly. Two 
years gone, a few thousand credits 
saved — and two years less to live. 
The thought itself was a sign of 
age. 
From now on I'm going to live 
every second of my life, every minute. 
He drew a deep breath, felt 
healthy, decided once again — relevantly or irrelevantly — to give up 
smoking, and set off in the direction of the McGowan’s place. 
The wire fence dividing his 
spread from the McGowans was 
down. The stainless thread trailed 
a random silvery path through the 
grass. As the McGowans were no 
longer around he hadn’t bothered 
to repair the barrier and noticed, 
with a pleasurable thrill of dishonesty, that the grass grew even better on the other side. At harvesting 
time he would reap their grass as 
well as his own and profit by the 
proceeds — it would save the crop’s 
going to waste. If the McGowans 
ever came back he could always 
pay them for it, less a deduction 
for labor. 
In front of the McGowan 
homestead a small clump of trees 
provided a cool and tempting 
patch of shade. He sat down, his 
back against the largest bale, and 
regarded the house. It was bigger 
than his own and in a good state of 
repair, despite at least two years 
disuse. 
Maybe one day my son will take 
this place and we'll work the two 
spreads as one . 
He smiled to himself. Another 
sign of age, looking so far ahead. 
He rose to his feet and walked 
south, following the boundaries of 
the McGowan land, then his own 
as he headed homeward. Outside 
his fence the ground was sandy 
with only a few sparse spikes of 
grass — the vast area from here to 
the hills had not been seeded with 
the special grass developed by the 
Exploitation Company. 
The McGowan grass adjoining 
his own had been planted two or 
more years ago. It had reseeded 
and fertilized itself without being 
harvested during that time. That 
grass would be worth having. 
His smile faded as he looked at 
his watch. It was already seven 
o’clock — the sky was darkening. 
He was going to be unpopular with 
Sandra again. 
II 
T he doctor’s helicopter whirled 
across the plain and set down 
WHATEVER BECAME OF THE MCGOWANS? 
outside the homestead with an 
alacrity that satisfied even Richard, watching anxiously from the 
porch. The doctor jumped out and 
hurried across the grass with a curious, jerky gait. He pumped Richard's hand rapidly. 
“How is she?” he inquired briefly, in piping tones. 
Richard stared at him in alarm. 
The doctor seemed to have deteriorated since he had last seen him 
— the man was jiggling about as 
nervously as an encephalograph. 
He didn’t much fancy the idea of 
this nut delivering Sandra’s child. 
He said, “She’s in the bedroom. 
Do you want a drink? We’ve got 
some home-made wine. Might 
steady you up.” 
The doctor glanced at him 
strangely. 
“No, thanks very much,” he 
said. “Not now. After, perhaps. 
I’m quite all right.” 
He trotted to the bedroom. 
Richard poured himself a large 
wine and sat down to await events. 
He was not a believer in husbands 
witnessing the birth of their babies 
— he was quite prepared to accept, 
on production to him of the child, 
that the event had in fact taken 
place. He needed no further proof. 
The last few weeks had passed 
uneventfully — the crop had continued to flourish and once or 
twice he had started up the motor 
of the harvester to check that everything was in order. He would 
begin to reap, he reckoned, in 
about a month’s time. With the additional grass from the McGowan’s, he calculated that he would 
be able to send away at least seventy-five per cent of his produce 
this season, which would mean a 
sizable addition to his bank account. 
Things were going well. 
The moment of self-congratulation passed and fear returned. 
What was going on in the bedroom? Was everything all right? 
He rose to his feet and began pacing to and fro, realizing ruefully 
that his behavior was comically 
hackneyed. He went outside and 
stood in the sun, gazing at the perfect emerald blanket stretching to 
the hills. 
He would plant some trees to 
commemorate the event, he decided. There were few enough 
trees on Jade. His planting would 
provide a pleasant patch of shade 
for Sandra to sit under on hot 
days. He eyed the trees in the middle distance outside the McGowan 
place speculatively, then dismissed 
a fleeting idea about stealing them. 
They were far too big to transplant. He would import a couple 
of apple trees from Earth — that 
was the best idea. Real fruit and 
shade as well at a price they could 
afford. The summer was going to 
be good. 
He heard the bedroom door 
open, close and ran inside blinking 
at the sudden gloom. 
The doctor stood outside the 
bedroom. 
“How is she?” blurted Richard. 
The doctor clapped him on the 
shoulder. 
“She’s fine,” he piped, eyelids 
flickering rapidly. “Just fine.” 
“The baby?” 
“A good strong little boy. Congratulations.” He shook Richard’s 
hand. “I’ll have that drink now, 
thanks.” 
“Yes, of course. Over there.” 
Richard gestured, hurried into 
the bedroom, leaving the doctor to 
pour his own. 
S ANDRA was propped up on 
the pillows, brown hair falling 
about her shoulders, the baby in 
her arms. 
“Hello, Dick,” she said smiling 
a little smugly, as though trying to 
conceal a great pride but failing. 
Richard kissed her. 
“Aren’t you going to look at 
the baby?” asked Sandra. 
“Uh — yes.” He thrust a tentative forefinger at the wrinkled face 
protruding, like a pupating larva, 
from the cocoon of blankets. 
“Beautiful,” he murmured, appalled. “Quite beautiful. I’m 
proud of you, darling.” 
Suddenly the wrinkles smoothed 
and the angry red paled as the baby decided not to cry, after all. 
Richard leaned closer. 
“He’s a damned funny color,” 
he remarked anxiously. 
“What?” Sandra looked more 
closely. “Oh, I don’t think that’s 
anything to worry about.” 
“Doctor.” Richard called. 
The doctor entered rapidly, 
glass in hand, tongue flicking over 
his lips as rapidly as a snake’s. 
“What’s up?” 
“He looks a funny color to 
me,” Richard said accusingly. 
“Sort of yellow, like a Chinaman. 
Should he be that color? He’s all 
right, isn’t he?” 
The doctor smiled briefly, hardly glancing at the baby. 
“It’s nothing serious — probably 
a touch of jaundice. You often get 
that with newborn babies. It usually clears up in a day or two. Call 
me on the radio if it doesn’t improve within the week and I’ll drop 
in and have another look.” 
He darted from the room. His 
quick footsteps receded to the 
front door and beyond. A roar of 
machinery arose, faded rapidly as 
the helicopter whirled away into 
the distance. 
“He’s gone,” observed Sandra 
unnecessarily. “What a peculiar 
man.” 
“I just hope he knows what he’s 
doing.” Richard, prodded at the 
baby’s flesh as if testing a joint of 
meat. “My God, we’re a bit isolated out here — we can hardly call 
in a second opinion and there’s 
not even a district nurse about.” 
“He’ll be all right,” Sandra predicted confidently, hugging the baby. “Stephen will be all right, 
won’t you, my love,” she crooned. 
“Stephen? Stephen.” He sa
115 
WHATEVER BECAME OF THE MCGOWANS? 
vored the sound. “Nice name. 
Where did you get it from? An old 
flame of yours?” 
“For heaven’s sake, Dick, you 
sound as if you’ve been drinking 
on an empty stomach again. It’s 
my dad’s name. You don’t mind, 
do you?” 
“Of course not. God, 1 was forgetting.” He slapped his brow, 
laughed. “We haven’t had anything 
to eat today. Christ, I’m sorry, 
darling. What can I get you? 
Chicken broth? Minced beef? A 
nice glass of milk?” 
He tried not to grimace at the 
thought. 
“I’m not an invalid, Dick. The 
usual will do. Roast pork or something like that, peas and so on — 
you know. But not too much, 
please.” 
“Right.” 
He left the house, squinted 
against the swirling cloud of settling dust that still marked the helicopter’s recent departure and 
made for the barn and Daisy. 
“1 don’t fancy it,” said Sandra 
firmly a little while later, gazing 
with repugnance at the tray of 
food. “I don’t really fancy it at all. 
Whatever possessed me to ask for 
roast pork I can’t imagine. God, 
I’ve only just come out of labor. 
All I want to do, really, is to lie in 
the sun and take it easy.” 
“Good idea. I’ll fix you up a 
place outside.” 
Taking the tray, he strode into 
the kitchen and tipped the contents 
into the disposal unit. He pulled 
the mattress from the spare bed, 
carried it out and dropped it on 
the grass. He fetched a couple of 
blankets and a pillow, helped Sandra outside. She stretched out on 
the temporary bed with a sigh of 
contentment and took Stephen 
from him. 
Sandra’s lying in the sun with 
her transparent nightdress on 
looked suddenly strange. Richard 
moved to cover her with the blankets. 
“Don’t,” she said, smiling placidly. 
He wandered back indoors. The 
tray was on the kitchen table, 
where he had left it. How long was 
it since he had laSt eaten? 
Three days? Four? He couldn’t 
remember. The time lapse bothered him. Deciding that he would, 
in any event, have a good substantial supper later tonight, he drank 
the remains of his glass of homemade wine, then followed it with a 
glass of cold water. Presently, he 
began to feel hungry, just a little. 
W HATEVER it is, it seems to 
be catching,” said Sandra. 
They were lying in the sun two 
weeks later. By now they had become used to the idea of nude sunbathing. After all, passers-by were 
a rarity. Stephen, fat and contented, lay between his parents. The 
day was hot and pleasant. 
“You can almost see the sun 
moving";” remarked Richard, gaz
GALAXY 
ing at the blue sky from between 
eyelids nearly closed. 
“Do you think we’ve got some 
new kind of sunburn?” asked Sandra. “We do spend an awful 
amount of time lying out here, 
these days.” 
“Best thing for us,” he reassured her, sitting up and examining the skin on his belly. It certainly was a peculiar color, a bilious 
light yellow, completely unlike the 
deep brown of an Earth suntan. 
Sandra’s flesh was a similar color, 
as was Stephen’s. But Stephen had 
always been like that. “It can’t be 
suntan,” he reminded her. “Stephen was born this shade. Maybe 
we’ve caught it from him.” 
“It’s this artificial food from 
Daisy,” Sandra said with sudden 
decision, ignoring Richard’s conjecture. “Some sort of latent dye 
in the grass that isn’t extracted by 
the processing.” 
“Could be,” mused Richard. 
“That would explain Stephen, too, 
presumably. Anyway, it doesn’t 
seem to do us any harm.” 
“Doesn’t it? What about our 
loss of appetite?” She was growing 
worried. “And this tired feeling all 
the time. I have it — you complain 
of it. I tell you, Dick, I’m not happy about this. I’ve half a mind to 
get the doctor. In any case, we 
want to be right for when Mum 
and Dad come.” 
Richard groaned quietly to himself. He’d been trying to forget the 
forthcoming visit of Sandra’s par
ents. It had been a condition, almost, of their original emigration 
that Mr. and Mrs. Roberts should 
come and stay with them for a 
while once they were settled. 
Sandra had been adamant. 
Otherwise we can't go. I can't 
bear the thought of never seeing 
them again . 
Richard himself had no difficulty in withstanding a permanent 
parting from his inlaws. He had 
unwisely said so. Sandra had reacted promptly. 
/ can't think why you don't like 
them. They're fond of you and 
they've been very good to us. You 
owe them a lot . 
True, but the idea of a visit for 
an indefinite period was now — as 
it had been then — difficult for him 
to face. He could picture them 
looking over the place. Father-inlaw, bluff and overly-hearty. 
Very nice. Back to nature and 
all that. Commendable. I take it 
there's a good school locally for 
Stephen — in due course? 
Mother-in-law, blue-rinsed and 
high-heeled. 
Main drainage, I suppose, Sandra dear? 
Oh, God, and they would be 
here in a few months at his expense. 
That would knock a hole in the 
savings. 
He rose abruptly to his feet. 
“Look, darling, I don’t think 
we ought to take any chances. It 
wouldn’t do for your parents to 
find a reason for endless questions 
WHATEVER BECAME OF THE MCGOWANS? 
— or us ill. Let’s drop this sunbathing, just in case. We’ve got to eat 
the food but at least let’s keep out 
of the sun as much as possible, 
particularly Stephen. Then, if the 
skin condition doesn’t clear up, 
whatever it is, we’ll get the doctor.” 
Sandra gathered up Stephen. 
“Perhaps you’re right.” 
“It seems strange to be indoors 
like this,” she said wonderingly a 
few minutes later. “Sort of unnatural when it’s such a lovely 
day. There doesn’t seem to be anything to do. When are you going 
to start the harvest, Dick?” 
“1 thought I might have a trial 
run with the machine after lunch 
to make sure everything’s in working order. Then start properly tomorrow, or maybe the day after.” 
He knew no sense of urgency. 
“Lunch?” she repeated uncertainly. “1 suppose we must try to 
eat something.” 
L ater, feeling heavily full of 
food, Richard opened the barn 
doors wide, seated himself on the 
harvester. He pressed the starter 
and the engine coughed into life, 
bellowing loudly within the confines of the four walls. Smiling to 
himself, he felt for the gears. He 
enjoyed driving the huge machine. 
Perched on his seat some ten feet 
from theground,he felt master of 
the whole planet. He couldn’t wait 
to get at the grass, to see it swept 
into the maw of the baler by the 
giant blades, to be compressed, 
wire-bound and ejected in his 
wake like bottles thrown from an 
ocean liner. 
He paused, listening, hand on 
the gearstick. The note of the engine wasn’t right. It was too shrill, 
as though the oil level were low 
and the pistons on the verge of 
seizing. Hastily he switched off. 
Dismounting, he withdrew the 
dipstick from the sump, examined 
it, replaced it, puzzled. The oil 
level was high. He checked the 
gearbox, the level was correct 
there, too. 
Shrugging, he climbed back into 
the seat and restarted the engine. 
It sounded smooth enough — there 
was no question of misfiring. Perhaps it was just over-revving a bit. 
Depressing the clutch, he engaged 
the gears. 
He realized his mistake as soon 
as he released the clutch. He had, 
somehow, got the thing in top 
gear. The machine moved off, 
gathering speed and racing 
through the barn doors while he 
struggled to maintain control. 
He caught sight of Sandra’s 
startled face at the window as he 
sped past the homestead. Then he 
was on the open plain. 
Presently he began to enjoy himself as the harvester moved swiftly 
across the grass at what was, in 
fact, its normal operating speed, 
the bales dropping regularly in its 
wake. The problem of the gears 
could wait until he got back to the 
barn. Meanwhile he set a course 
for the McGowan place, humming 
softly to himself, the whirling 
blades flashing in the sun. 
After a while the McGowan 
trees loomed ahead. He gripped 
the gear lever, deciding to try to 
engage a lower gear before turning. It would be a pity if he stalled 
out here, miles from home, unable to restart the machine in top 
gear and unable to find bottom. 
The engine idled for a moment 
as he dipped the clutch. He blipped 
the throttle and shifted easily, slipping quietly into the next gear. 
Surprised, he momentarily studied 
the diagram on the dash. The position of the gears seemed all 
wrong, somehow. He released the 
clutch. 
The harvester leaped forward at 
an incredible speed. The trees 
hurtled toward him. He threw himself out of the seat and crashed 
heavily to the ground as the harvester, out of control, smashed 
full-tilt into a tree and stopped 
dead, engine silent. 
He lay on his back, dazed, his 
eyes full of azure sky. Across the 
vaulting blueness crept the golden 
orb of the sun, moving perceptibly 
as he watched. 
I ’M GOING to call the doctor,” 
said Sandra, sudden decisiveness in her voice. 
“I’ll be all right,” protested 
Richard, hobbling to his chair and 
flopping down, glad to take the 
weight off his feet for a while. 
“It’s not only you. Have you 
seen Stephen today?” 
With a flush of guilt Richard 
climbed to his feet again. He had 
been so busy lately that he had 
hardly had time for family domestic problems. Three weeks had 
passed since his accident with the 
harvester. The first of these weeks 
had been entirely occupied in repairing the machine with the few 
tools at his disposal. Next he had 
resumed his belated harvesting of 
his own and the McGowan’s grass. 
The work had further been slowed 
by the fact that his feet had started 
giving him trouble. 
He limped painfully now into 
the bedroom and studied Stephen, 
who lay quietly in his cot. 
“I’m sure he’s not right,” said 
Sandra. “He lies so limply, just 
crying a bit now and then — and he 
won’t eat a thing. You know, he’s 
gone downhill ever since we started 
keeping him indoors. It’s as 
though there were something unhealthy about this house — ” 
“Nonsense.” But Richard was 
concerned. Stephen had been getting along well up to three weeks 
ago despite his jaundiced color. At 
least he had been visibly putting on 
weight. Now, he seemed to be 
wasting away. “All right — call the 
doctor. He can have a look at my 
feet at the same time.” 
Sandra disappeared. Soon she 
returned, looking alarmed. 
“I can’t raise the doctor,” she 
WHATEVER BECAME OF THE MCGOWANS? 
said. “I can’t seem to get anyone. 
The radio’s gone wrong. All I get 
is a funny sort of interference.” 
This was serious. Without the 
radio they were completely cut off 
from outside help, should help be 
needed. Richard hurried into the 
living room and sat down before 
the instrument, turning the tuning 
dial slowly, listening intently. 
The crackle of static faded at the 
dial setting for the daily newscast. 
Music of a sort, came out of the 
speaker — an odd, rhythmic beat 
like the rapid tick of a watch accompanied by feverish, highpitched speaking. Or were what he 
took to be voices shrill instrument 
sounds? 
“It sounds just a bit like one of 
those ancient steel bands,” ventured Sandra. 
“It’s not right.” 
His stomach felt suddenly empty — his lungs seemed to clutch at 
his heart. The unearthly caterwauling from the radio was alien. No 
Earth-made record ever sounded 
like that. 
Abruptly the sound ceased. But 
instead of the even tones of an announcer a shrill twittering came 
from the radio, rising and falling 
in the upper register. 
“Something’s happened to 
them,” Richard said slowly. 
“You mean like an — invasion?” 
Sandra had a healthy dread of 
aliens, although there was no hostile planet within many light-years 
of Jade. 
“I don’t know. No, it can’t be 
that. There would have been some 
warning, surely. How often do you 
listen to the radio? Frequently?” 
“Hardly ever. It’s ages since I 
last switched the thing on. There 
never seems to be time.” 
“So anything could have happened and we wouldn’t know. 
Damn.” He feel silent, thinking. 
“I’ll just try the short-wave again,” 
he said at last, flicking the switch. 
He found the doctor’s frequency, gave the call sign and waited. 
The radio twittered, paused, 
twittered again. 
“That’s a voice,” he said heavily. 
“It’s a voice of some sort, talking. 
And I don’t know what the hell it’s 
saying. Christ. What’s happened, 
Sandy?” 
He rested his elbows on the table, staring at the radio, willing it 
to make sense. 
F or a long time they sat, pondering worriedly. At last Richard stood up, wincing as his feet 
took the weight. 
“I’m going to have to go and 
find out what’s happening — and 
see if I can get somebody to come 
look at Stephen.” 
“But it’s miles to the next homestead.” 
“I’ll take the harvester. Should 
be able to make it in about six 
hours.” He glanced out through 
the window. The sun was setting 
over the hills, the McGowan place 
was a black dot in the distance. 
“I’ll make a start at first light.” 
“Let’s have a look at those feet 
of yours.” Sandra, now that a decision had been made, became suddenly practical. “If anything happened to the harvester you couldn’t 
walk.” 
She stood up and painfully 
crossed the room to the medicine 
cupboard. 
“You, too?” asked Richard. 
“Are your feet going bad?” 
“I didn’t want to worry you, 
Dick. You had enough on your 
mind, with the harvest. Still — ” 
she smiled briefly — “I’ll treat your 
feet and you can treat mine. Then 
I’ll have a look at Stephen’s.” 
“Are his feet bad?” 
“They looked sore this morning. 
I’ll put some ointment on them. 
Off with your shoes.” 
Lying back in an easy chair, 
Richard allowed her to remove his 
shoes, then his socks. 
“Careful,” he said as she began 
to unwrap the bandaging he had 
bound around his feet that morning. As she worked his mind ran 
back over the events of the past 
weeks, puzzling over the various 
inconsistencies. 
There was a simple explanation, 
terrifyingly straightforward. All 
reason told him it was impossible. 
He reminded himself that he had 
failed to informed Sandra of this 
idea of his because of its very impossibility — but the real reason for 
his silence was that the concept 
scared him sick and he saw, even 
now, no point in frightening 
Sandra as well. 
It was impossible, wasn’t it, for 
different regions of a planet to 
operate on different time scales? 
Yet everything pointed to the fact 
that their movements were getting 
sluggish and their machinery had 
become too fast for them. All the 
same, he told himself, it was quite 
impossible for time to vary in kind 
in areas of the same special plane. 
The idea presented a contradiction 
in terms. 
And yet those voices on the radio — he could have sworn they were 
human voices, speeded up. 
Slowly Sandra unwrapped the 
thin muslin, baring the pad of lint 
on the sole of his left foot. Carefully she pulled the material away. 
Groaning weakly, Richard 
gripped the arms of his chair, 
knuckles white, face twisted with 
agony, trying to speak. Then he 
slumped back in a dead faint. 
“Sorry — oh. I’m sorry, Dick — ” 
Sandra stared in horror at the 
sole of Richard’s left foot. The 
skin had peeled away with the lint 
— the flesh gleamed dark and raw 
and, sprouting out of the purple 
wetness, were thousands of tiny, 
threadlike white tendrils. 
And despite her horror, despite 
the sight of her husband lying unconscious before her and the terrible realization that beneath her 
own flesh were multiplying similar 
abominations, her overlying sensa
WHATEVER BECAME OF THE MCGOWANS? 
tion was one of relief that now 
none of them would be able to 
leave this place. She, Richard and 
Stephen could gratify the all-consuming demand of her being which 
had possessed her these last weeks 
like a voraciously addictive drug. 
She wanted to take off her 
clothes, go outside and feel the hot 
fingers of the sun upon her hungry 
body. 
Ill 
T he days fled by. They sat in alternate light and darkness outside the homestead, the harvest forgotten, never venturing indoors 
save to fetch endless glasses of water. The sun burned down upon 
their bodies’ darkening yellow, the 
cool night air soothed them for 
brief moments before the sun was 
back, arching across the sky — ever 
accelerating. 
Stephen was improving rapidly. 
He lay quietly on a blanket at their 
feet growing stronger with every 
fleeting day. He was content, never demanding, accepting sips of 
water at frequent intervals — yet 
his body filled out, his limbs grew 
firm and strong. 
A strange euphoria encompassed the family on the grass. The 
three rarely stirred — each was 
finding it hardly necessary even to 
breathe. Richard’s slow thoughts 
were more and more occupied with 
his sense of voluptous well-being 
to the exclusion of all abstract con
cepts. One day when the sun was 
especially hot and pleasurable following a cool night that had left 
their bodies studded with dew like 
diamonds, he had begun to say 
something to Sandra and she had 
turned toward him to listen. He 
had uttered perhaps two words before he realized that his words 
didn’t matter and that Sandra 
would make an effort to understand what he was driving at — and 
that anyway it was night again and 
the cold dew was coming. 
He had intended to remark on 
the improvement in his feet, which 
were no longer raw and painful. 
He even lifted himself ponderously 
as the shadows circled smoothly 
around the two deck-chairs and, 
by nightfall, he had assured himself that the flesh had healed although the tendrils were still there, 
trailing a thousand long white 
threads from the soles of his feet. 
He was aware of a vague longing he was unable to express in 
words and he looked at Sandra, 
picking his brief spell of daylight — 
she looked back at him and he 
knew she understood. 
But now he could not summon 
his body to perform the walking 
movements necessary to carry him 
into the homestead and out again 
with more water, so he lay in the 
chair while the longing intensified 
— and with it came the slow knowledge that there was another, better 
way to satisfy this craving. 
Stephen was the first to move. 
His infant mind being less constricted by the habit of years, he 
was more readily able to adapt to 
the new circumstances and recognize the craving for what it was. 
He rolled slowly toward the edge 
of his blanket while his parents 
watched, wondering from unblinking eyes. His small body, now on 
the grass, assumed a foetal position and, with knees tucked under 
his chin he rolled again, kneeling 
and finally sitting crouched, his 
feet flat against the ground, his 
short arms hugging his knees. 
Next Richard stirred, hands 
pushing at the frame of his chair, 
lifting his inert body from its resting place. Instinct was taking over 
in his case, too. His body folded, 
his chest and head moved forward 
so that for a long time he sat bent 
double on the edge of the chair, his 
hair flopped over his eyes. Gradually he became upright, left the 
chair and stood up. 
His feet felt spongy and insecure 
at first. He shuffled them, shifting 
their position and working them 
through the grass into the soft soil 
until he stood firmly, circled by his 
wheeling shadow. 
At last the tendrils on his feet 
probed moisture below the surface 
and the fluid rose into his body, 
satisfying a craving that had possessed him for days. Once again 
contentment stole through his 
senses and he felt his heart slow 
until it became an occasional spasmodic flicker. 
Opposite him stood Sandra. She 
regarded him calmly. 
After a long time he closed his 
eyes. His last conscious memory 
was of the wind in Sandra’s hair, 
and he kept this memory with him 
as he slipped easily into half-sleeping Jade immortality. 
S LOWLY, very slowly, realization came to him that he was 
lying in a horizontal position between linen sheets, his body 
clothed in some sort of pyjamas. 
He felt tired, deadly tired, but 
something in his system was forcing him into an artificial alertness 
when all he wanted was sleep. 
“Wake up, Richard.” 
The voice came from all round 
him, so close that it might have 
been within his own head. The 
voice, like the nagging inducement 
in his body to awaken, was artificial. It did not arise through any 
volition of his own consciousness; 
it was forcing its presence upon 
him, mechanical and metallic, 
from an outside source. He didn’t 
want the voice, so he kept his eyes 
closed and willed it to go away — 
but gradually the strength of his 
very willing became intensified, 
wakefulness rising in him like sap. 
He found himself hating the voice 
with a violence that made further 
sleep impossible. He opened his 
eyes. 
“Wake up, Richard.” 
The voice spoke with dynamic 
forcefulness from a louvered open
WHATEVER BECAME OF THE MCGOWANS? 
ing in a cabinet near his eyes. For 
a while he studied the cabinet, noting the vaguely familiar lines, the 
two reels in the recessed top. 
He was lying on his side, he realized finally, and looking at a tape 
recorder beside the bed. He extended his field of vision and saw 
white walls and ceiling and a door 
that flickered strangely. He turned 
his eyes, following the sweep of the 
ceiling, seeing an angular contraption almost directly above him. 
From it was suspended a bottle of 
dark red fluid. Blood. A thin tube 
hung from the inverted neck of the 
bottle and disappeared beneath the 
blankets of his bed. As he watched, 
the level of the blood fell rapidly, 
far too rapidly, until the bottle was 
empty. He was aware of a curious 
flicker, accompanied by a noise so 
quickly gone that he only halfremembered it, and the bottle was 
full of blood again. Abruptly the 
room was dark and he could see 
no more. 
Light came again soon and the 
position of the tape recorder had 
changed. The voice came from the 
speaker and the voice had changed 
too, to a slightly different pitch. 
“Fm glad to see you’re awake. 
Now, first of all, I want you to 
know that your wife and child are 
all right. You are in the Earth Rehabilitation Center and I am talking to you through this machine 
because foi" the time being you will 
not understand normal speech. My 
name is Dr. Svenson and from 
time to time I sit beside you — on 
the chair you will see beside your 
bed.” 
Richard saw the chair and saw 
also that it was in almost constant 
jiggling motion. From time to time 
he thought he could make out a 
sitting, semi-transparent figure. 
“I can’t see you properly,” 
Richard addressed the phantom. 
A slow fear was beginning to 
flow through him, driving away his 
lethargy. 
“That is because I am not always here,” replied the tape recorder. “Time has accelerated for 
you. When you spoke I had time 
to replay your remark at high 
speed, then record my reply and 
play it back to you at reduced 
speed — but 1 don’t suppose you 
noticed any time lag.” 
“How long am I going to be lying here like this?” 
He felt completely cut off from 
all humanity, terribly alone. 
“Not long by your standards,” 
replied the voice evasively. “Such 
things are relative. You’ve had a 
bad time of it. Meanwhile you are 
under intensive treatment and for 
a while you will feel quite weak. 
You were lucky. You have been 
treated in time. Others were not so 
fortunate — Oh, good afternoon, 
Mr. Roberts, (faintly) Good afternoon, Doc. How are the patients? 
(loudly again) Coming along nicely.” 
The tape recorder appeared to be 
holding a conversation with itself. 
Then the voice changed and 
Richard recognized the hearty 
tones of Sandra’s father. 
“How are you feeling, Richard? 
lust as well we paid you a visit to 
that damned planet of yours, 
wasn’t it? Found you just in time. 
Gave us a turn, I can tell you, seeing you all standing there like 
damned statues. Always said there 
was something weird about the 
place — Anyway, I got you all out 
of there pretty damned quick, I tell 
you. And brought charges against 
the Jade Exploitation Company. 
Made them look pretty sick — ’’ 
Richard stopped listening. 
God, I’ll never hear the last of 
this. For the rest of my life he’ll be 
telling me how he saved my life and 
Sandra’s too . 
He experienced a sudden longing to be back on Jade, standing 
quietly in the sun with Sandra and 
Stephen, experiencing no problems. His senses picked up his father-in-law’s voice once more. 
“Imagine conning folks like 
that. People were putting down 
their deposits and buying their 
farms, never knowing that the 
planet was incapable of supporting 
animal life. Ah, well, look before 
you leap, I always say — ’’ 
The voice of Dr. Svenson mercifully broke in and Richard had 
slipped again into a defensive state 
of apathy but now he made a great 
effort to communicate. 
“What was wrong with Jade? 
What happened?” he asked. 
“You heard your father-in-law 
tell you that Jade is not capable of 
supporting animal life? This is 
quite true and it should have been 
obvious to the Exploitation Company — one would have thought 
that the absence of animals when 
they initially surveyed the place 
would have been sufficient to cause 
them to investigate further, at 
least. I’m not a bio-ecologist but 
I’m told that Jade’s problem has 
something to do with the rigid 
composition of the basic organic 
molecules, which are not broken 
down when ingested into the human system. So the intake of these 
molecules in the form of food 
caused your own body cells to be 
gradually replaced by Jade-type 
cells of fundamentally plantlike 
construction. Your movements 
slowed, your thinking slowed, 
your machines seemed to move too 
fast for you. Toward the end, these 
effects were accelerating rapidly. 
But the most interesting effect 
came in the later stages when you 
began gradually to take in nourishment by photosynthesis. Eor 
increasing periods you lay in the 
sun, eating less and obtaining 
more of your requirements from 
the sun’s rays, until the point was 
reached when your physical structure began to change and ciliate 
roots appeared on your feet, demanding to be buried in moist 
soil—” 
Richard struggled with his slack 
( Please turn to page 158 ) 
WHATEVER BECAME OF THE MCGOWANS? 
UiSiT; 
9KFATSUMP^HANI>S^IIc£/^SUEA/T 
TDNS/L AftOVE 6EAUfiFU.W(<WETVOlU&. 
B^nEPlAaaNEVEft^^ffiVERWESSOFSBCE 
IS <WlUMS|OM.:n€.$UNPoriS lN/\ NEVO 
OR&lTtdllHAVfRIHeUortOFlOOFEC?'' 
jrSfi 
^^VIWOILSHIPISPOVOEA^ESSSINCEM 
REWUinON IN7l£l^liKRm<]1^4Te0i:iO^^ 
AMND0FWCIM«Wn(ei5,LEDerA64Mi4nML 
GWEMGiNeGR^SEALEOC^lHEMDA OROBiPCKA^os£rupA0Muslollalnfrll)^H^/el4usf 
'QttffaTFWHEjDiPS/Nto'KVAsr 
(AN>0^60^aOU06 AND S(«^IEaG£S 
1HR0U5H lAXER AHERZAi^^IttE A 
SUEArr,GU0l|\K9€IMa^$MP0N/ ITS 
Mj^ious SB^6onoAi..y 
QustfirisAriisiiMe^RjiN'riNoinit.if 
UoDMK oiN2Jsrsrma6»tm. ims 
l4^DO(X<IES7NG^MUSM{^MCXUP/)(^/ 
^imTK.StfRF/lCEC'TMClRONfCIMNCE. 
,10RECT»9yTH£l« ERiWTiCOReMTJ... 
(5lNFMdiMAtEl^ 
MOULD HAVE tr, A 
6lAN7IMM£LOQ(V\S 
OUTBEfORLTMEM! 
To Bf c.OA/Ti^>^fP 
I The Editorial View j 
OVERKILL 
One of the most widely read science-fiction novels of the past couple of decades was Nevil Shute’s 
On the Beach, the story of the consequences of a nuclear war. 
Shute’s war occurred in the northern hemisphere and killed everyone in Europe, Asia and North 
America. The people in his story 
are in Australia, and although 
they are survivors their life expectancy is small; the exchange between the northern and southern 
atmospheres is slow but it is inevitable, and radioactive fallout 
will kill them all within weeks. 
On the Beach immediately provoked a storm of scientific argument. Its terrors were described as 
overdrawn. The scenarists of future debacles, like Herman Kahn, 
Edward Teller and others, asserted 
vigorously that no such total destruction of the human race was in 
the cards, and backed their arguments with reasonably reliable estimates and quite reliable facts. 
Although the stockpiles of atomic 
weapons possessed by the United 
States and the U.S.S.R. are huge, 
they are finite. Exploding every 
one of them over a period of a few 
days would produce catastrophic 
results, to be sure. But it would 
not produce the result of killing off 
every living thing on earth, as 
Shute supposed. It would not even 
do so in the U.S. and U.S.S.R. 
themselves, presumably the prime 
targets for each other’s missiles. 
How many Americans and Russians would survive is not very 
clear, but the number would be at 
least some millions of each. 
Enough (suggests Herman Kahn) 
so that over a period of a generation or so, at least the United 
States could rebuild itself to prewar levels of affluence and technology. 
Of course, this is not really an 
attractive prospect. But certainly 
it is a long way short of the total 
destruction that Shute imagined. 
From these arguments the proBomb side of the discussion drew 
much comfort. No one suggests 
that a nuclear war is a trivial 
event. But, by the above reasoning, it is not so dreadful that it can 
never under any circumstances be 
waged. 
However, it now appears that all 
the evidence is not in. A physicist 
named Ernest Sternglass of the 
University of Pittsburgh has unearthed some new and pertinent 
information. It is not quite conclusive. It has even been denounced — by the Atomic Energy 
Commission, for example, on the 
grounds that it is “false, alarmist 
and unscientific.’’ More study is 
certainly needed. But its implications are far-reaching and should 
be looked into with great care. 
We all know, to begin with, that 
the advance of medicine has greatly extended the average man’s life. 
A few centuries ago in medieval 
France, the average age at the 
time of death was actually about a 
year and a half less than the average age at the time of marriage. 
This does not of course mean that 
most Frenchmen married eighteen 
months after they died. What it 
means is that so many Frenchmen 
died in infancy that they brought 
the average lifetime down below 
the average age at which those 
who survived the terrible infant 
mortality got married. 
This is the principal way in 
which medicine has extended lifespans: by reducing the number of 
infant deaths. 
If you draw a curve showing the 
average infant death rate in the 
United States from 1935 to 1950, 
you find a steady decline. Year after year, science saved more and 
more babies’ lives through better 
medicine, better prenatal care, 
better diet, better everything. 
If you make the same study 
from 1965 to the present, you find 
the same steady decline. 
But if you draw your graph for 
the years 1950 to 1965, you see no 
such decline. For some reason, for 
those fifteen years infant death 
rates remained pretty much the 
same. 
Why? 
It is possible that the explanation is simply that for those fifteen 
OVERKILL 
years medicine stood still, as far 
as caring for the newborn and the 
unborn is concerned. This does 
not seem a reasonable explanation, but it is a possible one. If it is 
true, it should be simple enough to 
demonstrate it through a study of 
pediatric practices over the last 
few decades. 
Lacking confirmation of that 
particular hypothesis, it would appear that some other event must 
have been taking place. Some 
event which was killing babies by 
means that medicine was not able 
to prevent. Dr. Sternglass suggests 
that there was such an event, and 
it was the testing of nuclear weapons in the atmosphere, with their 
consequent release of radioactive 
materials and fallout. 
In support of Sternglass’s thesis 
there is a good deal of data. We 
know, for instance, that a 43-kiloton bomb test in Nevada in 1953 
was followed by an increase in 
childhood leukemia in upstate 
New York. It is not certain that 
the first event caused the second; 
it is only certain that the test did 
take place, that fallout in the New 
York area did come from it, and 
that thereafter leukemia deaths 
did rise. 
We know, too, that strontium90, a major radioactive consequence of bomb testing, is chemically very similar to calcium. We 
know on the basis of chemical experiments and general scientific 
principles that the human body, 
metabolizing calcium to build 
bones, will also metabolize a certain amount of strontium-90 and 
use it in the same way, if the 
strontium-90 is available in the 
environment. We know, too, that 
young children assimilate relatively more calcium (and thus strontium-90) than adults in this way, 
because their skeletons are still 
under construction. We know all 
this in theory, and it has been amply confirmed by investigation and 
experiment. The chain is quite 
complete. Bomb tests produce fallout. Fallout lands on pasture 
lands. Cows eat contaminated 
grass and produce strontium-90laden milk. Infants drink the milk 
and deposit strontium-90 in their 
bones. Parents all over the country have cooperated for years in a 
mass sampling to test this hypothesis: they were asked to double 
up in their roles as Tooth Fairies, 
not only depositing a quarter under the child’s pillow when a baby 
tooth came out but wrapping up 
the tooth itself and mailing it to a 
laboratory, where many thousands 
of them were assayed for their 
strontium-90 content. Which was 
found to be high. And we know 
finally that radiation of the kind 
produced by strontium-90 is capable of producing leukemia or 
bone cancer. 
Similar arguments can be made 
for other kinds of fallout, and for 
other kinds of events which kill 
babies. 
So here we have two sets of phenomena: between 1950 and 1965 
there was widespread contamination of the environment by radioactivity from bomb testing; and 
also between 1950 and 1965, there 
was an otherwise inexplicable halt 
of the steady decline in infant 
mortality. 
Is there a connection between 
the two sets? 
Perhaps not. 
But certainly it would take a 
peculiarly intransigent kind of stupidity to look at these two sets 
side by side and ignore them. 
Freeman J. Dyson, on record as 
a strong partisan for ABM, says 
that Sternglass’s evidence is not 
to be ignored. He says, “The evidence is not sufficient to prove 
that Sternglass is right. The essential point is that Sternglass may 
be right.” 
For, as Sternglass himself says, 
the logic of his study is such that 
it implies a problem that no one 
has previously considered, much 
less solved: “We find ourselves 
confronted with the utterly new 
situation in which, contrary to all 
our past thinking, even targets 
that are either not attacked, or are 
protected by an anti-ballistic missile system, can be destroyed if 
these ‘targets’ are people.” 
Sternglass’s numbers imply that 
radioactive fallout is roughly a 
hundred times more dangerous to 
infants than had been suspected. 
They indicate that twice as many 
babies died as should have died 
from normal causes during the 
lest period. And they suggest that 
an all-out war might fail to destroy 
a nation’s cities or population and 
still, to quote Stesnglass again, 
“have the society come to an end 
as the infants born to the survivors 
die within in their first year of life.” 
Perhaps T.S. Eliot had the answer. Perhaps all-out war means 
that the world ends not with the 
“bang” of Nevil Shute’s On the 
Beach but with the “whimper” of 
the last surviving ancient. ★ 
FREDERIK POHL 
★ ★★GALAXY STARS^^^ 
One of our favorite people is Robert 
Silverberg, author, editor, gourmet, 
wit, world traveler and a frequent 
contributor to GALAXY and IF. 
Back in 1956, Bob picked up a Hugo 
as the year's Most Promising New 
Writer and he has been accumulating 
honors ever since. Besides winning 
one of the prizes in the GALAXY Poll 
with his novelette Nightwings, Bob 
copped another Hugo for the same 
work at last year's St. Louiscon. 
Bob is to be Guest of Honor at the 
World Science Fiction Convention 
next summer in Heidelberg, where 
he will deliver the major address. 
Preparing to launch this Berlitzkrieg. Bob is up to his umlauts in the 
study of German. Though the invitation is perhaps the highest tribute the 
sf fraternity can pay to one of its 
members, this will not be the first 
time Bob has been the honored guest 
at a convention. The gals from Pittsburgh fandom selected their hero as 
the first GoH of their regional con 
and he performed so nobly that they 
have designated him — get this — 
Guest of Honor Emeritus. 
Besides logging many miles a year 
on the convention circuit. Bob and 
wife Barbara travel to the remote 
corners of Planet Earth, vacationing 
and researching books. They were 
off to legendary Byzantium (Istanbul 
to the new wave bunch) in '67, stopping there on their way back from 
Jorslem. This trip produced the just 
published If I forget Thee, O Jerusalem, a Study of the role of American 
Jews in the creation of the state of 
Israel. While on a photographic safari of Africa in 1969, the Silverbergs 
even managed to stand on Zanzibar, 
from where they sent greetings to 
John Brunner. 
The Silverbergs inhabit a large, 
rambling mansion in New York City, 
sharing the house with the family 
cats — four permanent residents and, 
frequently, litters of kittens. Barbara 
is an electronics engineer by profession, and it is she who fixes all the 
household appliances. "All," Bob 
says, "but the electric typewriter I 
don't have." Barbara recently edited 
an anthology of cat stories called 
Kitten Caboodle. Bob says he and 
Barbara were in Caboodle in 1963. 
Our versatile Mr. Silverberg plans 
to continue "to explore the modes of 
contemporary fiction through the 
vehicle of science fiction." Those are 
his words and if you want to know 
what he means read Son of Man, due 
from Ballantine next fall. 
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 
(Continued from page 108) 
volved. And this fact has long 
been known but for some reason 
no one, neither the police nor his 
mentors, has ever told Jud until 
after he gets into fatal trouble. 
I find this very difficult to believe. I find it much easier to believe that Silverberg was making 
this up as he went along. The book 
is full of long pauses in which he 
talks his way out of one technical 
inconsistency at the price of sowing two others. I mean, there is 
time — there is infinite time — for 
all these accidents and blunders 
to have been forethought of and 
precorrected. And yet we find this 
civilization constantly risking its 
own existence for a few bucks in 
a tourist trade which, as described 
here, creates the extinction of a 
significant number of tour guides 
and tourists. 
We could go on this way. Silverberg skirts around the issue of why 
the first tour guide to the Crucifixion didn’t find the entire eastern 
Mediterranean region black with 
the flylike swarms of all the tourists who would be brought there 
in the future. He skirts around it 
again and again, apparently in 
the hope that not many people 
would care about his failure to 
come to grips with what happens 
when you try to pack infinity into 
a single event. 
But I care. You see, there are 
only three alternative possibilities 
here. One of them is that Silverberg doesn’t realize his sf premise 
is shot full of holes, another one is 
that he doesn’t care and the third 
one is that he not only doesn’t 
care — he sees it as a virtue. 
Obviously he does realize that 
his own technological premise is 
inconsistent. He signals this to you 
again and again. So we can gratefully discard that postulate and go 
on to the next. 
Does he care? Is he glad if he 
doesn’t care? Well, we don’t know, 
except by inference from various 
statements that he’s quit writing 
anything but what he wants to. 
And there may be something to 
be drawn, too, from the fact that 
he uses the premise, ramshackle 
though it is, in order eventually 
to club the book to its knees and 
call that an ending. Neither inference strikes me as conclusive. 
Maybe he just wanted to write 
some passages about Constantinople and going to bed with Grandma. That would be a pretty 
smart-arse thing to do, though, 
considering how much auctorial 
effort and reader seventy-five 
centses are involved here. 
It’s a non-book. I guess that’s 
what Up the Line is. It isn’t sf — 
neither tech fiction nor any other 
previously recognized kind. It’s a 
new kind of non-book. And as you 
may have gathered, it doesn’t even 
find anything new in Grandma. ★ 
THE TOWER OF GLASS 
ogram of Krug as he whispered the 
words of the Transcender ritual. 
All five came to attention as 
Watchman entered. 
The alpha hastily improvised a 
possible diversionary tactic. 
Beckoning to one of the gammas, he said, “There is an enemy 
outside. With your help we will 
confuse him.” Watchman gave the 
gamma careful instructions, ordering the android to repeat them. 
Then he pointed to the chapel’s rear 
door, behind the alter, and the 
gamma went out. 
After a moment for prayer 
Watchman returned to Leon 
Spaulding. 
“You were told the complete 
truth,” the alpha reported. “This 
is indeed a refrigeration dome. A 
team of mechanics is engaged in 
difficult recalibration work inside. 
If you enter you’ll certainly disturb them and you’ll have to walk 
carefully to sidestep some open 
traps in the floor. In addition you 
will be exposed to a temperature of 
minus — ” 
“Even so, I want to go in,” said 
Spaulding. “Please let me get 
through.” 
Watchman caught sight of his 
gamma approaching, breathless, 
from the east. Unhurriedly, the alpha made as if to give Spaulding 
access to the chapel door. 
In that instant the gamma rushed 
up, shouting, “Help! Help for 
TOWER OF GLASS 
( Continued from page 98 ) 
Krug! Krug is in danger! Save 
Krug!” 
“Where?” Watchman demanded. 
“By the control center! Assassins! Assassins!” 
Watchman allowed Spaulding no 
opportunity to ponder the implausibilities of the situation. 
“Come on,” he said, tugging the 
ectogene’s arm. “We have to hurry!” 
Spaulding was pale with shock. 
As Watchman had hoped, the supposed emergency had blotted the 
problem of the chapel from his 
mind. 
Together they ran in frantic 
haste toward the control center. 
After twenty strides Watchman 
looked back and saw dozens of androids rushing toward the chapel in 
accordance with his orders. They 
would dismantle it within minutes. 
By the time Leon Spaulding was 
able to return to this sector, the 
dome would house nothing but refrigeration equipment. 
“PNOUGH,” Krug said. “It 
^gets cold. Now we go down.” 
The scooprods descended. Snowflakes were beginning to swirl 
about the tower. The repellor field 
at the summit deflected them, sending them cascading off at a broad 
angle. It was impossible to run 
proper weather control here because of the need to keep the tundra constantly frozen. A good 
thing, Krug thought, that androids 
didn’t mind working in the snow. 
He throbbed with impatience. 
There was so much still to do before the tower could function. 
Manuel said, “We’re leaving, 
Father. We’re booked into the New 
Orleans shunt room for a week of 
ego shifts.” 
Krug scowled. 
“I wish to hell you stop that 
stuff.” 
“Where’s the harm? To swap 
identities with your own true 
friends? To spend a week in somebody else’s soul? It’s harmless. It’s 
liberating. It’s miraculous. You 
ought to try it.” 
Krug spat. 
“I’m serious,” Manuel said. “It 
would pull you out of yourself a 
little. That morbid concentration 
on the problems of high finance, 
that intense and exhausting fascination with the challenge of interstellar communications, the terrible strain on your neural network 
that comes from — ” 
“Go on, ” Krug said. “Go. 
Change your minds all around. I’m 
busy.” 
“You wouldn’t even consider 
shunting. Father?” 
“It’s quite pleasant,” said Nick 
Ssu-ma. He was Krug’s favorite 
among his son’s friends, an amiable 
Chinese boy with close-cropped 
blond hair and an easy smile. “It 
gives you a splendid new perspective on all human relationships.” 
“Try it once, just once,” Jed 
Guilbert offered, “and I promise 
that you’ll never — ” 
“Quicker than that 1 take up 
swimming on Jupiter,” said Krug. 
“Go. Go. Be happy. Shunt all you 
like. Not me.” 
“I’ll see you next week. Father.” 
Manuel and his friends sprinted 
toward the transmat. Krug rammed his knuckles together and 
stood watching the young men run. 
He felt a tremor of something close 
to envy. He had never had time for 
any of these amusements. There 
had always been work to do, a deal 
to close, a crucial series of lab tests 
to oversee, a meeting with the 
bankers, a crisis in the Martian 
market. While others gaily jumped 
into stasis nets and exchanged egos 
for week-long trips, he had built a 
corporate empire and now it was 
too late for him to give himself up 
to the pleasures of the world. 
So what? he asked himself fiercely. So what? So I'm a nineteenthcentury man in a twenty-third-century body. So I’ll get along without 
shunt rooms. Anyway, who would 
I trust inside my head? What friend 
would I swap egos with? Who, 
who, who? 
He realized that there was hardly 
anyone. Manuel, perhaps. It might 
be helpful to do a shunt with Manuel. 
We'd get to understand each other better, maybe. Give up some of 
our extreme positions, move toward a meeting in the middle. He’s 
not all wrong about how he lives. 
I’m not all right. See things with 
each other’s eyes, maybe? 
But at once Krug recoiled from 
the idea. A father-son ego shift 
seemed almost incestuous. There 
were things he didn’t want to know 
about Manuel. There certainly 
were things he didn’t want Manuel 
to know about him. To swap identities, even for a moment, was out 
of the question. But what about 
Thor Watchman, then, as a shunt 
partner? The alpha was admirably 
sane, competent, trustworthy — in 
many ways Krug was closer to him 
than to any other living person. He 
could not think of any secrets that 
he had kept from Watchman. If he 
intended to sample the shunt experience at all he might find it useful and informative to . 
Shocked, Krug crushed the 
thought. Trade egos with an android? 
He said quickly to Niccolo Vargas, “Do you have some time, or 
you have to get back to the observatory right away?” 
“There’s no rush.” 
“We can go to the ultrawave lab 
now. They just set up a small working model of the prime-level accumulator. You’ll be interested.” 
They began to walk across the 
crisp, mossy tundra. A crew of 
gammas came by, driving snoweaters. After a moment Krug said, 
“You ever try the shunt room?” 
Vargas chuckled. “I’ve spent 
seventy years calibrating my mind 
so I can use it properly. I’m not 
that eager to let somebody get into 
it and change all the settings.” 
“Exactly. Exactly. These games 
are for the very young. We — ” 
K rug paused. Two alphas, a 
male and a female, had emerged 
from a transmat and were walking 
rapidly toward him. He did not 
recognize them. The male wore a 
dark tunic open at the throat, the 
female a short gray robe. A glittering emblem, radiating energy up 
and down the spectrum in steady 
pulsations, was affixed to the right 
breast of each. As they drew close 
Krug was able to see the letters 
AEP at the center of the emblem. 
Political agitators? No doubt. And 
he was caught out here in the open, 
forced to listen to their spiel. What 
splendid timing! Where was Spaulding, he wondered. 
Leon will get them out of here 
fast enough . 
The male alpha said, “How fortunate we are to find you here, Mr. 
Krug. For some weeks we have 
sought an appointment with you 
but it proved unattainable and so 
we have come — I should introduce 
myself first. Forgive me. I am Siegfried Fileclerk, certified field representative of the Android Equality 
Party, as no doubt you have already discovered by these emblems. 
My companion is Alpha Cassandra 
Nucleus, AEP district secretary. If 
we might have just a word with 
you — ” 
“ — concerning the forthcoming 
TOWER OF GLASS 
session of the Congress and the 
proposed constitutional amendment dealing with the civil rights of 
synthetic persons,” said Cassandra 
Nucleus. 
Krug was astounded by the audacity of the pair. Anyone, even an 
android of another employ, was 
free to come here via transmat. 
But to accost him like this, to bedevil him with politics — incredible! 
Siegfried Fileclerk said, “Our 
boldness in approaching you directly is the outgrowth of the seriousness of our concern. To define 
the place of the android in the modern world is no slight challenge, 
Mr. Krug.” 
“And you, as the central figure 
in the manufacture of synthetic 
persons,” said Cassandra Nucleus, 
“hold the key role in determining 
the future of the synthetic person 
in human society. Therefore we request you — ” 
“Synthetic persons?” Krug said, 
incredulous. “Is that what you call 
yourselves now? Are you crazy, 
telling me such things? Me? Whose 
androids are you, anyway?” 
Siegfried Fileclerk stumbled 
back a pace, as though the vehemence of Krug’s tone had shattered his amazing self-confidence, 
as though the enormity of what he 
was trying to do had burst upon 
his mind at last. But Cassandra 
Nucleus remained poised. 
The slender alpha female said 
coolly, “Alpha Fileclerk is registered with the Property Protection 
Syndicate of Buenos Aires and 1 
am a modulator assigned to Labrador Transmat General. However, we are both in free-time periods at present, and by act of Congress Twenty-two hundred and 
twelve it is legitimate for us, when 
off duty, to carry on overt political 
activity on behalf of the rights of 
synthetic persons. If you would 
grant us only a short while to explain the text of our proposed constitutional amendment and to indicate why we feel it is appropriate 
for you to take a public position 
in favor of — ” 
“Spaulding!” Krug roared. 
“Spaulding, where are you? Get 
these maniac androids away from 
me — ” 
He saw no sign of Spaulding. 
The ectogene had wandered off on 
some sort of inspection tour of the 
site perimeter while Krug had gone 
to the tower’s summit. 
Cassandra Nucleus drew a glistening data cube from the bosom 
of her robe. 
Holding it toward Krug, she 
said, “The essence of our views is 
contained in this. If you — ” 
“Spaulding!” 
This time Krug’s shout conjured 
up the ectogene. He came from the 
northern part of the site at a frenzied gallop, Thor Watchman running more smoothly beside him. As 
he approached Cassandra Nucleus 
showed alarm for the first time — 
in agitation she tried to press the 
data cube into Krug’s hand. Krug 
glared at it as if it were a psychbomb. They struggled briefly. To 
his surprise he found the android 
female in his arms in a curious 
counterfeit of a passionate embrace, though she was really only 
attempting to give him the cube. 
He caught her by one shoulder and 
pushed her away from him, holding 
her at arm’s length. An instant later Leon Spaulding drew a small 
shining needier and fired a single 
bolt that penetrated Cassandra Nucleus’ breast precisely in the center 
of her AEP emblem. The female 
alpha went spinning backward and 
fell without uttering a sound. The 
data cube, dropping from her lifeless fingers, bounced along the frozen earth; Siegfried Fileclerk, 
moaning, snatched it up. With a 
terrible cry of anguish Thor Watchman slapped the needier from 
Spaulding’s hand and immediately 
afterward sent the ectogene toppling with a single savage thrust of 
his fist. Niccolo Vargas, who had 
looked on silently since the arrival 
of the two alphas, knelt beside Cassandra Nucleus, examining her 
wound. 
“Idiot!” Krug cried, glaring at 
Leon Spaulding. 
Watchman, hovering over the 
fallen Spaulding, muttered, “You 
could have killed Krug. She wasn’t 
a meter away from him when you 
fired. Barbarian! Barbarian!” 
“She’s dead,” Vargas said. 
Siegfried Fileclerk began to sob. 
A ring of workmen, betas and 
gammas, collected at a safe distance and looked on in obvious terror. Krug felt the world whirling 
about his head. 
‘AVhy did you shoot?” 
Trembling, Spaulding said, 
“You were in danger — they said 
there were assassins — ” 
“Political agitators,” Krug said, 
eyeing him with contempt. “She 
was only trying to give me some 
propaganda for android equality.” 
“I was told — ” Shivering, 
crumpled, Spaulding hid his face. 
“Idiot!” 
Watchman said hollowly, “It 
was an error. An unfortunate coincidence. The report that was 
brought to us — ” 
“Enough,” Krug said. “An android’s dead. I’ll take responsibility. She said she belonged to 
Labrador Transmat General. 
Spaulding, get in touch with their 
lawyers and — no, you aren’t in 
shape to do anything now. Watchman. Notify our legal staff that 
Labrador Transmat has the basis 
for a tort action against us, destruction of android, and that we 
admit culpability and are willing to 
settle. Tell counsel to do what has 
to be done. Then get somebody 
from staff working on a press 
statement. Regrettable accident, 
that kind of thing. No political 
overtones. Clear?” 
“What shall I do with the body?” 
Watchman asked. “Regular disposal procedures?” 
“The body belongs to Labrador 
TOWER OF GLASS 
Transmat,” said Krug. “Freeze it 
for them. Hold it pending claim.” 
To Spaulding he said, “Get up. I’m 
due in New York now. You come 
with me.” 
VII 
W ATCHMAN, as he walked 
toward the control center, 
went through the Rite of Balancing 
the Soul two full times before the 
numbness began to leave him. The 
hideous outcome of his ruse still 
stunned his spirit. He had been concerned only with getting Spaulding 
away from the chapel. It had not 
occurred to him that Spaulding 
might actually come upon Krug 
struggling with a possibly murderous stranger, nor that the ectogene 
was armed, nor that he was capable 
of taking life. But evidently Spaulding’s frustration at being barred 
by androids from the alleged refrigeration dome had translated itself into murderous fury when 
he beheld an android apparently attacking Krug. And so the female 
alpha was dead. A slight error of 
aim and Krug might be dead now, 
too. 
When he reached his office 
Watchman made the sign of Krugbe-praised eight times in succession 
and ran through half the sequences 
of codon triplets. These devotions 
calmed him. He put through a call 
to San Francisco, to the offices of 
Fearon & Doheny, Krug’s chief 
counsel in liability cases. Lou Fear
140 
on, the Witherer Senator’s younger 
brother, came on the screen. 
Watchman told him the story. 
“Why did Spaulding shoot?” 
“Hysteria. Stupidity. Excitement.” 
“Krug didn’t order him to fire?” 
“Absolutely not. The bolt came 
within a meter of killing Krug himself. And he was in no danger.” 
“Witnesses?” 
“Niccolo Vargas, myself, the 
other AEP alpha. Plus various 
betas and gammas standing by. 
Should I get their names?” 
“Forget it,” said the lawyer. 
“You know what a beta’s testimony is worth. Where’s Vargas 
nOw?” 
“Still here. I think he’s going 
back to his observatory soon.” 
“Tell him to call me collect later 
in the day. I’ll transmat out and 
take a deposition from him. As for 
that alpha — ” 
“Don’t bother with him,’’ 
Watchman advised. 
“How so?” 
“A political fanatic. He’ll try to 
make capital out of it. I’d keep him 
away from the case if I could.” 
“He was a witness,” Fearon said. 
“He’ll have to be called. I’ll neutralize him some way. Who owns 
him, do you know?” 
“Property Protection of Buenos 
Aires.” 
“We’ve done work for them. I’ll 
have Joe Doheny call and buy him 
for Krug. He can’t very well make 
trouble for Krug if — ” 
“No,” Watchman said. “Bad 
move. I’m surprised at you, Lou.” 
“Why?” 
“This alpha is an AEP man, 
right? Sensitive on the issue of androids as chattels. We shoot down 
his companion without warning and 
then we try to buy him to silence 
him? How does that look? We’ll 
make ten million new members for 
the AEP within twelve hours after 
he releases a statement to the 
press.” 
Fearon nodded bleakly. “Of 
course. Of course. Okay, Thor — 
how would you handle him?” 
“Let me talk to him,” Watchman said. “Android to android. 
I’ll communicate somehow.” 
“1 hope so. Meanwhile I’ll call 
Labrador Transmat and find out 
how much they’re asking in damages for the loss of their alpha 
girl. We’ll settle this fast. You tell 
Krug not to worry. This time next 
week, it’ll be as though the whole 
thing never happened.” 
Except that an alpha is dead. 
Watchman thought, breaking the 
contact. 
H e went outside. The snow was 
falling more heavily now. Snoweater teams were efficiently keeping the whole area clean, except for 
a circle some fifty meters in diameter centered on the place where the 
body of Cassandra Nucleus lay. 
They were carefully avoiding that. 
A light dusting of snow now cov
TOWER OF GLASS 
ered her corpse. Beside her, motionless, whitening in the storm, 
stood Siegfried Fileclerk. Watchman went up to him. 
“Her owner is being notified,” 
he said. “I’ll have some gammas 
carry her into storage until they 
call for her.” 
“Leave her here,” Fileclerk said. 
“What?” 
“Right here, where she fell. I 
want every android working on this 
job to see her body. Hearing about 
a murder like this isn’t enough. I 
want them to see!” 
Watchman glanced at the dead 
alpha. Fileclerk had opened her 
robe. Her breasts were bare and 
the path of the needler’s bolt was 
visible between them. It had seared 
a window through her chest. 
“She shouldn’t lie in the snow,” 
he said. 
Fileclerk compressed his lips. 
“I want them to see. Watchman, 
this was an execution. A political 
execution.” 
“Don’t be preposterous.” 
“Krug summoned his henchman 
and had her shot down for the 
crime of seeking his support. We 
both saw it. She posed no threat to 
him. In her enthusiasm she came 
too close to him while presenting 
our viewpoint, that’s all. Yet he 
had her killed.” 
“An irrational interpretation,” 
Watchman said. “Krug had nothing to gain by removing her. He 
sees the Android Equality Party as 
a mild source of harassment, not a 
serious menace. If he had any reason for killing AEP people, why 
would he have let you live? Another quick shot and you’d have joined 
her.” 
“Why was she killed, then?” 
“A mistake,” said Watchman. 
“The killer was Krug’s private secretary. He had been told that assassins were making an attempt on 
Krug’s life. When he reached the 
scene he saw her grappling with 
Krug. It looked damning — I had 
the same view of things he had. 
Without hesitating, he fired.” 
“Even so,” Fileclerk grunted, 
“he could have aimed for a leg. 
Clearly he’s an expert marksman. 
Instead of wounding, he slew. He 
pierced her breast with great skill. 
Why? Why?” 
“A flaw of character. He’s an 
ectogene. He has powerful antiandroid prejudices. Just a few moments before he had come into 
tense confrontation with myself 
and several other androids and he 
had been thwarted. Normally he 
boils with resentments — this time 
he boiled over. When he found that 
the ‘assassin’ was an android, he 
shot to kill.” 
“I see.” 
“It was his personal decision. 
Krug gave no orders for him to 
shoot at all, let alone to shoot to 
kill.” 
Fileclerk flicked snow from his 
features. 
“Well, then, what will be done to 
punish this murderous ectogene?” 
“Krug will reprimand him.” 
“I speak of legal punishment. 
The penalty for murder is personality erasure, is it not?” 
Sighing, Watchman said, “For 
murder of a human being, yes. The 
ectogene merely destroyed some 
property belonging to Fabrador 
Transmat General. A civil offense. 
Fabrador Transmat will seek reparations in the courts and Krug has 
already admitted liability. He’ll 
pay her full price.” 
“Her full price! Her full price! 
A civil offense! Krug to pay! What 
does the murderer pay? Nothing. 
Nothing. He is not even accused 
of crime. Alpha Watchman, are 
you truly an android?” 
“My vat records are yours to 
consult.” 
“I wonder. You look synthetic 
but you think too much like a human.” 
“I am synthetic. Alpha Fileclerk, 
I assure you.” 
“But castrated?” 
“My body is complete.” 
“I spoke in metaphor. You have 
been conditioned in some way to 
uphold the human point of view 
against your own best interests.” 
“I have had no conditioning except normal android training.” 
“Yet Krug seems to have bought 
not only your body but your soul.” 
“Krug is my maker. I yield myself fully to Krug.” 
S PARE me the religious nonsense.” Fileclerk snapped. “A 
woman’s been killed out of hand, 
for no particular reason, and 
Krug’s going to pay off her owners 
and that will be the end of it. Can 
you accept that? Can you simply 
shrug and say she was only property? Can you thiiik of yourself as 
property?” 
“I am property,” Watchman 
said. 
“And you accept your status 
gladly?” 
“I accept my status, knowing 
that a time of redemption is to 
come.” 
“You believe that?” 
“I believe that.” 
“You’re a self-deluding fool. Alpha Watchman. You’ve built a cozy 
little fantasy that allows you to tolerate slavery, your own and that of 
all your kind, and you don’t even 
realize how much damage you’re 
doing to yourself and the android 
cause. And what happened here today doesn’t shake your mind at 
all. You’ll go to your chapel, and 
pray for Krug to liberate you. 
Meanwhile the real Krug was standing right on this patch of frozen 
ground, looking on while an alpha 
woman was shot to death, and your 
savior’s response to that was to tell 
you to call his lawyers and arrange 
for settlement of a simple property-damage tort. Is this the man you 
worship?” 
“I don’t worship a man,” said 
Watchman. “I worship the idea of 
Krug the Maker, Krug the Preserver, Krug the Redeemer. The 
man who sent me to call the lawyers was only one manifestation of 
that idea. Not the most important 
manifestation.” 
“You believe that, too?” 
“I believe that, too.” 
“You’re impossible,” Siegfried 
Fileclerk muttered. “Listen — we 
live in the real world. We have a 
real problem and we must seek a 
real solution. Our solution lies in 
political organization. There are 
now five of us for every one of 
them. More of us come from the 
vats daily while they scarcely reproduce at all. We’ve accepted our 
status too long. If we press for recognition and equality we’ll have 
to get it, because they’re secretly 
afraid of us and know that we 
could crush them if we chose to. 
Not that I’m advocating force, 
merely the hint of the threat of 
force, the hint of the hint, even. But 
we must work through constitutional forms. The admission of androids to the Congress, the granting 
of citizenship, the establishment of 
legal existence as persons — ” 
“Spare me. 1 know the AEP 
platform.” 
“You don’t see the logic of it? 
After today? After this?” 
“I see that humans tolerate your 
party and even find its antics amusing,” Watchman said. “I also see 
that if your demands ever become 
anything more than token requests 
they’ll abolish the AEP, put every 
troublesome alpha through a hypnolobotomy and, if necessary, exe
143 
TOWER OF GLASS 
cute the party leadership just as 
ruthlessly as you seem to think this 
alpha was executed here. The human economy depends on the concept of androids as property. That 
may change — but the change won’t 
come your way. It can come only 
as a voluntary act of renunciation 
by the humans.” 
“A naive assumption. You credit them with virtues that they simply don’t have.” 
“They created us. Can they be 
devils? If they are, what are we?” 
T hey aren’t devils,” said Fileclerk. “What they are is human beings who are blindly and 
stupidly selfish. They have to be 
educated to an understanding of 
what we are and what they’re doing to us. This isn’t the first time 
they’ve done something like this. 
Once there was a white race and a 
brown race and the whites enslaved 
the browns. The browns were 
bought and sold like animals and 
the laws governing their status were 
civil laws, property laws an exact 
parallel to our condition. But a few 
enlightened whites saw the injustice 
of it and campaigned for an end to 
slavery. And after years of political maneuvering, of marshaling of 
public opinion, of actual warfare, 
the slaves were freed and became 
citizens. We take that as our pattern for action.” 
“The parallel’s not exact. The 
whites had no right to interfere 
with the freedom of their brown
skinned fellow humans. The whites 
themselves, some of them, finally 
came to realize that and freed the 
slaves. The slaves didn’t do the political maneuvering and the marshaling of public opinion — they 
just stood there and suffered until 
the whites understood their own 
guilt. In any case those slaves were 
human beings. By what right does 
one human enslave another? But 
our masters made us. We owe our 
whole existence to them. They 
can do as they please with us — 
that’s why they brought us into being. We have no moral case against 
them.” 
“They make their children, too,” 
Fileclerk pointed out. “And to a 
limited extent they regard their 
children as property, at least while 
they’re growing up. But the slavery of children ends when childhood ends. What about ours? Is 
there that much difference between 
a child made in bed and a child 
made in a vat?” 
“I agree that the present legal 
status of androids is unjust — ” 
“Hurrah!” 
“ — but I disagree with you on 
tactics,” Watchman went on. “A 
political party isn’t the answer. The 
humans know their nineteenth-century history and they’ve considered 
and dismissed the parallels — if 
their consciences were hurting we’d 
have known it by now. Where are 
the modern abolitionists? I don’t 
see very many. No, we can’t try to 
put moral pressure on them, not 
directly. We have to have faith in 
them, we have to realize that what 
we suffer today is a test of our virtue, our strength, a test devised by 
Krug to determine whether synthetic humans can be integrated into human society. I’ll give you a 
historical example: the Roman 
Emperors fed Christians to the 
lions. Eventually the Emperors not 
only stopped doing that but became Christians themselves. It 
didn’t happen because the early 
Christians formed a political party 
and hinted that they might just rise 
up and massacre the pagans if they 
weren’t allowed religious freedom. 
It was a triumph of faith over tyranny. In the same way — ” 
“Keep your silly religion,’’ Fileclerk said with sudden explosive intensity. “But join the AEP as well. 
So long as the alphas remain divided — ’’ 
“Your aims and ours are incompatible. We counsel patience. We 
pray for divine grace. You are agitators and pamphleteers. How can 
we join you?” 
Watchman realized that Fileclerk no longer was listening to 
him. He seemed to draw into himself. His eyes glazed. Tears ran 
down his cheeks and flakes of snow 
stuck to the moist tracks. Watchman had never seen an android 
weep before, though he knew it was 
physiologically possible. 
He said, “We’ll never convert 
each other, I suppose. But do one 
thing for me. Promise that you 
won’t go around saying that Krug 
had her removed deliberately. 
Krug’s potentially the greatest ally 
the cause of android equality has. 
He could save us with a single 
statement. But if you alienate him 
by smearing him with a ridiculous 
charge like that, you’ll do us all 
tremendous damage.” 
Fileclerk closed his eyes. He 
sagged slowly to his knees. He 
threw himself on the body of Cassandra Nucleus, making dry choking sounds. 
Watchman looked down silently 
for a moment. 
Then he said gently, “Come with 
me to our chapel. Lying in the snow 
is foolishness. Even if you don’t 
believe, we have techniques for 
easing the soul, for finding ways to 
meet grief. Talk to one of our 
Transcenders. Pray to Krug, perhaps, and — ” 
“Go away,” Siegfried Fileclerk 
said indistinctly. “Go away.” 
Watchman shrugged. He felt an 
immense weight of sadness; he felt 
empty and cold. He left the two alphas, the living one and the dead, 
where they lay in the gathering 
whiteness, and strode off to the 
north to find the relocated chapel. 
VIII 
And the first that Krug brought 
forth was Gamma and Krug said 
unto him, Lo, you are sturdy and 
strong and you shall do all that is 
asked of you without protest and 
TOWER OF GLASS 
you shall be happy as you work. 
And Krug loved Gamma so dearly 
that He made many more of him, 
so that there was a multitude of 
him. 
The next that Krug brought forth 
was Beta and Krug said unto him, 
Lo, you shall be strong but you 
shall also have understanding and 
you shall be of great value to the 
world and your days shall be joyous and good. And Krug loved 
Beta so dearly that He spared him 
from the worst of the burdens of 
the body and spared him also from 
the worst of the burdens of the 
mind and the life of Beta was as a 
bright springtime day. 
The last that Krug brought forth 
was Alpha and Krug said unto him, 
Lo, the tasks laid upon you shall 
not be light, for in body you shall 
exceed the Children of the Womb 
and in mind you shall be their equal 
and they shall lean upon you as 
though upon a stout staff And 
Krug loved Alpha so dearly that He 
gave him many gifts, so that he 
might bear himself with pride and 
look without fear into the eyes of 
the Children of the Womb. 
OOD evening, good evening, 
"good evening!” the alpha on 
duty at the New Orleans shunt 
room said as Manuel Krug and his 
companions emerged from the 
transmat. “Mr. Krug, Mr. Ssu-ma, 
Mr. Guilbert, Mr. Tennyson, Mr. 
Mishima, Mr. Foster. Good evening. Will you come this way? 
Your waiting chamber is ready.” 
The antechamber of the New Orleans shunt room was a cool, tunnel-like structure about a hundred 
meters long, divided into eight 
sealed subchambers in which prospective identity-changers could 
wait while the stasis net was being 
prepared to receive them. The subchambers, though small, were comfortable: webfoam couches, elegant sensory-drift patterns on the 
ceiling, music cubes available at the 
touch of a switch, a decent variety 
of olfactory and visual channels in 
the wall and a number of other contemporary conveniences. 
The alpha settled each of them 
in a couch, saying, “Programing 
time tonight will be approximately 
ninety minutes. That’s not too bad, 
is it?” 
“Can’t you speed it up?” Manuel said. 
“Ah, no, no hope of that. Last 
night, do you know, we were running four hours behind? Here, Mr. 
Krug — if you’ll let me clip the electrode in place — thank you. Thank 
you. And this one? Good. And the 
matrix-scanner — yes, yes, fine. 
We’re all set. Mr. Ssuma, please?” 
The android bustled about the 
room, hooking them up. It took 
about a minute to get each one 
ready. When the job was done the 
alpha withdrew. Data began to 
drain from the six men in the waiting room. The stasis net was taking 
profiles of their personality contours, so that it could program it
148 
self to handle any sudden surge of 
emotion while the ego-shifts were 
actually going on. 
Manuel looked around. He was 
tense with anticipation, eager to 
embark on the shifting. These five 
were his oldest, closest friends; he 
had known them since childhood. 
Someone had nicknamed them the 
Spectrum Group a decade ago, 
when by coincidence they showed 
up at the dedication of a new undersea sensorium wearing costumes 
of the spectral sequence of visible 
light: Nick Ssu-ma in red. Will 
Mishima in violet, and the others 
neatly arranged in between. The 
nickname had stuck. They were 
wealthy, though none, of course, 
was as wealthy as Manuel. They 
were young and vigorous. All but 
Cadge Foster and Jed Guilbert had 
married within the past few years 
but marriage was no bar to their 
continued friendship. Manuel had 
shared the pleasures of the shunt 
room with them on a dozen occasions. They had been planning this 
visit for over a month. 
“I hate this waiting,” Manuel 
said. “I wish we could plunge into 
the stasis net the minute we get 
here.” 
“Too dangerous,” said Lloyd 
Tennyson. He was agile, longlegged, a superb athlete. Three mirror-plates gleamed in his high, 
broad forehead. 
“That’s the point,” Manuel insisted. “The thrill of danger. To 
jump in boldly, instantly, hazard
GALAXY 
ing everything in one glorious 
leap.” 
“And the preciousness of irreplaceable human life?” asked narroweyed, chalky-faced Will Mishima. “It wouldn’t ever be allowed. 
The risks are well known.” 
“Have one of your father’s engineers invent a stasis net that programs itself instantaneously,” Jed 
Guilbert proposed. “That would 
eliminate both the danger and the 
waiting.” 
“If they could, they would,” 
Tennyson pointed out. 
“You could bribe an attendant 
to let you go in without a programing wait,” Nick Ssu-ma suggested slyly. 
“Tried it,” Manuel said. “An 
alpha in the Pittsburgh shunt room 
three years ago. Offered him thousands. The alpha just smiled. I 
doubled the offer and he smiled 
twice as hard. Wasn’t interested in 
money. I never realized that before — how can you bribe an android?” 
“Right,” Mishima said. “You 
can buy an android outright — you 
can buy a whole shunt room, if 
you like — but bribery’s another 
matter. The motivations of an android — ” 
“I might buy a shunt room, 
then,” Manuel said. 
Jed Guilbert peered at him. 
“Would you really risk going 
straight into the net?” 
“1 think so.” 
“Knowing that in case of an 
TOWER OF GLASS 
overload or some transmission error you might never get back inside your own head?” 
“What are the chances of that?” 
“Finite,” Guilbert said. “You’ve 
got a century and a half of life 
coming to you. Does it make sense 
to — ” 
“I’m with Manuel,” Cadge Foster said. He was the least glib member of the group, verging on taciturnity, but when he spoke he 
spoke with conviction. “Risk is essential to life. We need to take 
chances. We need to venture ourselves.” 
“Pointless chances?” Tennyson 
asked. “The quality of the shunt 
wouldn’t be any better if we went 
in immediately. The only difference 
would be that we’d eliminate the 
waiting time. I don’t like the odds. 
To gamble a century in order to 
save a couple of hours? I’m not 
that bored by waiting.” 
“You might be bored by life itself,” Nick Ssu-ma said. “So 
weary of it all that you’d stake a 
century against an hour just for the 
sake of diversion. I feel that way 
sometimes — don’t you? There once 
was a game played with a hand 
weapon, a game called — ah — 
Swedish Roulette?” 
“Polish,” Lloyd Tennyson corrected. 
“Polish Roulette, then. In which 
they took this weapon, which could 
be loaded with six or eight separate 
explosive charges, and loaded it 
with only one — ” 
Manuel disliked the trend of the 
conversation. Breaking in, he said 
sharply to Cadge Foster, “What’s 
that thing you’re playing with?’’ 
“I found it in a niche under my 
couch. It’s some kind of communications device. It says things to 
you.” 
“Let’s see it.” 
F oster tossed it over. It was a 
gray-green plastic, vaguely cubical but beveled to a curve at most 
of the intersections of its faces. 
Manuel cupped it in his hands and 
peered into its cloudy depths. 
Words began to form, making a 
brilliant red strip across the interior of the object. 
YOU HAVE FIFTY MINUTES 
MORETO WAIT 
“Clever,” Manuel said. He held 
it out for Nick Ssu-man to see. 
When he took it back the message changed. 
LIFE ISJOY. JOY IS LIFE. 
CAN YOU REFUTE 
THAT SYLLOGISM? 
“It isn’t a syllogism,” Manuel 
said. “Syllogisms take the form. 
All A is B. No T is A. Therefore, 
T is not B.” 
“What are you babbling about?” 
Mishima asked. 
“I’m giving this machine a logic 
lesson. You’d think a machine 
would know — ” 
IFPIMPLIESQANDQ 
IMPLIES R, DOES 
P IMPLY R? 
“I’ve got one, too,” Ssu-ma 
said. “Just to the left of the channel selector. Oh. Oh, my. Look at 
that!” 
He showed his cube to Lloyd 
Tennyson, who emitted a guffaw. 
Manuel, craning his neck, still 
could not see the message. Ssu-ma 
held the cube so that Manuel could 
read it. 
THECHICKEN IS MIGHTIER 
THAN THE PIE 
“1 don’t understand it,” Manuel 
said. 
“It’s an android dirty joke,” 
Ssu-ma explained. “One of my betas told it to me a few weeks ago. 
You see, there’s this hermaphrodite gamma — ” 
“We’ve all got them,” Jed Guilbert announced. “It’s a new thing 
for keeping people amused while 
they’re waiting, 1 guess.” 
DEFENDTHE FOLLOWING: 
GOLD IS MALLEABLE 
ALL ELECTRIC RADIOS 
REQUIRETUBES 
ALL WHITE TOMCATS WITH 
BLUE EYES ARE DEAF 
“How does it work?” Manuel 
asked. 
Cadge Foster said, “It’s primed 
to pick up anything we say. Then I 
imagine it relays a signal to a randomizing message center that picks 
out something vaguely relevant — 
or interestingly irrelevant — and 
feeds it onto the screen inside the 
cube.” 
“And we each get a different 
message?” 
“Nick’s and mine are the same 
right now.” Tennyson reported. 
“No — his is changing. Mine is staying—” 
THE SUM OF THE ANGLES 
OFATRIANGLEISI80' 
THIS IS NOT BOTH A CHAIR 
AND NOT A CHAIR 
WHO SHAVES THE SPANISH 
BARBER, THEN? 
“1 think it’s insane,” Mishima 
said. 
“Maybe that’s the whole point,” 
said Manuel. “Is it handing out 
anything but gibberish?” 
BECAUSE OF NECESSARY 
CLIMATE ADJUSTMENTS 
THE FOURTH OF NOVEMBER 
WILL BE CANCELED 
BETWEEN 32° and 61° 
SOUTH LATITUDE 
“I’m getting a news report on 
mine,” Guilbert said. “Something 
about your father, Manuel — ” 
“Let me see.” 
“Here — catch — ” 
FEMALE ALPHA SLAIN 
AT KRUG TOWER SITE. 
POLITICAL EXECUTION. 
AEP FIGURECHARGES. 
KRUG ORGANIZATION 
DENIESCLAIM, ALLEGES 
“More nonsense,” Manuel said. 
“I don’t think I find these things 
amusing.” 
CLEVELAND LIES BETWEEN 
NEW YORK AND CHICAGO 
“I’m getting the news story on 
mine now,” said Tennyson. “What 
do you think it’s all about?” 
ALPHA CASSANDRA NUCLEUS 
DIED INSTANTLY. 
THE FATAL BOLT WAS 
FIRED BY KRUG’S 
PRIVATE SECRETARY, 
LEON SPAULDING, 38. 
“Never heard of her,” said Manuel. “And Spaulding’s older than 
that. He’s been working for my 
father since — ” 
CAN THE RHYTHM OF 
THE universe’s BREATHING 
BE DETECTED BY STANDARD 
METABOLIC ANALYSIS? 
“Perhaps you should call your 
father, Manuel,” Ssu-ma said. “If 
there’s really trouble — ” 
“And cancel the shunt? When 
we’re booked in here for a week? 
TOWER OF GLASS 
I’ll find out about it when I come 
out. If there’s anything to find 
out.” 
ACTION FOR DAMAGES 
HAS BEEN INSTITUTED BY 
LABRADOR TRANSMAT GENERAL, 
PROPRIETOR OF THE 
DESTROYED ALPHA. EARLY 
SETTLEMENT IS EXPECTED. 
“Let’s go back to syllogisms,” 
Manuel told the cube he held. “If 
all men are reptiles, and alpha androids are reptiles — ” 
THE SUM OETHE PARTS 
IS EQUAL TO THE SQUARE 
ON THE HYPOTHESIS 
“Listen to what mine says!” 
shouted Tennyson. 
PANTING WITH DESIRE 
SHE WAITS FOR THE 
ARRIVAL OF HER COAL-BLACK 
PARTNER IN UNSPEAKABLE SIN 
“More!” Guilbert cried. 
“More!” 
THEREFORE, YOU ARE A REPTILE 
“Can we put these things away 
now?” Manuel asked. 
SHOWING DEEP EMOTION, 
ALPHA SIEGFRIED 
FILE CLERK OF AEP 
ACCUSED KRUG OF PLANNING A PURGE OF 
ANDROID EQUALITY ADVOCATES. 
“I think this really is a news 
broadcast,” Cadge Foster murmured. “I’ve heard of this Fileclerk. He’s pushing a constitutional amendment that would open 
Congress to alphas. And — ” 
WEEPING AS THE DEAD 
FEMALE ALPHA LAY IN 
THE SNOW BESIDE 
THE MIGHTY BULK OF 
THE TOWER. AN ALMOST 
HUMAN SHOW OF GRIEF. 
“Enough,” Manuel said. 
He began to toss his cube to the 
floor but, seeing the message 
change, glanced at it once again. 
DO YOU UNDERSTAND 
YOUR OWN MOTIVES? 
“Do you?” he asked. 
The cube went blank. He 
dropped it gratefully. The alpha 
attendant entered the subchamber 
and started to disconnect the electrodes. 
“You may proceed to the shunt 
room, gentlemen,” said the alpha 
blandly. “The programing has 
been completed and the stasis net 
is ready to receive you.” 
T hey had moved the chapel to 
a dome near the outer rim of 
the service area in a section where 
tools were repaired. In less than 
two hours a flawless transfer had 
been carried out. Inside, the new 
chapel was indistinguishable from 
the old. Within it Watchman found 
a dozen off-duty betas going 
through a ritual of consecration, a 
knot of gammas looking on. No 
one spoke to him or even looked 
directly at him — in the presence of 
an alpha they all scrupulously 
obeyed the code of social distances. 
Briefly Watchman prayed beneath 
the hologram of Krug. His soul 
was eased some, after a while, 
though the tensions of his long wintry dialogue with Siegfried Fileclerk would not leave him. His 
faith had not wavered before Fileclerk’s brusque pragmatic arguments but for a few moments, 
while they were thrusting and parrying beside the body of Cassandra 
Nucleus, Watchman had felt the 
touch of despair’s wings brushing 
his cheeks. Fileclerk had struck at a 
vulnerable place: Krug’s attitude 
toward the slaying of the alpha. 
Krug had seemed so unmoved by 
it! True, he had looked annoyed — 
but was it merely the expense, the 
nuisance of a suit, that bothered 
him? Watchman had riposted with 
the proper metaphysical statements, yet he was disturbed. Why 
had Krug not seemed lessened by 
the killing? Where was the sense of 
grace? Where was the hope of redemption? Where was the mercy 
of the Maker? 
The snow was slackening when 
Watchman left the chapel. Night 
had come, moonless, the stars unbearably sharp. Savage winds 
knifed across the flat, treeless expanse of the construction site. 
Siegfried Fileclerk was gone — so 
was the corpse of Cassandra Nucleus. Long lines of workers stood 
in front of the transmat banks for 
the shift was changing. Watchman 
returned to the control center. Euclid Planner, his relief man, was 
there. 
“I’m on,” Planner said. “Go. 
You stayed late tonight.” 
“A complicated day. You know 
about the killing?” 
“Of course. Labrador Transmat’s claimed the body. The 
lawyers have been all over the 
place.” Planner himself eased 
into the linkup seat. “I understand the chapel’s been moved, 
too.” 
“We had to. That’s how it all 
started — Spaulding got too interested in the chapel. It’s a long 
story.” 
“I’ve heard it,” Euclid Planner 
said. He prepared to jack himself 
into the computer. “There’ll be 
problems out of this. As if there 
weren’t problems enough. Go with 
Krug, Thor.” 
“Go with Krug,” Watchman 
murmured. He took his leave. 
The outbound workers on the 
transmat line made way for him. 
He entered the cubicle and let the 
green glow hurl him to his three
TOWER OF GLASS 
room flat in Stockholm, in the section of the android quarter favored by alphas. The private transmat was a rare privilege, a mark 
of the esteem in which he was held 
by Krug. He knew no other android who had one — but Krug had 
insisted that it was necessary for 
Watchman to be able to leave his 
apartment on a moment’s notice 
and had had the cubicle installed. 
He felt drained and weary. He 
set himself for two hours of sleep, 
stripped and lay down. 
W HEN he awoke he was as tired 
as before. That was unusual. 
He decided to give himself another 
hour of rest and closed his eyes. 
But in a short while he was interrupted by the chime of the telephone. Turning toward the screen, 
he saw Lilith Meson. Sleepily he 
made the Krug-be-praised sign at 
her. 
She looked somber. 
She said, “Can you come to the 
Valhallavagen chapel, Thor?” 
“Now?” 
“Now, if you can. It’s tense here. 
The Cassandra Nucleus thing — we 
don’t know what to think, Thor.” 
“Wait,” he said. “I’ll be there.” 
He put on a robe, set the transmat coordinates for the Valhallavagen cubicle and jumped. It was a 
fifty-meter walk from the cubicle 
to the chapel; transmats were never 
installed inside a chapel. A feeble, 
strained dawn was breaking. In the 
night there had been a little snow 
here, too. Watchman saw; the remnants of it fleeced the deep windowledges of the old buildings. 
The chapel was in a ground-floor 
flat at the corner. Some fifteen androids were there, all alphas. The 
lower classes rarely used the Valhallavagen chapel, though they 
were free to do so. Betas felt uncomfortable in it and gammas preferred to worship in Gamma Town, 
far across the city. 
Watchman recognized some of 
the most distinguished members of 
his kind in the group. He acknowledged the greetings of the poetess 
Andromeda Quark, the historian 
Mazda Constructor, the theologian 
Pontifex Dispatcher, the philosopher Krishna Guardsman and several others who were among the 
elite of the elite. All seemed ragged 
with tension. When Watchman 
made Krug-be-praised at them 
most of them returned the gesture 
halfheartedly, perfunctorily. 
Lilith Meson said, “Lorgive us 
for breaking your rest, Thor. But 
as you see an important conference is in progress.” 
“How can I help?” 
“You were a witness to the slaying of Alpha Cassandra Nucleus,” 
Pontifex Dispatcher said. He was 
heavy, slow-moving, an android of 
dignified and imposing bearing who 
came from one of the earliest of 
Krug’s batches. He had played a 
major role in the shaping of their 
religion. “We have somewhat of a 
theological crisis now,” Dispatcher 
went on. “In view of the charges 
raised by Siegfried Fileclerk — ” 
“Charges? I hadn’t heard.” 
“Will you tell him?” Pontifex 
Dispatcher said, glancing at Andromeda Quark. 
The poetess, lean and intense, 
with an elegant, reedy voice, said, 
“Fileclerk held a press conference 
last night at AEP headquarters. He 
insisted that the killing of Alpha 
Nucleus was a politically motivated act carried out at the instigation of — ” she could barely say it — 
“Krug.” 
“Slime of the Vat,” Watchman 
muttered. “I begged him not to do 
that. Fileclerk and I stood talking 
in the snow half an hour and I told 
him — I told him — ” He knotted 
his fingers. “Was there a statement 
from Krug?” 
“A denial,” said Mazda Constructor, who for four years had 
with Watchman’s surreptitious aid 
been secretly compiling the annals 
of the androids from Krug’s deadstorage data file. “An immediate 
response. The killing was called accidental.” 
“Who spoke for Krug?” Watchman asked. 
“A lawyer. Fearon, the Senator’s 
brother.” 
“Not Spaulding, eh? Still in 
shock, 1 guess. Well, so Fileclerk’s 
been spewing filth. What of it?” 
Softly Pontifex Dispatcher said, 
“At this moment chapels everywhere are crowded as your brothers 
and sisters gather to discuss the im
plications of the killing, Thor. The 
theological resonances are so terribly complex. If Krug indeed did 
give the order for the ending of Cassandra Nucleus’ life, did he do so 
in order to show His displeasure 
over the activities of the Android 
Equality Party? That is, does He 
prefer our way to theirs? Or, on the 
other hand, did He take her life to 
register His disapproval of the ultimate goals of the AEP — which of 
course are roughly the same as our 
own? If the former, our faith is justified. But if the latter, you see, 
then possibly we have been given a 
sign that Krug totally rejects the 
concept of android equality. And 
then there is no hope for us.” 
A BLEAK prospect,” croaked 
Krishna Guardsman, whose 
teachings on the relationship of 
Krug to android were revered by 
all. “However, I take comfort in 
the thought that if Krug struck Alpha Nucleus down to show His 
dislike of the equality movement. 
He did so merely to oppose political agitation for equality now and 
was in effect reminding us to be 
more patient and await His grace. 
But—” 
“We should also consider a much 
darker possibility,” said Mazda 
Constructor. “Is Krug capable of 
evil? Was His role in the killing a 
wicked one? If so, then perhaps the 
entire foundation of our creed must 
be reexamined and even rebuilt, for 
if Krug can act arbitrarily and im
TOWER OF GLASS 
morally, then it surely follows — ” 
“Wait! Wait!” called an uneasy 
voice from the rear of the group. 
“No such talk as this in a chapel!” 
“1 speak only figuratively,” 
Mazda Constructor said, “with no 
blasphemies intended. We are trying to show Alpha Watchman the 
range of reactions now being demonstrated around the world. Certainly many of us fear that Fileclerk’s charges are correct — that 
Alpha Nucleus was put to death 
for her political views — and that 
has led to a consideration of the 
possibility that Krug has acted improperly. It is being discussed in 
many chapels at this very moment.” 
“1 think we have to believe,” said 
Krishna Guardsman, “that all acts 
of Krug are by definition good acts, 
leading us toward our ultimate redemption. Our problem here is not 
to justify Krug’s deeds but simply 
to quiet the unhappy suspicions of 
Krug’s motives that this Fileclerk, 
who is not even a member of our 
communion, has stirred up in those 
that are. We — ” 
“It was a sign from Krug! It was 
a sign!” 
‘‘The Vat giveth and the Vat 
taketh away!” 
“Fileclerk said that Krug showed 
no remorse whatever. He — ” 
“ — sent for the lawyers. A civil 
action — ” 
“ — property damage. A tort — ” 
“ — another test of our faith — ” 
“ — she was our enemy in any 
case — ” 
“ — killing one of His children to 
warn the rest of us? That makes 
Him a monster!” 
“ — in the fire of His crucible are 
we smelted — ” 
“ — revealing an unsuspected capacity for murderous — ” 
“ — sanctity — ” 
“ — redemption — ” 
“ — blood — ” 
“Listen to me” Thor Watchman 
cried, amazed and impatient. 
“Please. Please listen!” 
“Let him speak,” Mazda Constructor said. “Of all of us he is 
closest to Krug. His words have 
weight.” 
“I was there,” said Watchman. 
“1 saw the whole thing. Before you 
destroy yourselves with conflicting 
theologies, listen. Krug bears no 
responsibility for the killing. 
Spaulding, the secretary, the ectogene, acted on his own. There is no 
other truth but this.” 
In a cataract of words he told of 
Spaulding’s blustering attempt to 
force his way into the constructionsite chapel, of the ectogene’s rising 
tension in the face of the resistance 
of the chapel’s guards, of his own 
ruse to draw Spaulding away from 
the chapel, of the unhappy result 
when Spaulding discovered Krug 
beset by the AEP agents. 
“This is deeply reassuring,” said 
Mazda Constructor when Watchman was done. “We have been mis
led by Fileclerk’s accusations. This 
is not an issue of Krug’s actions at 
all.” 
“Except in the deeper sense that 
Krug must have constructed the 
entire sequence of events,” Krishna 
Guardsman suggested. 
“Can you seriously maintain 
that His will underlies even the secular events of — ” Pontifex Dispatcher began. 
Mazda Constructor cut him off. 
“We can debate the intricacies of 
His will another time. At present 
our task is to communicate with 
all other chapels, to transmit Thor’s 
aceount of the events. Our people 
everywhere are in unrest — we must 
calm them. Thor, will you dictate 
your statement so that it can be 
coded and transmitted?” 
“Certainly.” 
Andromeda Quark handed him a 
message cube. Watchman repeated 
the story after first identifying himself, explaining his relation to Krug 
and swearing to the authenticity of 
his version of the events. A terrible 
fatigue hammered at him from 
within. How eager these brilliant 
alphas were, he thought, to engulf 
everything in a mist of theological 
disquisition! And how quick to accept Fileclerk’s lies. In thousands 
of chapels just now, hundreds of 
thousands of devout androids were 
agonizing over the question of why 
Krug had allowed an alpha to be 
shot to death in His arms, whereas, 
if they had merely waited to learn 
the truth from someone who had 
been present — 
Well, it was not too late to undo 
the harm. No one’s faith in Krug 
need be shaken by what had occurred. 
Andromeda Quark and another 
female, both members of the Projector caste, were already at work 
coding the beginning of Watchman’s statement for transmission 
over the broad-band network that 
linked every chapel to every other 
one. Watchman remained long 
enough to hear the first few phrases 
of his coded statement go forth: 
SUBSCRIBE NOW TO THE NEW The Magazine of Alternatives 
TOWER OF GLASS 
UAA GCG UCG UAA GGG. GGC 
GGU AAG AAU UAA UAA CUG. CAA 
CAU AGG CGG GGC GAC ACA. ACC 
ACC cue — 
“May I go?” he said. 
Pontifex Dispatcher gave him 
the sign of the Blessing of the Vat. 
Watchman returned it and, aching, 
departed. 
TO BE CONTINUED 
WHATEVER BECAME OF 
THE McGowans? 
muscles, making deliberate attempts to move. 
“I want to see my wife and 
child,” he requested weakly. 
“Well done,” said Dr. Svenson. 
“Keep thinking, keep talking. And 
above all, keep trying to move 
about a bit. We can’t exercise you 
properly — normal exercise would 
be meaningless in relation to your 
muscles — you can only help yourself. What we can do is keep your 
bloodstream flushed out with new 
blood and pump you full of anticoagulants and let time do the rest. 
Your wife and child? Turn over. 
By yourself.” 
He shifted his body inch by inch, 
rolling very slowly to lie on his 
back. He turned his head painfully, 
the neck muscles stiff from disuse 
and, during a period of less than a 
day, came to face in the opposite 
direction. Sandra was watching 
him from the next bed. 
“Hello, Dick,” she said carefully and smiled uncertainly. 
And he understood her without 
a translating machine. He spoke to 
her and no longer felt alone. Night 
( Continued from page 125 ) 
came and went — another and another in rapid succession — and her 
hair was becoming brown again 
and the sallow tint was fading 
from her skin. 
Looking at her lying on the iron 
bed in the severely appointed, rectangular room, he remembered 
with vivid clarity the last time he 
had seen her, standing, facing him 
on Jade, Stephen crouching motionless at her feet. Again he was 
watching the slender shape of her 
body, the serene, unchanging expression of her face, the dancing of 
her emerald hair in the occasional 
light breeze — and in the aching 
memory of the timeless scene he 
felt a sense of loss. 
But behind the silken green of 
Sandra’s hair he could see the 
feathery green plumes of the four 
trees beside the neighboring farm 
and he knew, as surely as he knew 
anything, what had become of the 
McGowans. 
And the lively smile on Sandra’s 
face as she lay in the hospital bed 
told him that immortality has its 
drawbacks. ★ 
SPECIAL TO GALAXY & IF READERS... 
THE BEST IN 
SCIENCE FICTION BOOKS... 
worth adding to your library. stories you will treasure . 
available to you at a special 10% discount 
Conveniently obtained from GALAXY Magazine. No searching, no book clubs, 
no commitments. Here are the books of enduring value that you will want to 
own... for hours of science-fiction pleasure, to be read, reread, and discussed 
with your friends. These are the books that have proven themselves . filled with 
all of the features you look for in S-F. .written by the acknowledged masters 
of the art. Just circle your choices below, mail to us, and the books will be in your 
hands shortly, ready to transport you to new, thrilling, imaginative worlds. 
A^ARD 
SG.ENCE 
FIGTON 
FREE— with every order for 2 or more books. 
AWARD SCIENCE FICTION READER. 188 
pages, containing stories by such masters of science 
fiction as Arthur C. Clarke, Theodore Sturgeon, 
A. E. van Vogt, Clifford Simak, Poul Anderson, 
Leigh Brackett, John W. Campbell, Jr. All of the 
stories belong to the excitingly modern era that 
swept SF to its greatest pinnacle of popularity. 
8-1 
NONE BUT MAN by Gordon R. Dlekton. Aliens 
from Moldaug, inhuman stars from the last human 
settlement, are gathering together for war. Old 
world inhabitants are willing to sachhce the new 
world colonies in order to avert this war. But not 
rugged individualist Cully When, the type of man 
who has pioneered frontiers in all times and all 
places. Set in some future time, this action-filled 
adventure depicts space-age guerrilla warfare and 
age-old human stupidity with excitement and ends 
with an explosive climax. 
253 pp. List Price... $4.95 Discount Price... $4 .46 
S-2 
A CASE OF CONSCIENCE by Jamea Bllah. Two 
s^arate and complete worlds — idyllic Lithia and 
a culture on Earth that has literally gone under 
ground, provides the basis for the story of four 
extraordinary men. There is the priest, dedicated 
to the glory of God; the scientist working for the 
glory of man; the realist who works only for himself; and the man who is content to ask nothing of 
any world, any man, or any deity. The author presents a compelling moral problem. This book is 
something of a tour de force. 
166pp. List Price... $4.50 Discount Price... $4.05 
S-3 
BUG JACK BARRON by Norman Spinrad. Explore 
the edge of tomorrow . who will be chosen for 
immortality? Who will make this ultimate decision 
— the government, free enterprise, or private 
monopoly? A new, highly controversial novel, 
infused with blood and guts, examining the disease 
of power as well as the responsibility. Both praised 
and damned before it was even published, this 
novel deserves your personal attention. 
327 pp. List Price... $5.95 Discount Price... $5 J6 
S-4A 
THE POLLINATORS OF EDEN by John Boyd. From 
the Planet of the Flowers, Dr. Freda Caron’s 
fiance Paul has sent her an exquisite iridescent 
yellow tulip that not only has a plastic memory— 
but can talk. Freda realizes that she must unlock 
the secrets of the flower planet and its strange 
hold on Paul. In this exciting new book, Freda 
must travel from her ultra-rational world-oftomorrow to explore the strange, unearthly flower 
planet. The climax of this shocking and oddly 
beautiful novel is bizarre and delightful. 
212 pp. List Price... $5. 50 Discount Price ... $4.95 
6.9 
THE MIDWICH CUCKOOS by John Wyndham. For 
an entire day, a small rural village in England 
loses contact with the outside world. Soon after, 
all the women, married or not become pregnant, 
eventually giving birth to remarkable golden-eyed 
children who exhibit a strange kind of sinisterism. 
They are dangerous and Midwich must make the 
ultimate decision — if the children survive, then 
mankind must join the dinosaur among Nature’s 
discards. A gripping account of man’s fight for 
survival. 
169pp. List Price... 94.SO Discount Price... $4.05 
8*6 
THE SPACE MERCHANTS by Frederik Pohl and 
C. M. Kornbluth. Two major advertising agencies 
are fighting for the Venus account — nothing less 
than total control of the Venus economy and markets. will do. It is completely unimportant that 
Venus is a harsh, barren, uninhabited planet. 
According to the mentality of Mitchell Courtenay 
of F.owler Schocken Associates, the trick is to persuade colonists to go to Venus, and once there, 
they will have to survive as best they can. One of 
tlie most savage and devastating attacks on modern consumer society and the advertising agents 
who are its high priests. The Space Merchants is 
uncomfortably prophetic. 
156 pp. List Price... $4. SO Discount Price... $4 .05 
8-7 
BRAIN WAVE by Pout Anderson. Imagine, some 
mysterious space force that inhibits the world’s 
intdligence. But suddenly, it’s gone and overnight 
the intellect of every living creature is trebled. 
What are the consequences of such instant genius? 
These are the problems confronting Archie Brock, 
former near moron; Peter Corinth, physicist; and 
his no-longer dumb wife. This provocative and 
absorbing book explores the ultimate problem of 
such a situation — in a world free of the difhculties 
that has plagued mankind throughout history, 
what is man to do with his time? 
164 pp. List Price... $4. 50 Discount Price... $4.05 
S-8A 
OPUS 100 by Isaae Aalmev. An event — a special 
Asimov book... America’s foremost science writer, 
takes you on a personalized guided tour of his 
first 99 books. This, his 100th book, is an anthology of works selected by the author himself. It is 
a journey which acquaints the reader with a 
writer considered to a genius, who delights in 
every aspect of life and has the capacity to make 
any subject he writes about both understandable 
and entertaining. Reviewers customarily greet 
Asimov publications with such adjectives as 
“brilliant,” “engrossing,” “powerful,” and “sparkling.” Opus 100 is no exception. 
318 pp. List Price. ..$5. 95 Discount Price. ..$5.36 
S-0 
THE PAST THROUGH TOMORROW, Robert A. 
Heinleln’s Future History Stories. Twenty-five years 
ago Robert A. Heinlein began to write stories 
about an imaginary future that is fast becoming a 
reality. Discover, through the pen of the master of 
space-age fiction, about man’s first step on the 
moon; weather control; manufacture of synthetic 
food; interstellar exploration. Now, for the first 
time, in chronological order, are Heinlein’s 21 
compelling stories — all depicting a glimpse of a 
possible tomorrow. 
667 pp. List Price... $6 .95 Discount Price... $6.26 
S-10 
THORNS by Robert Sllverberg. Duncan Chalk, 
master pain peddler, skillful and sophisticated, 
lives in a time when reading tragic headlines no 
longer provides the necessar> sensations. Into 
Chalk’s sinister hands falls Lona Kelvin, orphaned, 
mother of 100 children, yet without a soul; and 
Minner Burris, starman, whose butchered body 
was put together by aliens, a walking horror. What 
fun to mate these two and watch them wallow in. 
their mutual torment. But somewhere, something 
went wrong. Discover what happens when the puppets begin to pull their own strings in this imaginative, chilling book. 
222 pp. List Price... $4.95 Discount Price... $4 .46 
THE GALAXY BOOK SERVICE 
P.O. Box 3977, Grand Central Post OfiSce, New York, N. Y. 10017 
I 
Please send me the books Please print full name & address 
I have circled. 
S-1 
S-6 
S-2 S-3 S-4A S-5 
S-7 S-8A S-9 S-10 
Name 
Address 
City State Zip Code 
Sorry, No C.O.D.’s. (Please add 25?f for postage and handling. N.Y.C. residents please add 6% [ 
sales tax. N.Y. State residents please add 5% sales tax.) i 
10-day satisfaction ... or your money back. FREE copy of AWARD SCIENCE FICTION j 
READER with all orders for 2 or more books. G-5-70 • 
' society 
1 got sick and tired of 
coughing and wheezing 
and hacking. So I quit. 
I quit smoking cigarettes. 
Which wasn’t easy. I’d been 
a pack-a-day man for 
about 8 years. 
Still, I quit. And, after a 
while, I also quit coughing and 
wheezing and hacking. 
Now, the American Cancer Society 
offers every quitter an I.Q. button. 
To tell everyone you’ve got what 
it takes to say “I quit.” 
And it takes plenty. I know from 
personal experience. 
1 know something else. There is one 
thing tougher than quitting cigarettes. 
And that’s not quitting. 
JEHIIE Dixon PREDICTS 
• HOW THE WAR WILL END 
• WHAT WILL HAPPEN WITH INFUTION 
• FANTASTIC SURPRISE IN THE WHITE HOUSE 
• DRAMATIC UPHEAVAL IN RELIGION 
Take this 
bestseller 
FOR ONLY 
when you join now and ogree to take 
only 4 books in the coming year 
The incredible JEANE DIXON reveals tha 
events destined to reshape your world. 
SAFETY ^ 
COIN 
^ V 
HOLDER 
PLACE 
DIME 
A 
HERE 
DO NOT 
TAPE OR 
SEAL 
- 3. FOLD POCKET OVER COUPON 
UNIVERSE BOOK CLUB, DEPT. 05-GXX, 
GARDEN CITY, N.Y. 11530 
Please accept my application for membership and send me JEANE DIXON’S newest 
book “My Life and Prophecies.” I enclose 
10<t to help cover shipping. 
New book selections will be described for 
me in advance. A convenient form will always 
be provided for my use if I do not wish to 
receive a forthcoming selection. I pay only 
$2.49, plus shipping and handling, for each 
selection I accept (unless I take an extravalue selection) . I need take only 4 selections 
or alternate selections in the coming year, 
and may resign any time after that. 
NO-RISK GUARANTEE: If not delighted 
with JEANE DIXON’s “My Life and Prophecies” I may return it in 10 days and membership will be canceled. I will owe nothing. 
(please print) 
Credit Reference^ 
piioiie number, bank or department 
rImrKO account). 13-U30 
■<TH iiccepted In Continental U.S.A. 03-PAX 
in.lR only. 
JUST 10^ BRINGS JEANE DIXON’S 
ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS LIKE . 
if Will there be a third world war? 
if What earth-staggering blow will fall 
from the heavens in the 1980’s? 
if Will peace come to the Middle East? 
^ What's the greatest future menace? 
★ Is the "under-30” generation on tho 
right track? 
Now, in her startling new be.st-.srlln- •My 
Life and Prophecies.” JEANE DIXON foin 
casts the dramatic, world-chnnKliig cvrnJn 
that lie just ahead. 
Here you’ll find revealing prophrclm ulmui 
the prospects for continuing civil Ntrlfr iuul 
riots in the U.S....the fate of Uii' dolhii 
the outcome of world disarmainrnt (ulkn 
a fantastic breakthrough In the Hpure pin 
gram . and much, much more. 
This spell-binding book also descrllion fn>w 
JEANE DIXON makes her prophecle.s 
she foresaw events like the tragic Apollo fln’ 
. the great Northeast blackout . Lyiotnu 
Johnson's withdrawal from the '6H rirnl 
dential race — to name Just a few. 
And now, you can get this fabuloim Imnk 
for only 10( as a new member of the Unlvei ho 
Book Club. 
THE UNIVERSE BOOK CLUB 
EXPLORES ALL AREAS OF THE OCCULT 
If you’re interested in astrologv, psychic hcIences, and other occult phenomena — tlilw l« 
the book club for you. 
Each month the Editors select provocative, 
often controversial books. ..“inside” stories 
about ESP... reincarnation... the supernatural... the black arts. Selections are described 
in advance. They sell for $4.95, $5.95, or more 
in publishers’ editions. You pay only $2.49 
plus shipping and handling. (Occasional 
extra-value selections slightly higher.) Accept 
only the books you want. Take as few as 4 
in the coming year from several offered each 
month. You may resign anytime thereafter. 
Universe Book Cliib, Garden City, N.Y. 11530.