galaxy 
galaxy 
SCIENCE FICTION 
'iC' November 1968 
600 
Building on the Line 
by 
GORDON P D'U ON 
Perri! .r 
by ROBERT .’’V mW 
Eeeetz Ch 
by H. H. HOLL 
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION 
by WILLY LEY 
ALL STORIES 
HEW AND COMPLETE 
THANK YOU... 
We’re grateful to all the science-fiction fans 
who gave our publications a clean sweep of 
every professional Hugo Award at tho 1967 
World Science Fiction Convention. And 
we’re proud that you’ve selected us for the 
Best Magazine Award for the past two consecutive years. We’re even moro grateful to the many loyal 
readers who hnvo made it possible for both 
GALAXY and IF to appear monthly from now 
on. That means wo can bring you twice as 
many of the best storios being written by the 
best science-fiction writers of all time. 
...AND COME AGAIN 
To earn your continued support, we're determined to make GALAXY and IF even 
better in the future. You’ll regret missing a single issue. So to 
be sure instead of sorry, why not fill in the 
coupon— or write the information on a sheet 
of plain paper— and send it in today? You’ll 
save money, too! 
GALAXY PUBLISHING CORPORATION 
421 Hudson Street 
New York, New York 10014 
Hurry and enter my subscription to GALAXY and WORLDS OF IF at your special combination 
rate. I enclose my check or money order (or: 
□ 12 issues ol each for $1 1 .50 □ 24 issues of each for $22 50 □ 36 issues of each for $31,50 
Name 
Address 
City & State Zip Code 
Prices outside the Western Hemisphere add $1.00 per 12 issues for postage 
Please check whether □ new or □ renewal 
ALL STORIES NEW 
Galaxy Is published In French, German, Italian, Japanese and Spanish. 
The U. S. Edition Is published In 
Braille and Living Tape. 
November, 1968 • Vol. 27, No. 4 
CONTENTS 
NOVELETTES 
PERRIS WAY 10 
by Robert Silverberg 
BUILDING ON THE LINE 84 
by Cordon R. Dickson 
EEEETZ CH 167 
by H. H. Hollis 
SHORT STORIES 
FREDERIK POHL 
Editor 
WILLY LEY 
Science Editor 
JUDY-LYNN BENJAMIN 
Associate Editor 
LESTER DEL REV 
Managing Editor 
ROBERT M, GUINN 
Publisher 
LAWRENCE LEVINE ASSOC. 
Advertising 
MAVIS FISHER 
Circulation Director 
KEEP MOVING 70 
by Miriam Allen DeFord 
THE MARKET IN ALIENS 134 
by K. M. O'Donnell 
LOCUST YEARS 138 
by Douglas R. Mason 
THE TELL-TALE HEART MACHINE .... 153 
by Brian W. Aldiss 
SCIENCE DEPARTMENT 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 122 
by Willy Ley 
FEATURES 
EDITORIAL 4 
by Frederilc PoM 
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 160 
by Algis Budrys 
GALAXY'S STARS 193 
GALAXY MAGAZINE Is published 
monthly by Galaxy Publishing 
Corporation. Main offices: 421 
Hudson Street, New York, N.Y. 
10014. 60c per copy Subscription: (12 copies) $6.00 in the 
United States, Canada, Mexico, 
South and Central America and 
U. S. Possessions. Elsewhere 
$7.00. Second-class postage 
paid at New York, N.Y. and at 
additional mailing offices. Copyright New York 1968 by Galaxy 
Publishing Corporation, Robert 
M. Guinn, President. All rights 
including translations reserved. 
All material submitted must be 
accompanied by self-addressed 
stamped envelopes. The publisher assumes no responsibility 
for unsolicited material. All 
stories printed In this magazine 
are fiction and any similarity 
between characters and actual 
persons Is coincidental. 
Cover by DEMBER from 
BUILDING ON THE LINE 
Printed In the U.SA. 
By The Guinn Co., Inc. N.Y. 
Title Reg. U. S. Pat Off. 
VIETNAM REVISITED 
«[ 
Tn the June issue, as you may 
remember, we ran two fullpage ads on facing pages, one 
urging the United States to get 
out of Vietnam, the other urging us to stay. Each advertisement was signed and paid for 
by several dozen science-fiction 
writers, including on one list or 
the other most of the best-known 
writers in the field. 
It struck us that this was a 
rather odd and distressing phenomenon. As anyone who knew 
science fiction could tell by looking at the lists, there was much 
the same range of backgrounds, 
interests, world views and so on 
on both lists; it seemed to us that, 
if one were to get a sort of group 
consensus from each of the two 
sets of writers on what they wanted the future development of 
man to look like, the two sets of 
specifications would be just about 
identical. Yet on this quite crucial issue, their ways of getting to 
that shared future were polar opposites. And we wondered why. 
So we took the money that the 
two groups of writers paid us for 
the ads, amounting to $500, and 
offered it as five prizes of a hundred dollars each to the readers, 
writers or other interested parties 
who came up with the most interesting and potentially useful 
suggestions on just what one 
could do about Vietnam — whether in the direction of winning 
the war, or of ending it, or of preventing future Vietnams, or whatever seemed relevant. 
Now the results are all in, and 
the prizes have been awarded. 
TJ'rankly, we felt a little presumptuous at asking our own 
fellow sf addicts to solve a problem that has clearly defeated 
some of the brightest politicians 
of all time. We were prepared to 
be laughed at; but in the event, 
barring two persons, one a reader and the other a radio announcer, most people took it seriously. 
Seriously enough, anyway, to 
come up with more than 500 
pieces of mail, including a total 
that must be well over a thousand 
individual entries (we haven’t 
counted) which ranged the spec
DID THEY POSSESS? 
Why were these men great ? 
How does anyone — man or woman — achieve 
greatness? Is it not by mastery of the powers 
within ourselves? 
Knowthe mysterious world within you ! Attune 
yourself to the wisdom of the ages! Grasp the 
inner power of your mind ! Learn the secrets of a 
full and peaceful life! 
Benjamin Franklin, statesman and inventor. , 
Isaac Newton, discoverer of the Law of Gravitai 
tion . Francis Bacon, philosopher and scientist 
, . like many other learned and great men and 
women . were Rosicmcians. The Rosicrucians 
(NOT a religious organization) have been in 
existence for centuries. Today, headquarters of 
the Rosicmcians send over seven million pieces 
of mail annually to all parts of the world. 
0 TTe ROSICRUCIANS 
San Jose [(AMORC); California 95114, U.S.A. 
it FREE 
be Mss* 
— 
No ob
A non
Safes P.G.R. SEND THIS COUPON 
.The ROSICRUCIANS please include 
(AMORC) YOUR ZIP CODE 
Ssa Jose, California 95114. U.S.A. 
Please scad me the free book. The Mastery of Life, 
which explains how I may leara to use my faculties 
sod powers of mind. 
THE WINNERS 
Entries were judged fsr pertinence 
and originality. All entries, whether 
prize-winners or not, will be considered tor use in further- studies. The five 
recipients of $100 saih are Poul Anderson, 3 Las Palomas, Orinda, California 945(5 3; Dan Gollub, 122Q Marion #31, 
Denver, Colorado; Kirk W. Holliday, 
227 Bewery, New York, N. Y. 10002; 
Gary Pratt, Route #5, Athens, Ohio 
45701; and Mack Reynolds, Apartado 
252, San Miguel de Allende, Gto., Mexico. 
Although only five prizes were awarded according to the terms of the contest, the Editors of Galaxy Publishing 
Corporation wish to thank all of the 
participants in this rather unusual venture. We regret that it U impossible to 
acknowledge each submission personally. 
The love! of suggestions was high. 
trum from injunctions like “Kill 
gooksl” and “Just get out' to 
quite detailed proposals for what 
might actually be practicable and 
valuable procedures. Some entries were supported by maps, 
reference citations, statistical analyses, even a 30-page printed 
booklet, 
To be sure, not every entry 
was valuable, or even sensible. A 
fairly large number were clearly 
impossible. (We Have a House 
rule against using the word “impossible” except under rigidly 
construed circumstances — so 
many “impossible” things Have 
happened! In this case, we took a 
suggestion to be impossible wEen 
it proposed a specific measure 
that had already been tried, and 
failed; or when it proposed the 
immediate use of some weapon or 
device that does not exist We 
were prepared to grant the longrange possibility of almost any; 
device one could imagine — but 
not, for instance, the employment 
of mass hypnosis on all combatants this year. This year no one 
can do it) Another large group 
appeared to miss the point of 
what the war was about ( Admittedly there is some confusion 
on that question.) Some proposed destroying the wfeole country, or evacuating it totally; some 
suggested dropping H-bombs on 
everything in sight, or propagandising soldiers (some suggested 
our soldiers, others the other 
side’s) to “figEt the way the 
Arabs fought in the six-day war.” 
But eliminating all of those, 
there remained a batch of interesting entries. Some proposed 
new ways of winning the war — 
a method of interdicting Haiphong Harbor without bombing, 
a guerrilla strategy similar to that 
used by the British in Malaya. 
Some suggested ways of disengaging without loss of face — a variation on the tactic of non-violent resistance, a proposal for a 
plebiscite. Some offered longrange plans, including ways of 
strengthening the U.N., or of prejudging “national liberation” 
struggles by techniques resem
Ballantine 
RECENTLY we had occasion to read a manuscript which attempted to present a 
critique of science fiction designed to draw non s.f. readers into the fold. The 
general theme was that s.f. could now afford to stand up on its own indeterminate 
number of literary feet and need no longer be regarded as a pulp relative of "straight" writing. 
QUITE aside from the marvellous pomposity of this approach (neatly calculated 
to keep people away from s.f. in droves) the fact is that if any normal reader 
were to go through all the straight fiction published in any given month, he'd find 
70% of it appalling — not even skillful pulp like Harold Robbins, for instance, 
or true confessions — 6 la John Updike. There is an awful lot of rubbish published. But the s.f. field excludes rubbish and keeps the bad stuff down to a 
minimum. Because only s.f. readers are fanatical enough to want to read all the 
s.f. published. Only s.f. readers are discerning enough not only to read everything, 
but to come back at authors with criticism, praise, brickbats, encouragement — 
In short, participation. Only s.f. readers have conventions every year, write each 
other thousands of opinionated words via hundreds of fanzines, give awards, exchange scandal, get drunk with their favorite authors and, as a group, bring real 
meaning to the role of readership. 
SO there's the way to do it. Challenge the new recruit. Enquire if they have 
read Tolkien (never mind that he's not s.f.i Tolkien Is a magic word, a touchstone; 
|ust about anybody knows he wrote a book. And first we have to establish that 
the prospect is literate). If they have not read Tolkien, suggest they try. If they 
have read Tolkien, chances are they're wondering. But take the steps from fantasy 
to s.f, by easy stages, like from Tolkien to McCaffrey to a couple of classics 
(CHILDHOOD'S END and SPACE MERCHANTS), then one or two pungent Tenn 
collections perhaps, and on to Leiber and Larry Niven. You're into the hardcore stuff 
now, and they should be hooked. Turn them loose on A VOYAGE TO ARCTURUS 
and see what happens. Or Asimov, Heinlein, Vance, del Rey, Spinrad, a whole 
bouncing world of riches. 
THIS started out to be a coupon ad, but I see we've run out of space. Oh well, 
next month . Meantime, send for our catalog. And go buy Mervyn Peake's 
GORMBNGHAST TRILOGY, Or send us $3.00, And let us know what you think of 
it. Tell everybody. 
BALLANTINE BOOKS 
101 5th Avenue 
New York, Now York 10003 
bling compulsory arbitration. 
Some were pretty fanciful, as you 
might expect from science-fictioneers (a proposal to settle wars by 
counting voluntary suicides on 
eacH side; the side with the most 
volunteers wins), but most were 
not. 
They were, in fact — it’s a 
small enough thing to say — at 
least as persuasive as most of 
what we hear from the world’s 
leaders on the subject. 
And this is all the more remarkable because between the 
time the issue containing tlie contest announcement went on the 
printing presses and the time it 
reached the readers, the whole 
character of the situation changed 
dramatically. (It is not yet clear 
How much of the change is substance and How much is just 
drama.) The President announced his decision not to run 
again, and His willingness to begin talks at once, implementing it 
with a change in bombing policy; 
and in fact the Paris talks began shortly thereafter. 
In spite of everything, the responses came in in volume, from 
all over the United States, from 
Mexico, Canada, El Salvador, 
from England, France, Belgium, 
Portugal, Finland — a fair number from troops actually serving 
in Vietnam right now. 
By the time you read this, it Is 
possible there may be even more 
startling changes — after all, it’s 
an election year in the United 
States, and a most strange and 
perplexing one, at that. It is even 
possible that the war may be 
over, one way or another; it is 
perhaps possible, even, that it 
may have exploded out of control 
entirely, and all discussions Have 
become pointless. 
But we’ll be discussing it anyway. Because now that the contest is over, what we think is the 
most interesting part^is just beginning. 
^T'here exists (as you remem ber if you’ve been reading Galaxy attentively enough) a sort of 
procedure for exploring the future, pioneered by scientists associated with the RAND Corporation and called the Delphi technique. It’s an interesting research 
tool. Although it is hard to say 
just How successfully it can predict what’s going to happen (the 
only way you can really tell if a 
prediction is accurate is by waiting to see if if comes true — by 
which time it’s no longer very 
useful), there are indications that 
it is pretty promising. Its fairly, 
simple in concept. Basically, if is 
only a procedure for circulating 
questionnaires to a panel of wellinformed people to achieve a consensus of opinions without distortion by oratory, seniority, personality conflicts and the other; bi
8 
asing elements that confuse most 
committee studies — although 
in practice it requires a fair 
amount of pretty Hard work to 
get it done. And above all, it’s 
flexible. It can do more than give 
you a notion of wliat will Happen. It can Kelp evaluate tHe desirability of probable future 
events by quantitative criteria, 
and it can even be used to evaluate strategies for bringing about 
the desirable futures. 
Naturally, this is not to say 
tHat there is anything omniscient 
or infallible about the technique. 
If you want hard and fast statements about the future you have 
to go to the fortune-tellers. (They 
will be wrong, but they will be 
positive.) Nevertheless, Delphi 
can organize the thinking of a 
competent group on any subject 
better than most other techniques 
that are anywhere near as easy 
to apply, and we’ve been thinking 
for some time that it really ought 
to be used for non-trivial hard 
problems about the real world. 
That’s what we’re going to do 
with the suggestions that came in 
in response to the contest. Not 
just the winners, but all of them 
•—all, at least, that survive preliminary screening. We have a list 
of 47 specific proposals. They are 
at this moment in process of being refined and reduced; hopefully we’ll come out with perhaps 25 bright ideas to submit to 
our panel. A Delphic study has iia 
own timetable, mostly determined 
by the length of time necessary 
to circulate the questionnaires 
and get them back, and the time 
needed to analyze the results; it 
should be about two months now 
before we have a complete study. 
Selecting the panel has been a 
bit of a problem, to be sure. The 
basic prerequisites are pretty 
simple intelligence, knowledge, 
experience, freedom from bias. 
The only trouble with those prerequisites is that, particularly in 
a question about which' as much 
passion Has been spent as has 
been spent on this one, tliose four 
characteristics seldom come in 
the same package. The more 
likely a given person is to be able 
to give a useful opinion about the 
war, the more certain he is to 
Have formed his opinion already 
— and likely enough' to be pretty 
outspoken and determined about 
it. Fortunately Delphi has intrinsic safeguards which' reduce 
the problem of bias . mostly 
because, fortunately Human beings can if they are intelligent 
enough and informed enough to 
operate in an abstracted discussion as though their biases were 
temporarily disconnected. 
Be interesting to see Kow it all 
comes out. We’ll report the results 
as soon as they’re ready probably 
in an early 1969 issue of Galaxy. 
—THE EDITOR
SFGRAM_START_SILVERBERG
Perris Way 
by ROBERT SILVERBERG 
Illustrated by GAUGHAN 
Earth was under new management. 
Now l f of the guild of Watchers , 
led a blinded Prince to the Hall 
of the Remembers — and destiny. 
'"po journey with a fallen Prince 
is no easy thing. His eyes 
were gone, but not bis pride; 
blinding Had taught Him no Humility. He wore the robes and 
mask of a member of the guild of 
Pilgrims, but there was no piety 
in His soul and little grace. Behind His mask Ho still knew Himself to be the Prince of Roum, 
even! though Roum, like all of 
Eartfl, was ruled now by beings 
from a far star. 
I, the accidental companion of 
the fallen Prince, was all his 
court now, as we walked the road 
to Perris in early springtime. I, 
the weary Watcher, my occupation gone, served Him in His arrogance. I led Him along tfie 
right roads; I amused Him at His 
command witH stories of my 
wanderings; F nursed Him through 
moods of sulky bitterness. In return I got very little except the 
assurance tHat I would eat regularly. No one denies food to a 
Pilgrim, and in each village on 
our way we stopped in inns, 
where He was fed and I, as His 
companion, also was given meals. 
Once, early in our travels, He 
erred and haughtily told an innkeeper, “See that you feed my 
servant as well!” TKe blinded 
Prince could not see that look 
of shocked disbelief — for what 
would a Pilgrim be doing with a 
servant? — but I smiled at the 
innkeeper and winked and tapped my forehead, and the man 
understood and served us both 
without discussion. Afterward I 
explained the error to the Prince, 
and thereafter He spoke of me as 
his companion. Yet I knew that 
to Him I was nothing but a servant. I Had not been of a serving 
guild in former days, but even 
a Watcher is a Bumble thing in 
the mind of the Prince of Roum, 
Tfie weather was fair. Eyrop 
was growing warm as tfie year 
turned. Slender willows and poplars were greening beside the 
road, though for much of the 
way out of Roum the way wag 
planted with lavish’ star-trees, 
imported during the gaudy days 
of the Second Cycle, and their 
blue-bladed leaves had resisted 
our puny Eyropan winter. The 
birds, too, were coming back 
from their season across the sea 
in Afreek. They sparkled overhead, singing, discussing among 
themselves tKe change of masters 
in the world. “They mock me,” 
said the Prince one dawn. “They 
sing to me and defy me to see 
their brightness!” 
OH, he was bitter, and with 
good reason. His armies defeated, himself overthrown, his eyesight ripped away as an act of 
vengeance performed by one of 
the alien invaders — he who Had 
Had so much, and lost all, Had a 
good deal to lament. For me, the 
defeat of Earth meant only an 
end to habits. Otherwise all tKe 
same; no longer need I keep 
my Watch', now tHat the invaders 
were finally here, but I still wandered the face of the world, alone 
even when, as now, I Had a companion. 
I wondered if the Prince knew 
why fie Had been blinded. I 
wondered if, in the moment of 
his triumph, the star-being Gormon Had explained to the Prince 
that it was as elemental a matter as jealousy over a woman 
that had cost him his eyes. 
“You took Avluela,” Gormon 
might Have said. “You saw a little Flier, and you tEougHt she’d 
amuse you. And you said. Here 
girl, come to my bed. Not thinking of Her as a person. Not thinking sHe might prefer others. 
Thinking only as a Prince of 
Roum migHt think — imperiously. Here, Prince 1” 
And the quick forked thrust 
of long-tipped fingers — 
But I dared not ask. That 
much awe remained in me for 
this fallen monarch'. To penetrate his privacy, to strike up a 
conversation with him about his 
mishaps as though' he were an 
ordinary companion of the road 
— no, I could not I spoke when 
I was spoken to. I offered conversation upon command. Otherwise I kept my silence, like a 
good commoner in the presence 
of royalty. 
EacH day we Had our reminders that the Prince of Roum was 
royalty no longer. 
Overhead flew the invaders, 
sometimes in floaters or other 
chariots, sometimes under their 
own power. Traffic was heavy. 
They were taking inventory of 
their world. Their shadows passed over us, tiny eclipses, and I 
looked up to see our new masters 
and oddly felt no anger at them, 
only relief that Earth’s long vigil was over. For the Prince it was 
different. He always seemed to 
know when some invader passed 
above, and he clenched his fists 
and scowled and whispered black 
curses. Did his optic nerves still 
somehow record the movements 
of shadows? Or were His remaining senses so sharpened by the 
loss of one that He could detect 
the imperceptible Humming of a 
floater and sniff tKe skins of the 
soaring invaders? I did not ask. 
I asked so little. 
Sometimes at night, when he 
thought I slept. He sobbed. I pitied him then. He was so young 
to lose what He Had, after all. 
I learned in those dark Hours 
that even the sobs of a Prince 
are not those of ordinary men. 
He sobbed defiantly, belligerently, angrily. But yet He sobbed. 
M uch of the time Be seemed 
stoic, resigned to his losses. 
He put one foot before the other and walked on briskly beside 
me, every step taking Him farther 
from his great city of Roum, 
nearer to Perris. At other times, 
though, it seemed I could look 
through the bronze grillword of 
his mask to see the curdled soul 
within. His pent-up rage took 
petty outlets. He mocked me 
for my age, for my low rank, for 
the emptiness of my life’s purpose now that tEe invasion for 
which I had Watched Had come. 
He toyed with me. 
“What’s your name, Watcher?” 
PERRIS WAY 
“It is forbidden, Majesty.” 
“Old laws are now repealed. 
Come on, man, we Have months 
to travel together. Can I go on 
calling you WatcKer all that 
time?” i 
“It is the custom of my guild.” 
“The custom of mine,” He said, 
is to give orders and Have tKem 
obeyed. Your narael” 
“Not even the guild' of Dominators can have a Watcher's name 
without due cause and a guildmaster’s writ.” 
He spat. “WHat a jackal you 
are to defy me when I’m like 
this! If we were in my palace, 
you’d never dare!” 
“In your palace. Majesty, you 
would not make tins unjust demand on me before your court. 
Dominators have obligations, too. 
One of them is to respect the 
ways of lesser guilds.” 
“He lectures me,” said the 
Prince. Irritably He threw himself down beside the road. 
Stretching against the grassy 
slope, he leaned back, touched 
one of the star-trees, snapped 
off a row of blades, clenched 
them in his Hand so that they 
must have pricked his palm 
painfully. I stood beside him. A 
Heavy land-vehicle rumbled by, 
the first we had seen on that 
empty road this morning. Within 
"it were invaders. Some of them 
waved to us. After a long while 
the Prince said in a lighter, al
most wheedling tone, “My name 
is Enric. Now tell me yours.” 
“I beg you to let me be 
Majesty.” 
“But you Have my name! It 
is just as forbidden for me to give 
mine as you yours!” 
“I did not ask yours,” I said 
firmly. 
I n the end I did not give Him 
my name. It was a small 
enough victory, to refuse such information to a powerless Prince, 
but in a thousand little ways 
he made me pay for it. He nagged, chivvied, teased, blustered, 
cursed, and berated me. He spoke 
with contempt of my guild. He 
demanded menial service of me. 
I lubricated His metal mask; I 
sponged ointment into his ruined 
eyes; I did other things too humiliating to recall. And so we 
stumbled along the highway to 
Perris, the empty old man and the 
emptied young one, full of Hatred 
for one another and yet bound 
by the needs and tEe duties of 
wayfarers. It was a difficult time. 
I had to cope witH His changing 
moods as He soared to cosmic 
rapture over His plans for redeeming conquered Earth, and as 
he sank to abysses upon his realization that tfie conquest was final. I Had to protect Him from His 
own rashness in the villages, 
where He sometimes behaved as 
though He were still Prince of 
Room, ordering folk about, slapping them, even, in a way that 
was unbecoming to a holy man. 
Worse yet, I had to minister to 
his lusts, buying him women who 
came to him in darkness, unaware that they were dealing 
with one who claimed to be a 
Pilgrim. Somehow I got him past 
all of these crises, even the time 
when we encountered on the road 
another Pilgrim, a genuine one. 
This was a formidable and disputatious old man, full of theological quibbles. “Come and talk 
with’ me of the imminence of the 
Will,” he said to the Prince, and 
the Prince, whose patience was 
frayed that afternoon, replied obscenely. I kicked the princely 
shin in a surreptitious way and 
to the shocked Pilgrim I said, 
“Our friend is unwell today. Last 
night he held communion with 
the Will and received a revelation that unsettled his mind. I 
pray you, let us go on and give 
no talk of holiness until he is 
himself once more.” 
With such improvisations I 
I managed our journey. 
As the weather warmed, the 
Prince’s attitude mellowed. Perhaps he was growing reconciled 
to his catastrophe, or possibly, 
in the prison of his lightless skull, 
he was teaching himself new tactics for meeting his changed existence. He talked almost idly of 
himself, his downfall his humili
ation. He spoke of the power 
that had been his in terms that 
said unmistakably that he Had 
no illusions about ever recapturing it. He talked of his wealth, 
his women, his jewels, his strange 
machines, his Changelings and 
Musicians and Servitors, the 
Masters and even nominators 
who had knelt to him. I will not 
say that at any time I liked him, 
but at least at these times I recognized a suffering human being 
behind his impassive mask. 
Tie even recognized me as a Human being. I know it cost 
him much. 
He said, “The trouble with 
power, Watcher, is that it cuts 
you off from people. People become things. Take yourself. To 
me, you were nothing but a machine that walked around Watching for invaders. I suppose you 
had dreams, ambitions, angers, 
all the rest, but I saw you as a 
dried-up old man without any 
independent existence outside of 
your guild function. Now I see 
much more by seeing nothing.” 
“What do you see?” 
“You were young once, Watcher. You had a town you loved. 
A family. A girl, even. You chose 
or had chosen for you a guild; 
you went into apprenticeship; 
you struggled; your head ached 
you, your belly griped you; there 
were many dark moments when 
PERRIS WAY 
you wondered what it was all 
about, what it was for. And you 
saw us ride by, Masters, Dominators, and it was like comets 
going past. Yet Here we are together, cast uivby tEe tides on tEe 
road to Perris. And which of 
us is Happier now?” 
“I am beyond Happiness or 
sorrow,” I said. 
“Is that the trutE? Is that the 
truth? Or is it a line you Hide 
behind? Tell me, WatcEerf I 
know your guild forbids you to 
marry, but Have you ever 
loved?” 
“Sometimes.” 
“And are you beyond that 
now?” 
“I am old,” I said evasively. 
“But you could love. You 
could love. You’re released from 
your guild vows now, eh? You 
could take a bride.” 
I laughed. “Who’d Have me?” 
“Don’t speak tEat way. You’re 
not that old. You Have strengths. 
You’ve seen tHe world; you understand if. WEy, in Perris you 
could find yourself some wench 
wEo — ” He paused. “Were 
you ever tempted, while you still 
were under your vows?” 
Just then a Flier passed overhead. She was a woman of middle years, struggling a little in 
the sky, for some dayligKt remained to press on her wings. I 
felt a pang, and I wanted to tell 
the Prince, yes, yes, I was tempt
ed; there was a little Flier not 
long ago, a girl, a child, Avluela, 
whom I met in Agupt and 
brought with me over Land 
Bridge to Talya. And in my way 
I loved Her, tEough I never 
touched Her, and one whom I 
thought a Changeling also loved 
her, and then you commanded 
Her into your bed, and after
wards the Changeling had your 
eyes from you for that on the 
day of invasion, and my Avluela soared through the sky beside 
him, beside the invader who 
blinded you. And I love her still. 
T said nothing of this to Prince 
Enric. 
I looked, though, at that Flier, freer than I for that she had 
wings, and in the warmth of that 
spring evening I felt the chill of 
desolation enfolding me. 
“Is it far to Perris?” the 
Prince asked. 
“We will walk, and one day 
we will get there.” 
“And then?” 
“For me an apprenticeship in 
the guild of Rememberers, and a 
new life. For you?” 
“I hope to find friends there,” 
He said. 
We walked on, long hours each 
day. There were those who went 
by and offered us rides, but we 
refused, for at the checkpoints 
the invaders would be seeking 
such wandering members of the 
nobility as the Prince. We walked a tunnel miles long under skystorming mountains sheathed in 
ice, and we entered a flat land 
of farming peasants, and we 
paused by awakening rivers to 
cool our toes. Golden summer 
burst upon us. We moved 
through the world but were not 
of it; we listened to no news of 
the conquest, although it was obvious that the invaders had taken full possession. In small vehicles they hovered everywhere, 
seeing our world that now was 
theirs. 
I did the bidding of the Prince 
in all ways, including the unpleasant ones. I attempted to make 
his life less bleak. I gave him a 
sensation of being still a ruler, 
if even of only one useless old 
Watcher. I taught him, too, how 
best to masquerade as a Pilgrim. 
From what little I knew, I gave 
him postures, phrases, prayers. 
It was obvious that he had spent 
little time in contact with the 
Will while he reigned. Now he 
professed faith, but it was insincere, part of his camouflage. 
II 
I n a town called Dijon He said, 
“Here I will purchase eyes.” 
Not true eyes. The secret of 
making such replacements perished in the Second Cycle. Out 
among the more fortunate stars, 
any miracle is available fear a 
price, but our Earth is a neglected world in a backwater of the 
universe. The Prince might have 
gone out there in the days before conquest to purchase new 
sight, but now the best that was 
available to him was a way ef 
distinguishing light from da#k. 
Even that would give him a rudiment of sight; at present he 
had no other guidance than the 
reverberator that warned him ef 
obstacles in his path. How did 
he know, though, that in Dijon 
he would find a craftsman with 
the necessary skills? And witU 
what would he meet the cost? 
He said, “The man here is a 
brother of one of my Scribes. He 
is of the guild of Artificers, and 
I often bought his work in 
Roum. He’ll have eyes for me” 
“And the cost?” 
“I am not entirely without resources.” 
We stopped in a field of gnarled cork-trees, and the Prince undid his robes. Indicating a place 
in the fleshy part of his thigh, he 
said, “I carry a reserve here for 
emergencies. Give me your 
blade!” I handed it to him, and 
he seized the handle and pressed 
the stud that brought forth the 
cool, keen beam of light. With 
his left hand he felt his thngti, 
surveying for the exact place; 
then, stretching the flesh between 
two fingers; he made a surgiaal
PERRIS WAY 
ly precise cut two indies long. 
He did not bleed, nor was tfiere a 
sign tSat Be felt pain. I watcEed 
in bewilderment as Be slipped 
His fingers Info tEe cut, spread 
its edges, and seemed to grope as 
if in a sack”. He tossed my blade 
back to me. 
Treasures tumbled from Els 
tfiigfi. 
“Watcfi tfiat notfilng is lost,” 
He ordered me. 
To tEe grass tEere fell seven 
spar kling jewels of alien origin, 
a small and artful celestial globe, 
five golden coins of Imperial 
Roum of cycles past, a ring set 
witE a glowing dab of quasilife, a flask of some unknown 
perfume, a group of miniature 
musical Instruments done in precious woods and metals, eigHt 
statuettes of regal-looking men, 
and more. I scooped tEese wonders into a dazzling Heap. 
“An overpocket,” tHe Prince 
said coolly, “wfiicE a skilled 
Surgeon implanted in my flesfi. 
I anticipated a time of crisis in 
wEicE I migfit need to leave tHe 
palace Hurriedly. Into it I stuffed wEat I could; there is much 
more wKere tEese came from. 
Tell me, tell me wEat I Have 
taken out!” 
I gave Him tEe full inventory. 
He listened tensely to tHe 
end, and I knew tfiat fie Bad 
kept count of all tfiat fiad poured 
fortfi, and was testing my Honesty. Wfien I was done, fie nodded, pleased. “Take tHe globe,” 
lie said, “and tEe ring, and tHe 
two brigfitest jewels. Hide ifiem 
in your poucfi. THe rest goes 
back witfiin.” He spread tfie lips 
of tfie incision and one by one 
I dropped tfie glories inside, 
wfiere tfiey joined wfio knew 
wEat splendid things lying in another dim ension, the outlet from 
wKicH was embedded in tHe 
Prince. He might Have Half tHe 
contents of tHe palace tucked 
away in Eis tHigfi. At tfie end He 
pressed tHe cut togetfier, and 
it Healed without a trace of a 
mark as I watcEed. He robed 
Himself. 
In town, we quickly located 
tEe sEop of Bordo tHe Artificer. 
He was a squat man witH a speckled face, a grizzled beard, a tic 
in one eye, and a flat coarse nose, 
but Eis fingers were as delicate as 
a woman’s.' His sEop was a dark 
place with dusty wooden shelves 
and small windows; it could Have 
been a building ten thousand 
years old. A few elegant items 
were on display. Most were not. 
He looked at us guardedly, obviously baffled tKat a WatcEer 
and a Pilgriim should come to 
Him. 
At tHe Prince’s prodding I 
said, "My friend needs eyes.” 
“I make a device, yes. But it 
is expensive, and it takes many 
months to prepare. Beyond tHe 
means of any Pilgrim.” 
I laid one jewel on tHe weatfiered counter. “We Have means.” 
Shaken, Bordo snatdfied up tHe 
jewel, turned it tins way and 
tfiat, saw tHe alien fires glowing at its Heart, 
“If you come back wKen tfie 
leaves are falling — ” 
“You Have no eyes in stock?” 
I asked. 
He smiled. “I get few calls for 
sucH tilings. We keep but a small 
inventory.” 
I put down tfie celestial globe. 
Bordo recognized it as tfie work 
of a master, and fiis jaw sagged. 
He put it in one palm and tugged 
at fiis beard witfi tfie otfier Hand. 
I let Him look at it long enougfi 
to fall in love witfi it, and tfien 
I took it back and said, “Aut umn 
is too long to wait. We will Have 
to go elsewfiere. Perris, perfiaps.” 
I caugfit tfie Prince’s elbow, and 
we sfiuffled toward tfie door. 
“Stopl” Bordo cried. “At least 
let me cfieck! Perfiaps I Have a 
pair somewfiere — ” And fie began to rummage furiously in 
overpockets mounted in tfie rear 
wall. 
He Bad eyes In stock, of course, 
and I Haggled a bit on tfie price 
and we settled for tfie globe, tfie 
ring, and one jewel. Tfie Prince 
was silent tfirougfioui tfie transaction. I insisted on immediate 
installation; and Bordo, nodding 
excitedly, sfiut fiis sfiop, slipped 
on a dunking cap, and summoned a sallow-faced Surgeon. 
Sfiortly tfie preliminaries of tfie 
operation were under way. THe 
Prince lay on a pallet in a sealed and sterile room. He removed 
fiis reverberator and tfien fiis 
mask, and as tfiose sfiarp features came into view Bordo, wfio 
Bad been to tfie court of Roum, 
grunted in amazement and began 
to say something. My foot descended Heavily on fiis. Bordo 
Swallowed fils words; and tfie 
Surgeon, unaware, began tranquilly to swab’ the ruined sockets. 
npfie eyes were pearl-gray 
spfieres, smaller tfian real 
eyes and broken by transverse 
slits. Wfiat mecfianism was witfiin I do not know, but from tfieir 
rear projected tiny golden connections to fasten to tfie nerves. 
Tfie Prince slept tfirougfi tfie early part of tfie task, wffile I stood 
guard and Bordo assisted tfie 
Surgeon. Tfien it was necessary 
to awaken Him. His face convulsed In pain, but it was so 
quickly mastered tfiat Bordo 
muttered a prayer at tfiis display of determination. 
“Some light Here,” said tfie 
Surgeon. 
Bordo nudged a drifting globe 
closer. Tfie Prince said, “Yes, 
yes, I see tfie difference.” 
PERRIS WAY 
“We must test. We must adjust,” the Surgeon said. 
Bordo went outside. I followed. The man was trembling, and 
his face was green with fear. 
“Will you kil^ - us now?" He 
asked. 
“Of course not.” 
“I recognized — ” 
“You recognized a poor Pilgrim,” I said, “who has suffered 
a terrible misfortune while on 
his journey. No more. Nothing 
else.” 
I examined Bordo’s stock a 
while. Then the Surgeon and his 
patient emerged. The Prince now 
bore the pearly spheres in his 
sockets, with a meniscus of false 
flesh about them to insure a tight 
fit. He looked more machine than 
man, with those dead things beneath his brows, and as he moved his head the slits widened, 
narrowed, widened again, silently, stealthily. “Look,” he said, 
and walked across the room, indicating objects, even naming 
them. I knew that he saw as 
though through a thick veil, but 
at least he saw, in a fashion. He 
masked himself again, and by 
nightfall we were gone from Dijon. 
The Prince seemed almost 
buoyant. But what he had in his 
skull was a poor substitute for 
what Gormon had ripped from 
him, and soon enough he knew it. 
That night, as we slept on stale 
cots in a Pilgrims’ hostelry, the 
Prince cried out in wordless 
sounds of fury, and by the shifting light of the true moon and 
the two false ones I saw his arms 
rise, his fingers curl, his nails 
strike at an imagined enemy, 
and strike again, and again. 
Ill 
I t was summer’s end when we 
finally reached Perris. We 
came into the city from the 
south, walking a broad, resilient 
highway bordered by ancient 
trees, amid a fine shower of rain. 
Gusts of wind blew shriveled 
leaves about us. That night of 
terror on which we both had fled 
conquered Roum now seemed almost a dream; we were toughened by a spring and summer of 
walking, and the gray towers of 
Perris seemed to hold out promise of new beginnings. I suspected that we deceived ourselves, 
for what did the world hold for 
a shattered prince who saw only 
shadows and a Watcher long 
past his proper years? 
This was a darker dty than 
Roum. Even in late winter, Roum 
had had clear skies and bright 
sunlight. Perris seemed perpetually clouded over, buildings and 
environment both somber. Even 
the city walls were ash-gray, and 
they had no sheen. The gate 
stood wide. Beside it there 
lounged a small, sullen man in 
the garb of the guild of Sentinels, 
who made no move to challenge 
us as we approached. I looked 
at him questioningly. He shook 
his head. 
“Go in, Watcher.” 
“Without a check?” 
“You Haven’t Heard? All cities 
were declared free six nights ago. 
Order of the invaders. Gates are 
never closed now. Half the Sentinels Have no work.” 
“I thought the invaders were 
searching for enemies,” I said. 
“The former nobility.” 
“They have their checkpoints 
elsewhere, and no Sentinels are 
used. The city is free. Go in. Go 
in.” 
As we went in, I said, “Then 
why are you here?” 
“It was my post for forty 
years,” the Sentinel said. “Where 
should I go?” 
I made the sign that told Kim 
I shared his sorrow, and the 
Prince and I entered Perris. 
“Five times I came to Perris 
by the southern gate,” said the 
Prince. “Always by chariot, with 
my Changelings walking before 
me and making music in their 
throats. We proceeded to the river, past the ancient buildings and 
monuments, on to the palace of 
tlie Comt of Perris. And by night 
we danced on gravity plates high 
above the city, and there were 
ballets of Fliers, and from the 
Tower of Perris there was performed an aurora for us. And 
the wine, the red wine of Perris, the women in their saucy 
gowns, the red-tipped breasts, 
the sweet thighs 1 We bathed in 
wine, Watcher.” He pointed 
vaguely. “Is that the Tower of 
Perris?” 
“I think it is the ruin of this 
city’s weather machine,” I said. 
“A weather machine would be 
a vertical column. What I see 
rises from a wide base to a slender summit, as does the Tower 
of Perris.” 
“WKat I see,” I said gently, 
“is a vertical column, at least 
thirty men high, ending in a 
rough break. The Tower would 
not be this close to the southern 
gate, would it?” 
“No,” said the Prince, and 
muttered a foulness. “The weather machine it is, then. These eyes 
of Bordo’s don’t see so clearly 
for me, eh? I deceive myself, 
Watcher. I deceive myself. Find 
a flunking cap and see if the 
Comt Has fled.” 
T stared a moment longer at the 
* truncated pillar of the weathar machine, that fantastic device 
which Had brought such grief upon the world in the Second Cycle. I tried to penetrate its sleek, 
almost oily marble sides, to see 
the coiling intestines of mysterious devices that had been capa
PERRIS WAY 
ble of sinking whole continents, 
that long ago had transformed 
my homeland in the west from a 
mountainous country to a chain 
of islands. Then I turned away, 
donned a public cap, asked for 
the Comt, got the answer I expected, and demanded to know 
the locations of places where we 
might find lodging. 
The Prince said, “Well?” 
“The Comt of Perris was slain 
during the conquest along with 
all his sons. His dynasty is extinguished, His title is abolished, 
his palace has been transformed 
into a museum by the invaders. 
The rest of the Parisian nobility are dead or have taken flight. 
I’ll find a place for you at the 
lodge of Pilgrims.” 
“No. Take me with you to 
the Rememberers.” 
“Is that the guild you seek 
now?” 
He gestured impatiently. “No, 
fool! But how can I stay alone 
in a strange city, with all my 
friends gone? What would I say 
to true Pilgrims in their hostelry? I’ll stay with you. The Rememberers can Hardly turn away 
a blind Pilgrim.” 
He gave me no choice. And so 
He accompanied me to the Hall 
of Rememberers. 
We had to cross Half the city, 
and it took us nearly the whole 
day. Perris seemed to me to be in 
disarray. The coming of the in
vaders had upset the structure 
of our society, liberating from 
their tasks great blocs of people, 
in some cases whole guilds. I 
saw dozens of my fellow Watchers in the streets, some still 
dragging about with them their 
cases of instruments, others, like 
me, freed of that burden and 
scarcely knowing what to do 
with their hands. My guildmates looked glum and hollow; 
many of them were dull-eyed 
with carousing, now that all 
discipline was shattered. Then 
there were Sentinels, aimless and 
dispirited because they Bad 
nothing to guard, and Defenders, cowed and dazed at the 
ending of defense. I saw no Masters and of course no nominators, but many unemployed 
Clowns, Musicians, Scribes, and 
other court functionaries drifted 
randomly. Also there were Hordes of dull neuters, their nearly 
mindless bodies slumped from 
unfamiliar disuse. Only Vendors 
and Somnambulists seemed to 
be carrying on business as usual. 
>-p*he invaders were very much 
-*• in evidence. In twos and 
threes they strolled on every 
street, long-limbed beings whose 
Hands dangled nearly to their 
knees; their eyelids were Heavy, 
their nostrils were hidden in filtration pouches, their lips were 
full and, when not apart, joined 
almost seamlessly. Most of them 
were dressed in identical robes 
of a deep, rich’ green, perhaps a 
uniform of military occupation; 
a few carried weapons of an 
oddly primitive kind, great 
heavy things slung across their 
backs, probably more for display than for self-defense. They 
seemed generally relaxed as they 
moved among us — genial conquerors, self-confident and 
proud, fearing no molestation 
from the defeated populace. Yet 
the fact that they never walked 
alone argued that they felt an 
inner wariness. I could not find 
it in me to resent their presence, 
nor even the implied arrogance 
of their possessive glances at the 
ancient monuments of Perris; 
yet the Prince of Roum, to 
whom all figures were merely 
upright bars of dark gray 
against a field of light gray, instinctively sensed their nearness 
to him and reacted with quick 
hostile intakes of breath. 
Also there were many more 
outworid visitors than usual, 
star-beings of a Hundred kinds, 
some able to breathe our air, 
others going about in Hermetic 
globes or little pyramid-shaped 
breathing-boxes or contour suits, 
It was nothing new to see such 
strangers on Earth, of course, 
but the sheer quantity of them 
was astonishing. They were 
everywhere, prowling into the 
houses of Earth’s old religions, 
buying shining models of the 
Tower of Perris from Vendors at 
streetcomers, clambering precariously into the upper levels 
of the walkways, peering into 
occupied dwellings, snapping images, exchanging currency with 
furtive hucksters, flirting with 
Fliers and Somnambulists, risking their lives at our restaurants, moving in shepherded groups from sight to sight. 
It was as though our invaders Had passed the word 
through’ the galaxies: SEE OLD 
EARTH NOW. UNDER NEW 
MANAGEMENT. 
At least our beggars were 
flourishing. The outworid ones 
fared poorly at the hands of the 
alien almsgivers, but those who 
were Earthborn did well, except 
for the Changelings who could 
not be recognized as native 
stock. I saw several of these 
mutants, disgruntled at being refused, turn on other beggars 
who had had better luck and 
beat them to the ground, while 
image-snappers recorded the 
scene for the delight of galactic 
stay-at-homes. 
We came in time to the Hall 
of Rememberers. 
Tt was an imposing building, 
-*• as well it might be, Housing as 
it did all of our planet’s past. 
It rose to an enormous height 
PERRIS WAY 
on the southern bank of the 
Senn, just opposite the equally 
massive palace of the Comt. But 
the dwelling of the deposed 
Comt was an ancient building, 
truly ancient, of the First 
Cycle even,* a long, involuted 
structure of gray stone with a 
green metal roof in the traditional Parisian style, while the Hall 
of Rememberers was a shaft of 
polished whiteness, its surface unbroken by window. About it 
there coiled from summit to base 
a golden helix of burnished 
metal that bore inscribed on it 
the history of mankind. The up-, 
per coils of the helix were blank. 
At a distance I could read nothing, and I wondered whether the 
Rememberers had taken the 
trouble to inscribe upon their 
building the tale of Earth’s final 
defeat. Later I learned that they 
had not — that the story, in 
fact, terminated at the end of 
the Second Cycle, leaving much 
untold for which little pleasure 
was felt 
Night was falling now. And 
Perris, which had looked so 
dreary in the clouded and drizzly day, came to beauty like a 
dowager returning from Jorslem 
with’ her youth and voluptuousness restored. The city’s lights 
cast a soft but dazzling radiance that magically illuminated 
the old gray buildings, turning 
angles hazy, hiding antiquity’s 
grime, blurring ugliness into poetry. The Comfs palace was 
transformed from a heavy thing 
of sprawling bulk into an airy 
fable. The Tower of Perris, spotlighted against the dusk, loomed above us to the east like a 
giant gaunt spider, but a spider 
of grace and charm. The whiteness of the Hall of Rememberers now was intolerably beautiful, and the helical coil of history no longer seemed to wind 
to the summit, but plunged directly into one’s heart. The 
Fliers of Perris were abroad at 
this hour, taking their ease 
above us in a graceful ballet, 
their filmy wings spread wide to 
catch the light from below, their 
slender bodies trailing at an angle to the horizon. How they 
soared, these genetically altered 
children of Earth, these fortunate members of a guild that demands only that its members 
find pleasure in life! They shed 
beauty upon the groundlings like 
little moons. They were joined 
in their airborne dance by invaders, flyng in some method 
unknown to me, their lengthy 
limbs drawn close to their 
bodies. I noticed that the Fliers 
showed no distaste for those who 
had come to share their sport, 
but rather appeared to welcome 
the outworlders, allowing them 
places in the dance. I thought 
of little Avluela and how gladly 
she Had given Herself to tKe false 
Changeling Gormon, no mutant 
Eartfirnan at all but an advance 
scout foe tKe invasion of EartH. 
Higfier, on the backdrop of 
tKe sky itself, whirled tKe two 
false moons, blank and bumisKed, slamming from west to 
east; and blobs of disciplined 
light swirled in mid-atmosphere 
in wh'at I supposed was a customary Parisian diversion; and 
speakers floated beneath the 
clouds, showering us with sparkling music. I heard the laughter 
of girls from somewhere; I 
scented bubbling wine. If this is 
Perris conquered, I wondered, 
wh'at must Perris free have been 
like? 
U A re we at the Hall of Rememberers?” asked Prince 
Enric testily. 
‘This is it, yes,” I replied. “A 
tower of white.” 
“I know wHat it looks like, 
idiot! But now — I see less well 
after dark — that building, 
there?” 
‘‘You point to the palace of 
the Comt, Majesty.” 
“There, then.” 
“Yes.” 
“Why have we not gone in?” 
“I am seeing Perris,” I said. 
“I Have never known sucK beauty. Roum is attractive too, in a 
different way. Roum is an emperor; Perris is a courtesan.” 
PERRIS WAY 
“You talk poetry, you shriveled old man?” 
“I feel my age dropping away. 
I could dance in the streets now. 
This city sings to me.” 
“Go in. Go in. We are here 
to see the Rememberers. Let it 
sing to you later.” 
I sighed and guided him toward the entrance to tfie great 
Hall. We passed up a walkway 
of some black glossy stone, while 
beams of light played down on 
us, scanning us and recording us. 
A monstrous ebony door, five 
men wide and ten men High, 
proved to be only a projected illusion, for as we neared it I 
sensed tfie depth of it, saw its 
vaulted interior, and knew it for 
a deception. I felt a vague 
warmth and tasted a strange 
perfume as we passed through 
it 
Within was a mammoth antechamber nearly as awesome as 
tfie grand inner space of the 
palace of tKe Prince of Roum. 
All was white; the stone glowing with an inner radiance that 
bathed everything in brilliance. 
To right and left, Heavy doorways led to inner wings. Alth'ougfi night Had come, many 
individuals were clustered about 
access banks mounted on tfie 
rear wall of the antechamber, 
where screens and caps gave 
them contact with the master 
files of the guild of Remember
crs. I noticed with interest that 
many of those who Bad come 
Here with questions about mankind’s past were invaders. 
Our footsteps crackled on the 
tiled floor- as we crossed it. 
I saw no actual Rememberers, 
and so I went to an access bank, 
put on a thinking cap, and notified tKe embalmed brain to 
which it was connected that I 
sought the Rememberer Basil, 
Ke whom I Had met briefly in 
Roum. 
“What is your business with 
him?” 
“I bring with me His shawl, 
which he left in my care when 
He fled Roum.” 
“The Rememberer Basil Has returned to Roum to complete His 
research, by permission of the 
conquerors. I will send to you 
another member of the guild to 
receive the shawl.” 
IV 
T T7e did not Have long to wait. 
* * We stood together near the 
rear of the antechamber, and I 
contemplated the spectacle of 
the invaders who had so much 
to learn, and in moments there 
came to us a thick-set, dourfaced mart some years younger 
than myself, who wore about his 
broad shoulders the ceremonial 
shawl of his guild. 
“I am the Rememberer Elegro,” 
he announced quite portentously. 
“I bring you Basil’s shawl.” 
“Come. Follow.” 
He Had emerged from an imperceptible place in tKe wall 
where a sliding block turned on 
pivots. Now Ke slid it once more 
and rapidly went down a passageway. I called out to Him that 
my companion was blind and 
could not match His pace, and 
the Rememberer Elegro Halted, 
looking visibly impatient. His 
downcurving mouth twitched, 
and Ke buried His short fingers 
in the deep black curls of His 
beard. When we Had caught up 
with him lie moved on, less swiftly. We pursued an infinity of 
passageways and ended in Elegro’s domicile, somewhere High 
in the tower. 
The room was dark but amply 
furnished with screens, caps, 
scribing equipment, voiceboxes, 
and other aids to scholarship. 
The walls were Hung with a 
purple-black fabric, evidently 
alive, for its marginal folds rippled in pulsating rhythms. Three 
drifting globes gave less than 
ample light. 
‘The shawl,” he said. 
I produced it from my pouch. 
It had amused me to wear it for 
a while in those first confused 
days of th'e conquest — after all, 
Basil Had left it in my Hands 
when Ke fled down the street, 
and I Had not meant to wrest it 
from him, but he obviously had 
cared little for its loss — but 
shortly I Had put it away, since 
it bred confusion for a man in 
Watcher’s garb to wear a Rememberer’s shawl. Elegro took it 
from me curtly and unfolded it, 
scrutinizing it as though looking 
for lice. 
“How did you get this?” 
“Basil and I encountered one 
another in the street during the 
actual moment of the invasion. 
He was highly agitated. I attempted to restrain him, and he 
ran past me, leaving me still 
grasping his shawl.” 
“He told a different story.” 
“I regret it if I have compromised him,” I said. 
"At any rate, you have returned his shawl. I’ll communicate the news to Roum tonight. 
Are you expecting a reward foe 
delivering it?” 
“Yes.” 
Displeased at this, Elegro said, 
“Which is?” 
“To be allowed to come 
nmong the Rememberers as an 
apprentice.” 
H e looked startled. “You Have 
a guild!” 
“To be a Watclier in these 
days is to be guildless. For what 
should I watch? I am released 
from my vows.” 
“Perhaps. But you are old to 
be trying a new guild.” 
“Old yes, but not too old.’* 
“Ours is a difficult one.” 
“I am willing to work hard. I 
desire to learn. In my old age 
curiosity is bom in me.” 
“Become a Pilgrim like your 
friend here. See the world.” 
“I have seen the world. Now 
I wish to join the Rememberers 
and learn of the past.” 
“You can dial an information 
below. Our access banks are open 
to you. Watcher.” 
“It is not the same. Enroll 
me.” 
"Apprentice yourself to the Indexers,” Elegro suggested. “The 
work is similar, but not so demanding.” 
“I claim apprenticeship here.” 
Elegro sighed heavily. He 
steepled his fingers, bowed his 
Head, quirked His lips. This was 
plainly unique to him. While he 
pondered, an inner door opened 
and a female Rememberer entered the room, carrying a small 
turquoise music-sphere cradled 
in both Her hands. SHe took four 
paces and Halted, obviously surprised that Elegro was entertaining visitors. 
She made a nod of apology 
and said, “I will return later.” 
“Stay,” said the Rememberer. 
To myself and the Prince he 
said, “My wife. The Rememberer Olmayne.” To his wife he 
said, "These are travelers newly 
come from Roum. They have 
PtRRIS WAY 
delivered Basil’s sKawl. TKe 
Watcher now asks apprenticeship in our guild. WKat do you 
advise?” 
TKe Rememberer Olmayne’s 
wEite brow furrowed. She put 
down Her music-sphere in a 
dark crystal vase; tfie sphere 
was unintentionally activated as 
she did so, and it offered us a 
dozen shimmering notes before 
she switched it off. Then she 
contemplated us, and I her. She 
was notably younger than Her 
Husband, who was of middle 
years, while she seemed to be 
in first bloom. Yet there was a 
strength about Her that argued 
for greater maturity. Perhaps, 
I thought, she had been to Jorslem to renew her youth; but in 
that case it was odd that her 
Husband had not done the same, 
unless he prized his look of age. 
She was surely attractive. Her 
face was broad, with a High forehead, pronounced cheekbones, 
a wide, sensual mouth, a jutting 
cliin. Her Hair was lustrous 
black, contrasting most vividly 
with the strange pallor of her 
skin. Such white skin is a rarity 
among us, though now I know 
that it was more common in 
ancient times, when the breed 
was different. Avluela, my lovely 
little Flier, had displayed that 
same combination of black and 
white, but there the resemblance 
ended, for Avluela had been all 
fragility, and the Rememberer 
Qlmayne was strength itself. Below her long slender neck, her 
body blossomed into well-set 
shoulders, high breasts, firm 
legs. Her posture was regal. 
Qhe studied us at length, until 
l '-' I could scarcely meet the 
level gaze of her widely-spaced 
dark eyes. Ultimately she said, 
“Does the Watcher regard himself as qualified to become one 
of us?” 
The question appeared aimed 
at anyone in the chamber who 
cared to reply. I hesitated; Elegro did likewise; and at length 
it Was the Prince of Roum who 
replied in his voice of command, 
“The Watcher is qualified to 
enter your guild.” 
“And who are you?” Qlmayne 
demanded. 
Instantly the Prince adopted 
a more accommodating tone.” A 
miserable blind Pilgrim, milady, 
who Has wandered here on foot 
from Roum, in this man’s company. If I am any judge, you 
could do worse than admit him 
as an apprentice.” 
Elegro said, “And yourself? 
What plans Have you?” 
“I wish only refuge Here,” said 
the Prince. “I am tired of roaming, and there is much thinking 
I must do. Perhaps you could 
allow me to cany out small 
tasks here. I would not want 
to be separated from my companion," 
To me Olmayne said, “We 
will confer on your case. If there 
is approval, you will be given 
the tests. I will be your sponsor.” 
“Olmaynel” blurted Elegro in 
unmistakable amazement. 
SKe smiled serenely at us all. 
A family quarrel appeared on 
tlie verge; but it was averted, 
and tlie Rememberers offered us 
hospitality, juices, sharper beverages, a night’s lodging. We 
dined apart from them in one 
section of their suite, while other Rememberers were summoned to consider my irregular application. The Prince seemed in 
strange agitation; he bolted 
down his food, spilled a flask of 
wine, fumbled with his eating 
utensils, put his fingers again 
and again to his gray metallic 
eyeballs as though trying to 
scratch an itch upon the lobes 
of his brain. 
At length he said in a low, 
urgent voice, “Describe her to 
mel” 
I did so, in detail, coloring and 
shading my words to draw him 
the most vivid picture I could, 
“She is beautiful, you say?” 
“I believe so. You know that 
at my age one must work from 
abstract notions, not from the 
flow of the glands.” 
“Her voice arouses me,” said 
the Prince. “She has power. She 
is queenly. She must be beautiful; there’d be no justice if Her 
body failed to match the voice.” 
“She is,” I said heavily, “another man’s wife, and the giver 
of Hospitality.” 
I remembered a day in Roum 
when the Prince’s palanquin 
had come forth from the palace, 
and the Prince Had spied Avluela and ordered her to him, 
drawing Her through the curtain 
to make use of Her. A Dominator may command lesser folk 
that way; but a Pilgrim may 
not, and I feared Prince Ernie’s 
schemes now. He dabbed at His 
eyes again. His facial muscles 
worked, 
“Promise me you’ll not start 
trouble with Her,” I said in all seriousness. 
Tfie comer of His mouth jerked in what must Have been the 
beginning of an angry retort, 
quickly stifled. With effort He 
said, “You misjudge me, aid 
man. I’ll abide by the laws of 
Hospitality Here. Be a good man 
and get me more wine, eE?” 
I thumbed the serving niche 
and obtained a second flask. It 
was strong red wine, not the 
golden stuff of Roum. I poured; 
we drank; the flask was swiftly 
empty. I grasped it along its 
lines of polarity and gave it the 
proper twist, and it popped and 
PERRIS WAY 
V 
was gone like a bubble. Moments later the Rememberer 
Olmayne entered. SEe Ead 
changed Eer garments; earlier 
she had worn an afternoon gown 
of dull -Hue and coarse fabric, 
but now slie was garbed in a 
sheer scarlet robe fastened between Her breasts. It revealed to 
me the planes and shadows of 
her body, and it surprised me to 
see that she had chosen to retain 
a navel. It broke the smooth 
downward sweep of her belly in 
an effect so carefully calculated 
to arouse that it nearly incited 
even me. 
SEe said complacently, “Your 
application Eas been approved 
under my sponsorship. The tests 
will be administered tonight. If 
you succeed, you will be pledged 
to our division.” Her eyes! 
twinkled in sudden miscEief. 
“My husband, you should know, 
is most displeased. But my Eusband’s displeasure is not a tEing 
to be feared. Come with me, 
JbotE of you.” 
SEe stretcEed fortfi Eer Hands, 
faking mine, taking tfie Prince’s. 
Her finger were cool. I throbbed 
witE an inner fever and marveled at this sign of new youth, not 
even by virtue of the waters of 
tEe House of renewal in sacred 
Jorslem. 
“Come,” said Olmayne, and 
she led us away to the place of 
test. 
A nd so I passed into the guild 
** of Rememberers. 
TEe tests were perfunctory. 
Olmayne brought us to a circular room somewEere near tEe 
summit of tEe great tower. Its 
curving walls were inlaid with 
rare woods of many Hues, and 
shining benches rose from the 
floor, and in the center of all 
was a Helix the Height of a man, 
inscribed with letters too small 
to be read. Half a dozen Rememberers lounged about, plainly there only by Olmayne’s 
whim, and not in tEe slightest 
interested in this old and shabby 
Watcher whom sEe Ead so unaccountably sponsored. 
A thinking cap was offered 
me. A scratcEy voice asked me 
a dozen questions, tfirough the 
cap, probing for my typical responses, querying me on biographical details. I gave my 
guild identification so that they 
could contact the local guildmaster, check my bona fides, and 
obtain my release. Ordinarily 
one could not win release from 
a Watcher’s vows, but these 
were not ordinary times, and I 
knew my guild was shattered. 
Within an Hour all was done. 
Olmayne Eerself placed the 
shawl over my shoulders. 
“You’ll be given sleeping quarters near our suite,” she said. 
"You’ll have to surrender your 
Watcher garb, though your 
friend may remain in Pilgrim’s 
clothes. Your training will begin after a probationary period. 
Meanwhile you Have full access 
to any of out memory tanks. 
You realize, of course, that it 
will be ten years or more before you can win full admission 
to the guild.” 
“I realize that,” I said. 
“Your name now will Be 
Tomis,” Olmayne told me. “Not 
yet the Rememberer Tomis, but 
Tomis of the Rememberers. 
There is a difference. Your past 
name no longer matters.” 
The Prince and I were conducted to the small room we 
would share. It was a humble 
enough place, but yet it had 
facilities for washing, outlets for 
thinking caps and other information devices, and a food vent. 
Prince Enric went about the 
room, touching things, learning 
the geography. Cabinets, beds, 
chairs, storage units, and other 
furniture popped in and out of 
the walls as He blundered onto 
the controls. Eventually He was 
satisfied; not blundering now, he 
activated a bed, and a sheaf of 
brightness glided from a slot. 
Ife stretched out 
“Tell me something, Tomis of 
Hie Rememberers.” 
"Yes?” 
"To satisfy curiosity that eats 
at me. What was your name in 
previous life?” 
“It does not matter now.” 
“No vow binds you to secrecy. 
Will you thwart me still?” 
“Old Habit binds me,” I said. 
‘Tor twice your lifetime I was 
conditioned never to speak my 
name except lawfully.” 
“Speak it now.” 
“Wuellig ,” I said. 
Tt was strangely liberating to 
commit that act My former 
name seemed to Hover in the air 
before my lips; to dart about the 
room like a jewelbird released 
bom its captivity; to soar, to turn 
sharply, to strike a wall and 
shiver to pieces with a light 
tinkling sound. I trembled. 
“Wuellig,” I said again. “My 
name was Wuellig.” 
“Wuellig no more.” 
“Tomis of the Rememberers.” 
And we both laughed until it 
hurt, and the blinded Prince 
swung himself to his feet and 
slapped His Hand against mine in 
high good fellowship, and we 
shouted my name and his and 
mine again and again, like small 
boys who suddenly Have learned 
the words of power and Have discovered at last How little power 
those words really have. 
Thus I took up my new life 
among the Rememberers. 
For some time to come I did 
not leave the Hall of Remem 
PERRIS WAY 
berers at all. My days and nights 
were completely occupied, and I 
remained . a stranger to Perris 
without, TKe Prince, too, though 
His time was not as fully taken 
up, stayed in the building almost 
always, going out only wHen 
boredom or ‘ fury overtook Kim. 
Occasionally tKe Rememberer 
Olmayne went witfi Kim, or Ke 
witfi Her, so tEat Ke would not 
be alone in His darkness; but I 
know tEat on occasion He left 
tKe building by Himself, defiantly intending to sKow that even 
sightless Ee could cope witH tKe 
challenges of tKe city. 
My waking Hours were divided 
among tKese activities : 
Preliminary orientations. 
Menial duties of an apprentice. 
Private researches. 
Not unexpectedly, I found myself mucE older than tKe otEer 
apprentices tEen . in residence. 
Most were youngsters, the cEildren of Rememberers themselves; they looked upon me in 
bafflement, unable to comprehend Having sucE an ancient for 
a schoolmate. TEere were a few 
fairly {nature apprentices, those 
wEo Had found a vocation for 
Remembering midway in life, 
but none approaching my age. 
Hence I Bad little social contact 
with Say fellows in training. 
For a part of eacfi day we 
learned the techniques by which 
the Rememberers recapture 
Earth’s past. I was shown wideeyed through the laboratories 
where analysis of field specimens 
is performed; I saw the detectors 
wEicK, by pinpointing the decay 
of a few atoms, give an age to 
an artifact; I watched as beams 
of many-colored light lancing 
from a ringed outlet turned a 
sliver of wood to asE and caused 
it to give up its secrets; I saw 
tKe very images of past events 
peeled from inanimate substance. 
We leave our imprint where we 
go; the particles of light rebound 
from our faces, and the photonic 
flux nails tliem to the environment, from which' the Rememberers strip them, categorize 
them, fix them. I entered a room 
where a phantasmagoria of faces 
drifted on a greasy blue mist: 
vanished kings and guildmasters, 
lost dukes, heroes of ancient 
days. I beheld cold-eyed technicians prodding History from 
Eandsful of cKarred matter. I saw 
damp lumps of trasK give up 
tales of revolutions and assassinations, of cultural change, of tKe 
discarding of mores. 
^T'Ken I was instructed superfi> cially in tKe techniques of the 
field. Through cunning simulation I was shown Rememberers 
at work with vacuum cores, digging through the mounds of the 
great ruined cities of Afreek and 
Ais. I participated vicariously in 
the undersea quest for the remnants of the civilizations of the 
Lost Continents; teams of Rememberers entered translucent 
teardrop-shaped vehicles, like 
blobs of green gelatin, and sped 
into the depths of Earth Ocean, 
down and down to the slimecrusted prairies of the former 
land, and with lancing beams of 
violet force drilled through muck 
and girders to find buried truths. 
I watched the gatherers of 
shards, the diggers of shadows, 
the collectors of molecular films. 
One of the best of the orientation experiences they provided 
was a sequence in which some 
truly heroic Rememberers excavated a weather machine in lower Afreek, baring the base of the 
titanic thing, lifting it on power 
pulls from the soil, an extraction 
so mighty that the earth itself 
seemed to shriek when it was 
done. High aloft they floated the 
ponderous relic of Second Cycle folly, while shawled experts 
prodded in its root-place to leam 
how the column had been erected in the first place. My eyes 
throbbed at the spectacle. 
I emerged from these sessions 
with an overwhelming awe for 
this guild I had chosen. Individual Rememberers whom I had 
known had struck me generally 
ns pompous, disdainful, haughty, 
or merely aloof; I did not find 
them charming. Yet is the whole 
greater than the sum of its parts, 
and I saw such men as Basil and 
Elegro, so vacant, so absent 
from ordinary human concerns, 
so disinterested, as parts of a 
colossal effort to win back from 
eternity our brilliant yesterdays. 
This research into lost times was 
magnificent, the only proper 
substitute for mankind’s former 
activities; having lost our present and our future, we had of necessity to bend all our endeavors to the past, which no one 
could take from us if we were 
only vigilant enough. 
For many days I absorbed the 
details of this effort, every stage 
of the work from the collection 
of specks of dust in the field 
through their treatment and analysis in the laboratory to the 
highest endeavor of all, synthesis and interpretation, which was 
carried out by senior Rememberers on the highest level of this 
building. I was given but a 
glimpse of those sages: withered 
and dry, old enough to be grandfathers to me, white heads bent 
forward, thin lips droning comments and interpretations, quibbles and corrections. Some of 
them, I was told in a hushed 
whisper, had been renewed at 
Jorslem two and three times 
apiece and now were beyond renewal and in their final great 
age. 
PERRIS WAY 
Next we were introduced to 
StEe memory tanks where the Rememberers store tEeir findings 
and from wKicE are dispensed informations for tEe benefit of tEe 
curious. 
Asa WatcEer, I Bad Ead little 
curiosity and less interest in 
visiting memory tanks. Certainly I Ead never seen anything 
like tEis; for tEe tanks of Rememberers were no mere threebrain or five-brain storage units, 
but mammotH installations witE 
a Hundred brains or more Booked in series. The room to wEicH 
they took us — one of dozens 
beneatK the building, I learned 
— was an oblong chamber, deep 
but not EigH, in whicH braincascs were arrayed in rows of 
nine, going back into shadowed 
depths. Perspective played odd 
Slicks; I was not sure if there 
were ten rows or fifty, and the 
sigEt of those bleached domes 
was overpoweringly immense. 
“Are these the brains of former Rememberers?” I asked. 
TEe guide replied, “Some of 
them are. But there’s no necessity to use only Rememberers. 
Any normal Human brain will 
do; even a Servitor Eas more 
storage capacity than you’d believe. We had no need for redundancy in our circuits, and so 
we can use the full resources of 
each brain.” 
I tried to peer through the 
Heavy block of sleekness that 
protected the memory tanks 
from harm. I asked, “WKat is recorded in this particular room?” 
“The names of dwellers in 
Afreek in Second Cycle times, 
and as much personal data about 
each as we have so far recovered. Also, since these cells are 
not yet fully charged, we Eave 
temporarily stored in them certain geographical details concerning the Lost Continents, and 
information pertaining to the 
creation of Land Bridge.” 
“Can sucK information be easily transferred from temporary 
storage to permanent?” I asked. 
“Easily, yes. Everything is, 
electromagnetic here. Our facts 
are aggregates of charges; we 
shift them from brain to brain 
by reversing polarities.” 
“WHat if there were an electrical failure?” I demanded. “You 
say you have no redundancy 
Here. Is there no possibility of 
losing data through some accident?” 
“None,” said the guide 
smoothly. “We Have a series of 
fallback devices to insure cointinuity of power. And by using 
organic tissue for our storage 
cells, we Have the best assurance 
of safety of all: for the brains 
themselves will retain their data 
in the event of a power interruption, It would be taxing but 
not impossible to recapture their 
contents.” 
“During the invasion,” I said, 
“were any difficulties experienced?” 
“We are under the protection 
of the invaders who regard our 
work as vital to their own interests.” 
T found out how true that was 
* not long afterward, at a general convocation of the Rememberers. We apprentices were permitted to look on from a balcony 
of the guildhall; below us, in full 
majesty, were the guild members, shawls in place, Elegro 
and Olmayne among them. On 
a dais that bore the helical symbol was Chancellor Kenishal of 
the Rememberers, an austere and 
commanding figure, and beside 
him was an even more conspicuous personage who was of the 
species that had conquered the 
Earth. Kenishal spoke briefly. 
The resonance of his voice did 
not entirely conceal the hollowness of his words; like all administrators everywhere, he 
gushed platitudes, praising himself by implication as he congratulated his guild for its notable work. Then he introduced the 
invader. 
The alien stretched forth his 
arms until they seemed to touch 
the walls of the auditorium. 
"I am Manrule Seven,” he 
said I quietly. “I am Procurator 
of Perris, with particular responsibility for the guild of Rememberers. My purpose here today 
is to confirm the decree of the 
provisional occupational government. You Rememberers are to 
go totally unhampered in your 
work. You are to have free access 
to all sites on this planet or on 
any other world that may have 
bearing on your mastery of the 
past of this planet. All files are 
to remain open to you, except 
those pertaining to the organization of the conquest itself. 
Chancellor Kenishal has informed me that the conquest lies outside the scope of your present 
research in any case, so no hardship will be worked. We of the 
occupying government are aware 
of the value of the work of your 
guild. The history of this planet 
is of great significance, and we 
wish your efforts continued.” 
“To make Earth a better 
tourist attraction,” said the 
Prince of Roum bitterly at my 
side. 
Manrule Seven went on, “The 
Chancellor has requested me to 
inform you of one administrative 
change that will necessarily follow from the occupied status of 
your planet In the past all disputes among you were settled 
by the courts of your own guild, 
with Chancellor Kenishal having 
the highest right of appeal. For 
tUe sake of sufficient administration, it now becomes mandatory for us to impose our jurisdiction over tEat of tEe guild. 
Therefore tEe Chancellor will 
transfer to us tliose litigations 
which He feels no longer fall into His spEere of autEority.” 
TKe Rememberers gasped. 
TKere was a sudden sEifting of 
postures and excEaoging of 
glances on tEe floor below. 
“TEe CHancellor’s abdicating!" blurted an apprentice near 
me. 
“WEat choice does He Have, 
fool?” whispered another Harshly
TKe meeting broke up in some 
confusion. Rememberers flooded 
Into the Hallways, gesticulating, 
debating, expostulating. One 
venerable wearer of tKe shawl 
wn9 so shaken that He crouched 
down and began to make tEe 
■cries of stabilizer responses, 
Heedless of tKe throng. Tlie tide 
■wept over us apprentices, forcing us back. I attempted to protect the Prince, fearing that He 
would be thrown to the floor and 
I rumpled; but we were swept 
npnrt, and I lost sight of him 
for minutes. When I saw Him 
iiguIn, He stood with Rememberer Olmayne. Her face was flushed; licr eyes were bright; she was 
■peaking rapidly, and the Prince 
wni listening. His Hand clung to 
her elbow as if for support. 
VI 
A fter the conclusion of tEe 
early period of orientations, 
I was given trivial tasks. CEiefly I was asked to do things that 
in an earlier time should Have 
been performed wholly by machine: for example, to monitor 
tEe feed Hnes tEat oozed nutrients into tEe brain-boxes of 
memory tanks. For several Hours 
eacH day I walked through tlie 
narrow corridor of tKe inspection panels, searching for clogged lines. It Had been so devised 
that when a line became blocked, a stress pattern was created 
tEe length of the clear tubing 
that contained it, and beams of 
a special polarized light illuminated that pattern for benefit of 
tEe inspector. I did my Humble 
task, now and again finding a 
blockage, and I did otEer little 
jobs as befit my status of apprenticeship. 
However, I also Had the opportunity to pursue my own investigations into the events of 
my planet’s past. 
Sometimes one does not learn 
tEe value of things until they are 
lost. For a lifetime I served as 
a Watcher, striving to give early 
warning of a promised invasion 
of Earth, while caring little who 
might wish to invade us, or wEy. 
For a lifetime I realized dimly 
tEat EartH Had known grander 
CtRRIS WAY 
uiuu taose of the Third 
Cycle into which I Had been 
bom, and yet I sought no 
knowledge of wfiat tHose days 
had been like and of the reasons 
for our present diminished condition. Only when the starships 
of ‘the invaders blossomed in the 
sky did I feel a sudden hunger 
to know of that lost past. Now, 
as the most elderly of apprentices, I, Tomis of the Rememberers, rummaged through the 
archives of vanished time. 
Any citizen Has the right to go 
to a public thinking cap and 
requisition an information from 
the Rememberers on any given 
subject. Nothing is concealed. 
But the Rememberers volunteer 
no aid; you must know how to 
ask, which means you must know 
what to ask. Item by item you 
must seek your facts. It is useful for those who must know, 
say, the long-term patterns of 
climate in Agupt, or the symptoms of the crystallization disease, or the limitations in the 
charter of one of the guilds; but 
it is no help at all to the man 
who wishes knowledge of the 
larger questions. One would need 
to requisition a thousand informations merely to make a beginning. The expense would be 
great; few would bother. 
As an apprentice Rememberer 
I Had full access to all data. 
More important, I Had access to 
the indexes. The Indexers are a 
guild subsidiary to the Rememberers, a donkey-guild of drudges who record and classify that 
which they often do not understand; the end product of their 
toil serves the greater guild, but 
the indexes are not open to all. 
Without them one scarcely is 
able to cope with the problems 
of research. 
1 will not summarize the stages 
by which I came by my knowledge — the hours spent shuffling through interwoven corridors, the rebuffs, the bewilderments, the throbbing on the 
brain. As a foolish novice I was 
at the mercy of pranksters, and 
many a fellow apprentice, even 
a guild member or two, led me 
astray for the sheer wicked joy 
of it. But I learned which routes 
to follow, how to set rp sequences of questions, how to follow a path of references higher 
and higher until the truth bursts 
dazzlingly upon one. With’ persistence rather than with great 
intellect, I wrung from the files 
of the Rememberers a coherent 
tale of the downfall of man. 
^T'Here was a time in ages past 
when life on Earth was brutal and primitive. We call this 
time the First Cycle. I do not 
speak of the period before civilization, that time of grunting 
and Hairiness, of caves and stone 
tools. We consider the First Cycle to have commenced when man 
first learned to record information and to control environment. 
This occurred in Agupt and Burn ir. By our way of reckoning 
the First Cycle commenced some 
40,000 years ago, although we are 
uncertain of its true length in its 
own terms, since the span of the 
year was altered at the end of 
tlie Second Cycle and we have 
been unable thus far to determine How long, in previous eras, 
it took for our world to circle its 
sun. Somewhat longer than at 
present, perhaps. 
The First Cycle was the time 
of Imperial Roum and of the 
first flowering of Jorslem. Eyrop 
remained savage long after Ais 
and parts of Afreek were civilized In the west, two great continents occupied much of Earth 
Ocean, and these two were Held 
by savages. 
It is understood that in this 
cycle mankind Had no contact 
with other worlds or stars. Such 
solitude is difficult to comprehend; but yet so it occurred. 
Mankind Had no way of creating light except through fire; fie 
could not cure Eis ills; life was 
not susceptible to renewal. It 
wns a time without comforts, a 
Itniy time, harsh in its simplicity. 
I truth' came early; one Hardy 
liml time to scatter a few sons 
about, and one was carried off. 
One lived with fear, but mostly 
not fear of real things. 
The soul recoils from such an 
era. But yet it is true that in the 
First Cycle magnificent cities 
were founded — Roum, Perris, 
Atin, Jorslem — and splendid 
deeds were accomplished. One 
stands in awe of those ancestors, 
foul-smelling (no doubt), illiterate, without machines, and still 
capable of coming to terms with 
their universe and to some extent of mastering it. 
War and grief were constant 
throughout the First Cycle. Destruction and creation were nearly simultaneous. Flames ate 
man’s most glorious cities. Chaos 
threatened always to engulf order. How could men have endured such conditions for thousands of years? 
Towards the close of the First 
Cycle much of the primitivism 
was outgrown. At last sources of 
power were accessible to man; 
there was the beginning of true 
transportation; communication 
over distances became possible; 
many inventions transformed the 
world in a short time. Methods 
of making war kept pace with the 
technological growth in other directions; but total catastrophe 
was averted, although several 
times it appeared to have arrived. 
It was during this final phase 
of the cycle that the Lost Continents were colonized, also 
I'l RRIS WAY 
2-raIya, end that first contact 
r/as made with tKe adjoining 
olanets of our solar system. 
fT'Ee transition from First Cycle to Second is arbitrarily 
fixed at tKe point wEen man first 
encountered intelligent beings 
from distant worlds. TEis, tKe 
Rememberers now believe, took 
place less tKan fifty generations 
after tKe First Cycle folk Bad 
mastered electronic and nuclear 
energy. Tfius we may rigfitly say 
tEat tKe early people of Eartfi 
stumbled Headlong from savagery to galactic contact — or, 
ratKer, tHaf tfiey crossed tEat 
gap in a few quick strides. 
TEis too is cause for pride. For 
if tEe First Cycle was great despite its Handicaps, tEe Second 
Cycle knew of no Handicaps, and 
achieved miracles. 
In tEis epocE mankind spread 
out to tEe stars, and tEe stars 
came to mankind. Earth was a 
marketplace for goods of all 
worlds. Wonders were commonplace. One migEt Hope to live 
for Hundreds of years: eyes, 
hearts, lungs, kidneys were replaced as easily as sEoes; tfie 
air was pure, no man went Hungry, war was forgotten. Machines of every sort served man. 
But the machines were not 
enough', and so tfie Second Cycle folk bred men wEo were machines, or machines who were 
men: creatures that were genetically Humans, but were bom artificially and were treated witfi 
drugs that prevented the permanent storing of memories. TEese 
creatures, analogous to our neuters, were capable of performing an efficient day’s work, but 
were unable to build up tEat permanent body of experiences, 
memories, expectations, and abilities that is the mark of a Human soul. Millions of such notquite-Eumans Handled the duller tasks of the day, freeing otEers for lives of glistening fulfillment. After the creation of 
tEe sub-humans came the creation of the super-animals, who 
through biochemical manipulation of the brain were able to 
carry out tasks once beyond tEe 
capacity of their species; dogs, 
cate, mice, and cattle were enrolled in the labor force, while 
certain high primates received 
functions formerly reserved for 
Humans. Through this exploitation of tEe environment to tEe 
fullest, man created a paradise 
on Earth. 
TEe spirit of man soared to 
tEe loftiest peak it Had known. 
Poets, scholars, and scientists 
made splendid contributions. 
Shining cities sprawled across the 
land. TEe population was enormous, and even so tEere was ample room for all, with no shortage 
of resources. One could indulge 
one’s whims to any extent; there 
was much experimentation with 
uenetic surgery and with mutagcnetic and teratogenetic drugs, 
no that the Human species adopted many new forms. There was, 
however, nothing yet like tHe vailnnt forms of our cycle. 
Across the sky in stately proi rssion moved space stations serving every imaginable need. It was 
nt this time that the two new 
moons were built, although the 
KVmemberers Have not yet determined whether their purpose was 
functional or esthetic. The auioi ns that now appear each night 
In 1 lie sky may Have been install< • I nt this time, although some 
fin (ions of Rememberers argue 
l lint the presence of temperatenmc auroras began with the geophysical upheavals that heralded 
I he close of the cycle, 
| ( was, at any rate, the finest of 
® limes to be alive. 
"See Earth and die,” was the 
watchword of the outworlders. 
No one making the galactic 
gmnd tour dared pass up this 
pl it net of miracles. We welcomed 
the strangers, accepted their 
i iimpliments and their money, 
nimle them comfortable in the 
wnytt they preferred, and proudly 
ill*|ilnycd our greatnesses. 
The Prince of Roum can testify 1 lint it is the fate of the 
mighty eventually to be hum
rriwis way 
bled, and also that the Higher 
one reaches for splendor, the 
more catastrophic one’s downfall is apt to be. After some thousands of years of glories beyond 
my capacity to comprehend, the 
fortunate ones of the Second 
Cycle overreached themselves 
and committed two misdeeds, 
one bom of foolish arrogance, 
the other bom of excessive confidence. Earth is paying yet for 
those overreachings. 
The effects of the first were 
slow to be felt. It was a function of Earth’s attitude toward 
the other species of the galaxy, 
which had shifted during the 
Second Cycle from awe to matter-of-fact acceptance to contempt. At the beginning of the 
cycle, brash and naive Earth Had 
erupted into a galaxy already 
peopled by advanced races that 
long had been in contact with 
one another. This could well 
Have produced an ego-crushing 
trauma, but instead it generated an aggressive urge to excel 
and surpass. And so it happened 
that EartKmen quickly came to 
look upon most of the galactics 
as equals, and then, as progress 
continued on Earth, as inferiors. 
This bred the easy habit of contempt for the backward. 
Thus it was proposed to establish “study compounds” on 
Earth for specimens of inferior 
races. These compounds would 
reproduce the natural habitat of 
the races and would be accessible 
to scholars wishing to observe 
the life-processes of these races. 
However, the expense of collecting and ihaintaining the specimens 
was such' that it quickly became 
necessary to open the compounds 
to the public at large, for purposes of amusement. It will be 
seen that these supposedly scientific compounds were, in fact, 
zoos for other intelligent species. 
At the outset, only the truly 
alien beings were collected, those 
so remote from human biological 
or psychological norms that there 
was little danger of regarding 
them as people. A many-limbed 
thing that dwells in a tank of 
methane under high pressure 
does not strike a sympathetic response from those likely to object to the captivity of intelligent creatures. If that methanedweller Happens to Have a complex civilization of a sort uniquely fitted to its environment, it can 
be argued that it is all the more 
important to duplicate that environment on Earth so that one 
can study so strange a civilization. Therefore the early compounds contained only the bizarre. The collectors were limited, also to taking creatures who 
had not attained the stage of 
galactic travel themselves. It 
would not have been good form 
to kidnap life-forms whose relatives took part in the interstellar tourist trade on which 
our world’s economy had come 
so heavily to depend. 
nphe success of the first compounds led to the demand for th'e formation of others. Less critical standards were 
imposed; not merely the utterly 
alien and grotesque were collected, but samplings of any sort 
of galactic life not in a position to register diplomatic protests. And, as the audacity of 
our ancestors increased, so did 
the restrictions on collection loosen, until there were samplings 
from a thousand worlds on Earth, 
including some whose civilizations were older and more intricate than our own. 
The archives of the Rememberers show that the expansion 
of our compounds stirred some 
agitation in many parts of the 
universe. We were denounced as 
marauders, kidnappers, and pirates; committees were formed to 
criticize our wanton disregard 
for the rights of sentient beings; 
Earthmen traveling to other 
planets were occasionally beset 
by mobs of hostile life-forms demanding that we free the prisoners of the compounds at once. 
However, these protesters were 
only a minority. Most galactics 
kept an uncomfortable silence 
about our compounds. THey regretted the barbarity of them, 
and nevertheless made a point 
of touring them when they visited Earth'. Where else after all, 
could one see Hundreds of lifeforms, culled from every part of 
tHe universe, in a few days? Our 
compounds were a major attraction, one of tHe wonders of the 
cosmos. By silent conspiracy our 
neighbors in th'e galaxy winked 
at the amorality of tHe basic 
concept in order to sKare tHe 
pleasure of inspecting the prisoners. 
There is in the archives of the 
Rememberers a memory-tank 
entry of a visit to a compound 
area. It is one of the oldest visual records possessed by the 
guild, and I obtained a look at 
it only with great difficulty and 
upon the direct intercession of 
the Rememberer Olmayne. Despite the use of a double filter 
in the cap, one sees the scene 
only blurredly; but yet it is 
clear enough. Behind a curved 
shield of a transparent material 
are fifty or more beings of an 
unnamed world. THeir bodies are 
pyramidal, with dark blue surfaces and pink visual areas at 
each vertex; they walk upon 
sliort, thick legs; they Have one 
pair of grasping limbs on each 
face. Though it is risky to attempt to interpret the inner 
feelings of extraterrestrial beings, 
one can clearly sense a mood of 
utter despair in these creatures. 
Through the murky green gases 
of their environment they move 
slowly, numbly, without animation. Several have joined tips 
in wHat must be communication. 
One appears newly dead. Two 
are bowed to the ground like 
tumbled toys, but their limbs 
move in what perhaps is prayer. 
It is a dismal scene. Later, I discovered other such records in 
neglected corners of the building. They taught me much. 
VII 
TT'or more than a thousand Second Cycle years the growth 
of these compounds continued 
unchecked, until it came to seem 
logical and natural to all except the victims that Earth 
should practice these cruelties in 
the name of science. Then, upon 
a distant world not previously 
visited by Earthmen, there were 
discovered certain beings of a 
primitive kind, comparable perhaps to Earthmen in early Fiirst 
Cycle days. These beings were 
roughly humanoid in form, undeniably intelligent, and fiercely 
savage. At the cost of several 
Earthbom lives, a collecting team 
acquired a breeding colony of 
these people and transported 
them to an Earth compound. 
PERRIS WAY 
This was the first of the Second Cycle’s two fatal errors. 
At the time of the kidnapping 
the beings of this other world — 
which is never named in the records, but knowq only by the 
code designation H362 — were in 
no position to protest or to take 
punitive steps. But shortly they 
were visited by emissaries from 
certain other worlds aligned politically in an anti-Earth position. Under the guidance of these 
emissaries, the beings of H362 
requested the return of their 
people. Earth' refused, citing the 
long precedent of interstellar 
condonement of the compounds. 
Lengthy diplomatic representations followed, in the course of 
which Earth simply reaffirmed 
its right to have acted in such a 
fashion. 
The people of H362 responded 
with threats. “One day,” they 
said, “we will cause you to regret this. We will invade and 
conquer your planet, set free all 
the inhabitants of the compounds, 
and turn Earth itself into a gigantic compound for its own people.” 
Under the circumstances this 
appeared quite amusing. 
Little more was heard of the 
outraged inhabitants of H362 
over the next few millenia. They 
were progressing rapidly, in their 
distant part of the universe, but 
since by all calculations it would 
take them a cosmic period to 
pose any menace to Earth 1 , they 
were ignored. How could one fear 
spear-wielding savages? 
T^arth addressed itself to a new 
challenge: full control of the 
planetary climate. 
Weather modification Had 
been practiced on a small scale 
since late First Cycle. Clouds 
holding potential rain could be 
induced to release it; fogs could 
be dispelled; hail could be made 
less destructive. Certain steps 
were taken toward reducing the 
polar ice packs and toward making deserts more fruitful. However, these measures were strictly 
local and, with few exceptions, 
had no lasting effects on environment. 
The Second Cycle endeavor 
involved the erection of enormous 
columns at more than one hundred locations around the globe. 
We do not know the heights of 
these columns, since none has 
survived intact and the specifications are lost, but it is thought 
that they equaled or exceeded 
the highest buildings previously 
constructed and perhaps attained altitudes of two miles or 
more. Within these columns was 
equipment which was designed, 
among other things, to effect displacements of the poles of Earth’s 
magnetic field. 
As we understand the aim of 
the weather machines, it was to 
modify the planet’s geography 
according to a carefully conceived plan arising from the division of what we call Earth 
Ocean into a number of large 
bodies. Although interconnected, 
these sub-otfeans were considered to Have individual existences, 
since along most of their boundary region they were cut off 
from the rest of Earth Ocean by 
land masses. In the north polar 
region, for example, the joining 
of Ais to the northern Lost Continent (known as Usa-amrik) 
in the west and the proximity of 
Usa-amrok to Eyrop in the east 
left only narrow straits through 
which the polar waters could 
mingle with those of the warmer 
oceans flanking the Lost Continents. 
Manipulation of magnetic 
forces produced a libration of 
Earth on its orbit calculated to 
break up the north' polar ice 
pack and permit the cold water 
trapped by this pack to come in 
contact with warmer water from 
elsewhere. By removing the 
northern ice pack and thus exposing the northern ocean to 
evaporation, precipitation would 
be greatly increased there. To 
prevent this precipitation from 
falling in the north as snow, additional manipulations were to 
be induced to change the pattern of the prevailing westerly 
winds, which carry precipitation 
over temperate areas. A natural 
conduit was to be established 
that would bring the precipitation of the polar region to areas 
in lower latitudes lacking in 
proper moisture. 
There was much more to the 
plan than this. Our knowledge of 
the details is Hazy. We are aware 
of schemes to shift ocean currents 
by causing land subsidence or 
emergence, of proposals to deflect solar Heat from the tropics 
to the poles, and of other rearrangements. The details are unimportant. What is significant 
to us are the consequences of this 
grandiose plan. 
After a period of preparation 
lasting centuries, and absorbing more effort and wealth 
than any other project in human 
History, the weather machines 
were put into operation. 
The result was devastation. 
The' disastrous experiment in 
planetary alteration resulted in 
a shifting of the geographical 
poles, a lengthy period of glacial conditions throughout most 
of the northern hemisphere, the 
unexpected submergence of Usaamrik and Sud-amrik its neighbor, the creation of Land Bridge 
joining Afreek and Eyrop, and 
the near destruction of human 
civilization. These upheavals! 
did not take place with great 
PERRIS WAY 
speed. Evidently the project went 
smoothly for the first several 
centuries; the polar ice thawed, 
and the corresponding rise in 
sea levels was clealt with by constructing fusion evaporators — 
small suns, in effect — at selected oceanic points. Only slowly 
did it become clear that the 
weather machines were bringing 
about architectonic changes in 
the crust of the Earth. These, 
unlike the climatic changes, proved irreversible. 
It was a time of furious storms 
followed by unending droughts; 
of the loss of Hundreds of millions of lives; of the disruption 
of all communications; of panicky mass migrations out of the 
doomed continents. Chaos triumphed. Th'e splendid civilization of the Second Cycle was 
shattered. 
Earth fell into receivership. 
For the sake of saving what 
remained of its population, several of the most powerful galactic 
races took command of our planet. They established energy pylons to stabilize Earth’s axial 
wobble; they dismantled those 
weather machines that Had not 
been destroyed by the planetary 
convulsions; they fed the hungry, clothed the naked, and offered reconstruction loans. Foe 
us it was a Time of Sweeping, 
when all the structures and conventions of society were ex
46 
punged. No longer masters in our 
own world, we accepted the charity of strangers and crept pitifully about 
Yet, because we were still tfie 
same race we Had been, we recovered to some extent. We had 
squandered our planet’s capital, 
and so could never again be anything but bankrupts and paupers, but in a Humbler way we 
entered into our Third Cycle, 
Others were devised, working 
generally on different principles. 
Our guilds were formed to give 
order to society: Dominators, 
Masters, Merchants, and the 
rest. Th'e Rememberers strove to 
salvage what could be pulled 
from the wreck of the past. 
/"Vur debts to our rescuers were 
enormous. As bankrupts, 
we Had no way of repaying those 
debts; we hoped instead for a 
quitclaim, a statement of absolution. Negotations to that effect were already under way 
when an unexpected intervention 
occurred. The inhabitants of 
H362 approached the committee of Earth’s receivers and offered to reimburse them for their 
expenses — in return for an assignment of all rights and claims 
in Earth to H362. 
It was done. 
H362 now regarded itself tfie 
owner by treaty of our world. If 
Served notice to tfie universe at 
large that it reserved the right 
to take possession at any future 
date. As well it might, since at 
that time H362 was still incapable of interstellar travel. Thereafter, though, H362 was deemed 
legal possessor of the assets of 
Earth, as purchaser in bankruptcy. 
No one failed to realize that 
this was H362’s way of fulfilling its threat to turn Earth itself into a gigantic compound, 
as revenge for the injury inflicted by our collecting team long 
before. 
On Earth, Third Cycle society 
constituted itself along the lines 
it now holds, with its rigid stratification of guilds. The threat of 
H362 was taken seriously, for 
ours was a chastened world that 
sneered at no menace, however 
slight; and a guild of Watchers 
was devised to scan the skies for 
attackers. Defenders and all the 
rest followed. In some small way 
we demonstrated our old flair 
for imagination, particularly in 
the Years of Magic, when a fanciful impulse created the selfperpetuating mutant guild of 
Fliers, a parallel guild of Swimmers of whom little is heard nowadays, and several other varieties, including a troublesome and 
unpredictable guild of Changelings whose genetic characteristics were highly erratic. 
The Watchers Watched. The 
Dominate rs ruled. The Fliers 
soared. Life went on, year after 
year, in Eyrop and in Ais, in 
Stralya, in Afreek, in the scattered islands that were the only 
remnants of the Lost Continents 
of Usa-amrik and Sud-amrik. 
The vow of H362 receded into 
mythology, but yet we remained 
vigilant. And far across the cosmos our enemies gathered 
strength, attaining some measure 
of the power that had been ours 
in our Second Cycle. They never forgot the day when their 
kinsmen Had been held captive 
in our compounds, though all the 
compounds had been destroyed 
in the chaos at the end of the 
Second Cycle. 
In a night of terror they came 
to us. Now they are our masters, 
and their vow is fulfilled, their 
claim asserted. 
All this, and much more, I 
learned as I burrowed in the accumulated knowledge of the guild 
of Rememberers. 
VIII 
A /l eanwhile the former Prince 
1Y2. D f Roum was wantonly 
abusing the hospitality of our 
co-sponsorer, the Rememberer 
Elegro. I should Have been aware 
of what was going on, for I knew 
the Prince and his ways better 
than any man in Perris. But I 
was too busy in the archives, 
PERRIS WAY 
learning of the past. While I explored the details of the Second 
Cycle’s protoplasm files and regeneration nodules, its tunewind 
blowers and its photonic-flux 
fixers, Prince Enric was seducing 
the Rememberer Olmayne. 
Like most seductions, I imagine that this was no great contest of wills. Olmayne was a 
woman of sensuality, whose attitude toward Her husband was 
affectionate but patronizing. She 
regarded Elegro openly as ineffectual, a bumbler; and Elegro, 
whose haughtiness and stem mien 
did not conceal His underlying 
weakness of purpose, seemed to 
merit her disdain. What kind of 
marriage they Had was not my 
business to observe, but clearly 
she was stronger, and just as 
clearly He could not meet her 
needs. 
Then, too, why had Olmayne 
agreed to sponsor us into Her 
guild? 
Surely not out of any desire 
for a tattered old Watcher. It 
must have been the wish to know 
more of the strange and oddly 
commanding blind Pilgrim who 
was that Watcher’s companion. 
From the very first, th'en Olmayne must Have been drawn to 
Prince Enric: and He, naturally, 
would need little encouragement 
to accept the gift she offered. 
Possibly they were lovers almost from the moment of our 
arrival in the Hall of Rememberers. 
I went my way, and Elegro 
went His, and Olmayne and 
Prince Enric went theirs, and 
summer gave way to autumn and 
autumn to winter. I excavated 
the records with passionate impatience. Never before had I known 
such involvement, such intensity 
of curiosity. Without benefit of 
a visit to Jorslem I felt renewed. 
I saw the Prince infrequently, and 
our meetings were generally silent; it was not my place to question Him about His doings, and 
He felt no wish to volunteer information to me. 
Occasionally I thought of my 
former life, and of my travels 
from place to place, and of the 
Flier Avluela who was now, I 
supposed, the consort of one of 
our conquerors. How did the 
false Changeling Gormon style 
himself, now that he had emerged from his disguise and owned 
himself to be one of those from 
H362? Earthking Nine? Oceanlord Five? Overman Three? 
Wherever he was, he must feel 
satisfaction, I thought, at the 
total success of the conquest of 
Earth. 
'T’oward winter’s end I learned 
of the affair between the Rememberer Olmayne and Prince 
Enric of Room. I picked up whispered gossip in the apprentice 
quarters first; then I noticed the 
smiles on the faces of other Rememberers when Elegro and Olmayne were about; lastly, I observed the behavior of the Prince 
and Olmayne toward one another. It was obvious. Those little 
glances, those touchings of hand 
to hand, those sly exchanges of 
catchwords and private phrases 
— what else could they mean? 
Among the Rememberers the 
marriage vow is regarded solemnly. As with the Fliers, mating is for life, and one is not 
supposed to betray one’s partner 
as Olmayne was doing. When 
one is married to a fellow Rememberer — a custom in the 
guild, but not universal — the 
union is all the more sacred. 
What revenge would Elegro 
take when in time he learned 
the truth? 
It happened that I was present when the situation at last 
crystallized into conflict, and so 
I had a view of how the Rememberer Elegro is constructed. 
It was a night in earliest spring. 
I had worked long and hard in 
the deepest pits of the memory 
tanks, prying forth data that no 
one had bothered with since it 
had first been stored; and, with 
my head a swim with images of 
chaos, I walked through the 
glow of the Perris night, seeking 
fresh air. I strolled along the 
Senn and was accosted by an 
agent for a Somnambulist, who 
offered to sell me insight into 
the world of dreams. I came upon 
a lone Pilgrim at his devotions 
before a temple of flesh. I watch* 
ed a pair of young Fliers in passage overhead, and shed a selfpitying tear or two. I was halted 
by a star bom tourist in breathing 
mask and jewelled tunic, who put 
his cratered red face close to mine 
and vented hallucinations in my 
nostrils. At length I turned to 
the Hall of Rememberers and 
went to the suite of my sponsors 
to pay my respects before retiring. 
Olmayne and Elegro were 
there. So, too, was Prince Baric. 
Olmayne admitted me with a 
quick gesture of one fingertip, 
but took no further notice of me, 
nor did the others. Elegro was 
tensely pacing the floor, stomping about so vehemently that the 
delicate life-forms of the carpet folded and unfolded their 
petals in wild agitation. “A Pilgrim!” Elegro cried. “If it had 
been some trash of a Vendor, it 
would only be humiliating. But 
a Pilgrim? That makes it monstrous!” 
T>rince Enric stood with arms 
folded, body motionless. It 
was impossible to detect the expression beneath his mask of 
Pilgrimage, but he appeared 
wholly calm. 
PERRIS WAY 
Elegro said, “Will you deny 
that you Have been tampering 
with’ the sanctity of my pairing?” 
“I deny nothing. I assert nothing.” 
“And you?” Elegro demanded, 
whirling on hi^ lady. “Speak 
truth, Olmayne! For once, speak 
truth! What of the stories do 
they tell of you and this Pilgrim?” 
“I Have heard no stories,” said 
Olmayne sweetly. 
“That He shares your bed! 
That you taste potions together! 
That you travel to ecstasy together!” 
Olmayne’s smile did not waver. Her broad face was tranquil. 
To me she looked more beautiful 
than ever. 
Elegro tugged in anguish at 
the strands of his shawl. His dour, 
bearded face darkened in wrath 
and exasperation. His hand slipped within his tunic and emerged 
with the tiny glossy bead of a 
vision capsule, which he thrust 
forth toward the guilty pair on 
the palm of His Hand. 
“Why should I waste breath?” 
he asked. “Everything is here. 
The full record in the photonic 
flux. You Have been under surveillance. Did either of you think 
anything could be Hidden here, 
of all places? You, Olmayne, a 
Rememberer, how could you 
think SO?” 
Olmayne examined the cap
sule from a distance, as though 
it were a primed implosion bomb’. 
With' distaste she said, “How like 
you to spy on us, Elegro. Did it 
give you great pleasure to watch 
us in our joy?” 
“Beast!” he cried. 
Pocketing the capsule, He advanced toward the motionless 
Prince. Elegro’s face now was 
contorted with righteous wrath. 
Standing an arm’s length from 
the Prince he declared icily, “You 
will be punished to the fullest 
for this impiety. You will be 
stripped of your Pilgrim’s robes 
and delivered up to the fate reserved for monsters. The Will 
shall consume your soul!” 
Prince Enric replied, “Curb 
your tongue.” 
“Curb my tongue? Who are 
you to speak that way? A Pilgrim who lusts for the wife of 
his host — who doubly violates 
holiness — who drips lies and 
sanctimony at the same moment?” Elegro frothed. His iciness was gone. Now he ranted 
in nearly incoherent frenzy, displaying his interior weakness by 
his lack of self control. We three 
stood frozen, astounded by His 
torrent of words, and at last the 
stasis broke when the Rememberer, carried away by the tide 
of his own indignation, seized the 
Prince by the shoulders and began violently to shake him. 
“Filth,” Enric bellowed, “you 
may not put your Hands to me!” 
W itfi a double tfirust of Jus 
fists against Elegro’s cSest 
He sent tHe Rememberer reeling 
backward across tHe room. Eiegro crasKed into a suspension cradle and sent a flask of watery 
artifacts tumbling; tHree flasks 
of scintillating fluids sHivered 
and spilled their contents; tHe 
carpet set up a sHrill cry of pained protest. Gasping, stunned, 
Elegro pressed a Hand to His 
breast and looked to us for assistance. 
“PKysical assault — ” Elegro 
wheezed. “A shameful crime!” 
“The first assault was your 
doing,” Olmayne reminded Her 
husband. 
Pointing trembling fingers, 
Elegro muttered, “For this there 
can be no forgiveness, Pilgrim!” 
“Call me Pilgrim no longer,” 
Enric cried. His Hands went to 
the grillwork of his mask. Olmayne cried out, trying to prevent Him; but in his anger the 
Prince knew no check. He hurled 
the mask to the floor and stood 
with His KarsH face terribly exposed, the cruel features hawklean, the gray mechanical spheres 
in his eyesockets masking the 
depths of his fury. “I am the 
Prince of Roum,” He announced 
in a voice of thunder. “Down 
and abase! Down and abase! 
Quick, Rememberer, tHe three 
PERRIS WAY 
prostrations and the five abasements!" 
Elegro appeared to crumble. 
He peered in disbelief; then He 
sagged, and in a kind of reflex 
of amazement He performed a 
ritual obeisance before His wife’s 
seducer. It was the first time 
since tHe fall of Roum that the 
Prince Had asserted his former 
status, and tHe pleasure of it was 
so evident on His ravaged face 
tKat even the bland eyeballs appeared to glow in regal pride. 
“Out,” the Prince ordered. 
“Leave us.” 
Elegro fled. 
I remained, astounded, staggered. THe Prince nodded courteously to me. “Would you pardon us, old friend, and grant us 
some moments of privacy?” 
IX 
A weak man can be put to 
route by a surprise attack, 
but afterward He pauses, reconsiders, and Hatches schemes. So 
was it with the Rememberer 
Elegro. Driven from his own 
suite by the unmasking of the 
Prince of Roum, h'e grew calm 
and crafty once He was out of 
that terrifying presence. Later 
that same night as I settled into 
my sleeping cradle and debated 
aiding slumber with a drug, 
Elegro summoned me to his research cell on a lower level. 
There he sat amid the paraphernalia of his guild: reels and 
spools, data flakes, capsules, 
caps, a quartet of series-linked 
skulls, a row of output screens, 
a small ornamental helix, all the 
symbology of the gatherers of 
information. In his hands he 
grasped a tension-draining crystal from one of the Cloud worlds; 
its milky interior was rapidly 
tinging with sepia as it pulled anxieties from his spirit. He pretended a look of stern authority, 
as if forgetting that I had seen 
him exposed in his spinelessness. 
He said, “Were you aware of 
this man’s identity when you 
came with him to Perris?” 
"Yes.” 
“You said nothing about it.” 
“I was never asked.” 
"Do you know what a risk 
you have exposed all of us to, 
by causing us knowingly to harbor a Dominator?” 
“We are Earthmen,” I said. 
“Do we not still acknowledge the 
authority of the Dominators?”” 
“Not since the conquest By 
decree of the invaders, all former governments are dissolved 
and their leaders subject to arrest.” 
“But surely we should resist 
such an order!” 
The Rememberer Elegro regarded me quizzically. “Is it a 
Rememberer’s function to meddle in politics? Tomis, we obey 
the government in power, whichever it may be and however it 
may have taken control we conduct no resistance activities 
here.” 
“I see.” 
“Therefore we must rid ourselves at once of this dangerous 
fugitive. Tomis, I instruct you 
to go at once to occupation headquarters and inform Manrule 
Seven that we have captured the 
Prince of Roum and hold him 
here for pickup.” 
“I should go?” I blurted. “WHy 
send an old man as a messenger 
in the night? An ordinary thinlting-cap transmission would be 
enough!” 
“Too risky. Strangers may intercept cap communications. It 
would not go well for our guild 
if this were spread about. This 
has to be a personal communication.” 
“But to choose an unimportant apprentice to carry it — it 
seems strange.” 
“There are only two of us who 
know,” said Elegro. “I will not 
go. Therefore you must.” 
“With no introduction to Manrule Seven I will never be admitted.” 
“Inform his aides that you 
have information leading to the 
apprehension of the Prince of 
Roum. You’ll be heard.” 
“Am I to mention your 
name?” 
“If necessary. You may say 
tfiat tfie Prince is bring Grid prisoner in my quarters witfi t&e cooperation of my wife.” 
T nearly laugfied at that. But I 
field a straight face before 
tfiis cowardly Rememberer, wfio 
did not even dare to go Eims elf 
to denounce tfie man wfio fiad 
cuckolded Him,. 
Ultimately,” I said, “tfie 
Prince will become aware of wfiat 
we fiave done. Is it rigfit of you 
to ask me to betray a man wfio 
was my companion for so many 
montfis?” 
“It is not a matter of betrayal. 
It is a matter of obligations to 
the government.” 
“I feel no obligation to tfiis 
government. My loyalties are to 
tfie guild of Dominators. Which' 
is wfiy I give assistance to tfie 
Prince of Roum in fiis moment 
of peril.” 
“For tfiat,” said Elegro, “your 
own life could be forfeit to our 
conquerors. Your only expiation 
is to admit your error and cooperate in bringing about fiis arrest. Go Now.” 
In a long and tolerant life I 
fiave never despised anyone so 
vefiemently as I did tfie Rememberer Elegro at tfiat moment 
Yet I saw tfiat I was faced 
witfi few cfioices, none of them 
palatable. Elegro wished fiis undoer punished, but lacked tfie 
courage to report him hims elf; 
therefore I must give over to tfie 
conquering authorities one wfiom 
I fiad sheltered and assisted, arid 
for whom I felt a responsibility. 
If I refused; Elegro would perfiaps hand me to tfie invaders 
for punishment myself, as an accessory to tfie Prince’s escape 
from Roum; or fie might take 
vengeance against me within tfie 
machinery of tfie guild of Rememberers. If I obliged Elegro, 
tfiougfi, I would fiave a stain on 
my conscience forever, and in 
tfie event of a restoration of tfie 
power of tfie Dominators I would 
fiave much to answer for. 
As I weighed tfie possibilities, 
I triply cursed tfie Rememberer 
Elegro’s wife and Her invertebrate husband. 
I Hesitated a bit. Elegro offered more persuasion, threatening 
to arraign me before tfie guild 
on sucfi charges as unlawfully 
gaining access to secret files and 
improperly introducing into guild 
precincts a proscribed fugitive. 
He threatened to cut me off forever from tfie information pool. 
He spoke vaguely of vengeances. 
In tfie end I told him I would 
go to tfie invaders’ Headquarters 
and do fiis bidding. I fiad by tfien 
conceived a betrayal tfiat would 
— I hoped — cancel tfie betrayal 
Elegro was enforcing on me. 
Dawn was near wfien I left tfie 
building. Tfie air was mild and 
PERRIS WAY 
sweet; a low mist hung over the 
streets of Perris, giving them a 
gentle shimmer. No moons were 
in sight. In the deserted streets 
I felt uneasy, although I told 
myself that no lone would care 
to do Harm to an aged Rememberer; but I was armed only with 
a small blade, and I feared 
bandits. 
TV/Ty route lay on one of the pedestrian ramps. I panted a 
bit at the steep incline, but when 
I had attained the proper level 
I was more secure, since here 
there were patrol nodes at frequent intervals, and here, too, 
were some other late-night strollers. I passed a spectral figure 
garbed in white satin through 
which alien features peered : a 
r even ant, ghostly inhabitant of 
a planet of the Bull, where reincarnation is the custom and no 
man goes about installed in his 
own original body. I passed three 
female beings of a Swan planet 
who giggled at me and asked if 
I Had seen males of their species, since the time of conjugation was upon them. I passed a 
pair of Changelings who eyed me 
speculatively, decided I had 
nothing on me worth' robbing, 
and moved on, their piebald 
dewlaps jiggling. 
At last I came to the squat octagonal building occupied by the 
Procurator of Perris . 
It was indifferently guarded. 
The invaders appeared confident 
that we were incapable of mounting a counterassault against 
them, and quite likely they were 
right; a planet which can be 
conquered between darkness and 
dawn is not going to launch a 
plausible resistance afterward. 
Around the building rose the 
pale glow of a protective scanner. There was a tingle of ozone 
in the air. In the wide plaza 
across the way, Merchants were 
setting up their market for the 
morning; I saw barrels of spices 
being unloaded by brawny Servitors, and dark sausages carried 
by files of neuters. I stepped 
through the scanner beam and 
an invader emerged to challenge 
me. 
I explained that I carried urgent news for Manrule Seven, 
and in short order with amazzingly little consultation of intermediaries, I was ushered into 
the Procurator's presence. 
The invader had furnished His 
office simply but in good style. 
It was decked entirely with 
EartHmade objects: a drapery 
of Afreek weave, two alabaster 
pots from ancient Agupt, a marble statuette that might Have 
been early Roumish', and a dark 
Talyan vase in which’ a few 
wilting deathflowers languished. 
When I entered, he seemed preoccupied with several message 
cubes; as I Had Heard, the ingraders did most of their work 
In the dark Hours, and it did not 
Surprise me to rind Kim so busy 
now. After a moment He looked 
Up and said, “WEat is it. 
Did man? What’s this about a fugitive Dominator?” 
“THe Prince of Roum,” I said. 
“I know of His location.” 
A t once His cold eyes sparkled 
with interest.. He ran His 
many-fingered Hands across his 
desk, on wfiicli were mounted the 
emblems of several of our guilds, 
Transporters and Rememberers 
and Defenders and Clowns, 
among others. “Go on,” Be said. 
“THe Prince is in this city. He 
is in a specific place and Has no 
way of escaping from it.” 
“And you are Here to inform 
me of Kis location?” 
“No,” I said. “I’m Here to 
buy His liberty.” 
Manrule Seven seemed perplexed. “There are times when 
you Humans baffle me. You say 
you’ve captured this runaway 
Dominator, and I assume that 
you want to sell Him to us, but 
you say you want to buy Him. 
Wfiy botKer coming to us? Is this 
a joke?” 
“Will you permit an explanation?” 
He brooded into tfie mirror 
fop of His desk wKile I told Him 
in a compressed way of my jour
PERRIS WAY 
ney from Roum with tfie blinded Prince, of our arrival at the 
Hall of Rememberers, of Prince 
Enric’s seduction of Olmayne, 
and of Elegro’s petty fuming desire for vengeance. I made it 
clear that I Had come to the invaders only under duress and 
that it was not my intention to 
betray the Prince into their 
Hands. Then I said, “I realize 
that all Dominators are forfeit 
to you. Yet this one Has already 
paid a EigH price for His freedom. 
I ask you to notify the Rememberers that the Prince of Roum 
Is under amnesty, and to permit 
Him to continue on as a Pilgrim 
to Jorslem. In that way Elegro 
will lose power over Kim.” 
“What is it tEat you offer us,” 
asked Manrule Seven, “in return for this amnesty for your 
Prince?” 
“I Have done researcH in the 
memory tanks of the Rememberers.” 
“And?” 
“I Have found that for wHicH 
you Have been seeking.” 
Manrule Seven studied me 
with care. “How would you Have 
any idea of what we seek?” 
“TEere is in tHe deepest part 
of tHe Hall of Rememberers,” I 
said quietly, “an image recording of the compound in wfiicfi 
your kidnapped ancestors lived 
while they were prisoners on 
EartH. It sHows their sufferings 
in poignant detail. It is a superb 
justification for tKe conquest of 
EartH by H362 
“Impossible! TKere’s no sucK 
document!” 
From the intensity of the invader’s reaction, I knew that I 
had stung him in tKe vulnerable 
place. 
He went on, “We’ve searched 
your files thoroughly. Th’ere’s 
only one recording of compound 
life, and it doesn’t sKow our people. It shows a non-humanoid 
pyramid-shaped race, probably 
from one of the Anchor worlds.” 
“I have seen that one,” I told 
him, “There are others. I spent 
many hours searching for them, 
out of Hunger to know of our past 
injustices.” 
“TKe indexes — ” 
“ — are sometimes incomplete. 
I found this recording only by 
accident. The Rememberers 
themselves Have no idea it’s 
there. I’ll lead you to it — if you 
agree to leave the Prince of 
Roum unmolested.” 
npSe Procurator was silent a 
moment. At length Ke said, 
“You puzzle me. I am unable 
to make out if you are a scoundrel or a man of the highest virtue.” 
“I know where true loyalty 
lies.” 
“To betray the secrets of your 
guild, though — ” 
“I am no Rememberer, only 
an apprentice, formerly a Watcher. I would not have you Harm 
the Prince at the wish of a 
cuckolded fool. TKe Prince is in 
his hands; only you can obtain 
his release now. And so I must 
offer you this document” 
“Which’ the Remembers have 
carefully deleted from their indexes, so it will not fall into 
our Hands.” 
“Which the Remembers have 
carefully misplaced and forgotten.” 
“I doubt it,” said Manrule 
Seven. “They are not careless 
folk. They hid that recording; 
and by giving it to us, are you 
not betraying all your world? 
Making yourself a collaborator 
with the hated enemy?” 
I shrugged. “I am interested in 
having the Prince of Roum made 
free. Other means and ends are 
of no concern to me. The location of the document is yours in 
exchange for the grant of amnesty.” 
The invader displayed what 
might have been his equivalent 
of a smile. “It is not in our best 
interests to allow members of 
the former guild of Dominators 
to remain at large. Your position 
is precarious, do you see? I could 
extract the document’s location 
from you by force — and still 
Have the Prince as well. 
“So you could,” I agreed. “I 
take tliat risk. I assume a certain 
basic Honor among people wKo 
come to avenge an ancient crime. 
I am in your power, and the 
wKereabouts of the document is 
in my mind, yours for the pick
• — if 
ing. 
Now He laughed in an unmistakable show of good Humor. 
“Wait one moment,” he said. 
He spoke a few words in His own 
language into an amber communication device, and shortly a 
second member of his species entered the office. I recognized Him 
instantly, although he was shorn 
of some of the flamboyant disguise he had worn when he traveled with' me as Garmon, the supposed Changeling. He offered the 
ambivalent smile of His kind and 
said, “I greet you, Watcher.” 
“And I greet you, Gormon.” 
“My name now is Victorious 
Thirteen.” 
“I now am called Tomis of the 
Rememberers,” I said. 
Manrule Seven remarked, 
“When did you two become such 
fast friends?” 
“In the time of the conquest,” 
said Victorious Thirteen. “While 
performing my duties as an advance scout I encountered this 
man in Talya and journeyed 
with him to Roum. But we were 
companions, in truth, and not 
friends.” 
I trembled. ‘Where is the Flier 
Avluela?” 
“In Pars, I believe,” he said 
offhandedly. “She spoke of returning to Hind, to the place of 
her people.” 
“You loved her only a short 
while, then?” 
“We were more companions 
than lovers,” said the invader. 
“It was a passing thing for us.” 
“For you, maybe,” I said. 
“For us.” 
“And for this passing thing 
you stole a man’s eyes?” 
He who had been Gormon 
shrugged. “I did that to teach a 
proud creature a lesson in pride.” 
“You said at the time that 
your motive was jealousy,” I reminded him. “You claimed to 
act out of love.” 
I 
T Victorious Thirteen appeared 
* to lose interest in me. To 
Manrule Seven He said, “Why is 
this man here? Why have you 
summoned me?” 
“The Prince of Roum is in 
Perris,” said Manrule Seven. 
Victorious Thirteen registered 
sudden surprise. 
Manrule Seven went on, “He 
is a prisoner of the Rememberers. Tins man offers a strange 
bargain. You know the Prince 
better than any of us; I ask your 
advice.” 
The Procurator sketched the 
outlines of the situation. He who 
Had been Gormon listened 
thoughtfully, saying nothing. At 
PERRIS WAY 
the end, Manrule Seven said, 
“The problem is this: shall we 
give amnesty to a proscribed 
Dominator?” 
“He is blind,” said Victorious 
Thirteen. “I^is power is gone. 
His followers are scattered. His 
spirit may be broken, but he 
presents no danger to us. I say 
accept the bargain.” 
“There are administrative risks 
in exempting a Dominator from 
arrest,” Manrule Seven pointed 
out. “Nevertheless, I agree. We 
undertake the deal.” To me, he 
said, “Tell us the location of the 
document we desire.” 
“Arrange the liberation of the 
Prince of Roum first," I said 
calmly. 
Both invaders displayed amusement. “Fair enough,” said Manrule Seven. “But look: how cart 
we be certain that you’ll keep 
your word? Anything might happen to you in the next Hour 
while we’re freeing the Prince.” 
“A suggestion,” put in Victorious Thirteen. “This is not so 
much a matter of mutual mistrust as it is one of timing. Tomis, why not record the document’s location on a six-hour 
delay cube? We’ll prime the cube 
so that it will release: its information only if within that six 
hours the Prince of Roum Himself, and no one else, commands 
it to do so. If we haven’t found 
and freed the Prince in that time, 
the cube will destruct. If we do 
release the Prince, the cube will 
give us the information, even if 
— ah — something should have 
happened to you in the interval.” 
“You cover all contingencies,” 
I said. 
“We are agreed,” I said. 
“Are we agreed?” Manrule 
Seven asked. 
They brought me a cube and 
placed me under a privacy screen 
while I inscribed on its glossy 
surface the rack number and sequence equations of the document I Had discovered. Moments 
passed; the cube everted itself 
and the information vanished 
into its opaque depths. I offered 
it to them. 
Thus did I betray my Earthborn heritage and perform a service for our conquerors, out of 
loyalty to a blinded wifestealing 
Prince. 
X 
D awn Had come by this time. 
I did not accompany the 
invaders to the Hall of Rememberers; it was no business of 
mine to oversee the intricate 
events that must ensue, and I 
preferred to be elsewhere. A fine 
drizzle was falling as I turned 
down the gray streets that bordered Senn. The timeless river, 
its surface stippled by the drops, 
swept unwearyingly against stone 
archies of First Cycle antiquity, 
bridges spanning uncountable 
millennia, survivors from an era 
wKen the only problems of mankind were of His own making. 
Morning engulfed the dty. 
THrougH an old and ineradicable 
reflex I searched for my instruments so that I could do my 
Watching and Had to remind 
myself that that was far behind 
me now. The Watchers were disbanded; the enemy Had come, 
and old Wuellig, now Tomis of 
the Rememberers Had sold himself to Mankind’s foes. 
In the shadow of a twin-steepled religious House of the ancient 
Christers I let myself be enticed 
into the booth of a Somnambulist. This guild is not one with 
which I Have often had dealings; 
in my way I am wary of charlatans, and charlatans are abundant in our time. The Somnambulist, in a state of trance, claims 
to see what has been, wh’at is, 
and what will be. I know something of trances myself, for as a 
Watcher I entered such a state 
four times each day; but a 
Watcher with pride in his craft 
must necessarily despise the tawdry ethics of those who use second sight for gain, as Somnambulists do. 
However, while among the Rememberers I Had learned, to my 
surprise, that Somnambulists 
frequently were consulted to aid 
in unearthing some site of ancient times, and that they Had 
served the Rememberers well 
Though still skeptical, I was 
willing to be instructed. And, at 
the moment, I needed a shelter 
from the storm that was breaking over the Hall of Rememberers. 
A dainty, mincing figure garbed in black greeted me with a 
mocking bow as I entered the 
low-roofed booth. 
“I am Samit of the Somnambulists,” fie said in a high whining voice. ““I offer you welcome 
and good tidings. Behold my 
companion, the Somnambulist 
Murta.” 
The Somnambulist Murta was 
a robust woman in lacy robes. 
Her face was heavy with flesh, 
deep rings of darkness surrounded Her eyes, a trace of mustache 
lined Her upper lip. Somnambulists work their trade in teams, 
one to do the Huckstering, one to 
perform; most teams were man 
and wife, as was this. My mind 
rebelled at the thought of the 
embrace of the flesh-mountain 
Murta and the miniature man 
Samit, but it was no concern of 
mine. I took my seat as Samit 
indicated. On a table nearby I 
saw some food tablets of several 
colors; I Had interrupted this 
family’s breakfast. Murta, deep 
in trance, wandered the room 
PERRIS WAY 
with ponderous strides, now and 
again grazing some article of 
furniture in a gentle way. Some 
Somnambulists, it is said, waken 
only two or three hours of the 
twenty, simply to take meals 
and relieve bodily needs; there 
are some who ostensibly live in 
continuous trance and are fed 
and cared for by acolytes. 
T scarcely listened as Samit of 
-*■ the Somnambulists delivered 
his sales talk in rapid, feverish 
bursts of ritualistic word-clusters. It was pitched to the ignorant; Somnambulists do much 
of their trade with Servitors and 
Clowns and other menials. At 
length', seemingly sensing my 
impatience, he cut short his extolling of the Somnambulist 
Murta’s abilities and asked me 
what it was I wished to know. 
“Surely the Somnambuliist already is aware of that,” I said. 
“You wish a general analysis?” 
“I want to know the fate of 
those about me. I wish particularly for the Somnambulist’s 
concentration to center on events 
now occurring in the Hall of 
Rememberers.” 
Samit tapped long fingernails 
against the smooth’ table and 
shot a glaring look at the cowlike 
Murta. “Are you in contact with 
the truth?” he asked Her. 
Her reply was a long feathery 
sigh wrenched from the core of 
all the quivering meat of her 
“What do you see?" he asked 
her. 
She began to mutter thickly. 
Somnambulists speak in a language not otherwise used by 
mankind; it is a harsh thing of 
edgy sounds, which some claim 
is descended from an ancient 
tongue of Agupt. I know nothing 
of that. To me it sounded incoherent, fragmentary, impossible 
to hold meaning. Samit listened 
a while, then nodded in satisfaction and extended his palm to 
me. 
“There is a great deal,” he said. 
We discussed the fee, bargained briefly, came to a settlement. 
“Go on,” I told him. “Interpret 
the truth.” 
Cautiously he began, “There 
are outworlders involved in this, 
and also several members of the 
guild of Rememberers.” I was silent, giving him no encouragement. “They are drawn together 
in a difficult quarrel. A man 
without eyes is at the heart of 
it.” 
I sat upright with' a jolt. 
Samit smiled in cool triumph. 
“The man without eyes Has fallen from greatness. He is Earth, 
shall we say, broken by conqueror? Now He is near the end 
of his time. He seeks to restore 
his former condition, but he 
knows it is impossible. He has 
caused a Rememberer to violate 
an oath, To their g uildh all Have 
come several of the conquerors 
to — chastise him? No. No. To 
free Him from captivity. Shall I 
continue?” 
“Quickly!” 
“You Have received all that 
you paid for.” 
T scowled. This was extortion; 
but yet the Somnambulist 
Bad clearly seen the truth. I Had 
learned nothing Here that I did 
Hot already know, but that was 
sufficient to tell me I might learn 
Snore. I added to my fee. 
Samit closed His fist on my 
coin and conferred once more 
with Murta. She spoke at length, 
in some agitation, whirling several times colliding violently with a 
musty divan. 
Samit said, “The man without 
eyes Has come between a man 
and his wife. The outraged Husband seeks punishment; the outworlders will thwart that. TEe 
outworlders seek Hidden truths; 
they will find them, with a traitor’s Kelp. Tfie man without eyes 
peeks freedom and power; He 
will find peace. The stained wife 
seeks amusement; she will find 
Hardship.” 
“And I?” I said into an obstinate and expensive silence. “You 
say nothing of me!” 
“You will leave Perris soon, 
In the same manner as you entered it You will not leave 
alone. You will not leave in your 
present guild.” 
“What will be my destination?” 
"You know that as well as we 
do, so why waste your money to 
tell you?” 
He fell silent again. 
“Tell me what will befall me as 
I journey to Jorslem,” I said. 
“You could not afford such 
information. Futures become 
costly. I advise you to settle for 
what you know.” 
“I Have some questions about 
what has already been said.” 
“We do not clarify at any 
price.” 
He grinned. I felt the force of 
his contempt THe Somnambulist Murta, still bumbling about 
the room, groaned and belched. 
The powers with whom she was 
in contact appeared to impart 
new information to Her; she 
whimpered, slhvered, made a 
blurred chuc kling sound. Samit 
spoke to Her in their language. 
SEe replied at length. He peered 
at me. “At no cost,” Be said, “a 
final information. Your life is Hi 
no danger, but your spirit is. It 
would be well if you made ycrur 
peace witK the Will as quickly 
possible. Recover your moral orientation. Remember your true 
loyalties. Atone for well intent 
honed sins. I can say no more.” 
Indeed, Murta stirred and 
seemed to wake. Great slabs of 
PERRIS WAY 
flesh jiggled in her face and body 
as the convulsion of leaving the 
trance came over her. Her eyes 
opened, but I saw only whites, 
a terrible sight Her thick lips 
twitched to reveal crumbling 
teeth. Saxnit beckoned me out 
with quick br ushin g gestures of 
his tiny hands. I fled into a dark 
rain-drenched morning. 
T T urriedly I 
n Hall of Re 
returned to the 
Rememberers, arriving there out of breath, with a 
red spike of pain behind my 
breastbone. I paused a while 
outside the superb building to 
recover my strength. Floaters 
passed overhead, leaving the 
guildhall from an upper level. 
My courage nearly failed me. 
But in the end I entered the 
Hall and ascended to the level 
of the suite of Elegro and Olmayne. 
A knot of agitated Rememberers 
filled the hall. A buzz of whispered comment drifted toward me. I 
pressed forward; and a man 
whom I recognized as high in the 
councils of the guild Held up a 
Hand and said, “What business 
do you have here, apprentice?” 
“I am Tomis, who was sponsored by the Rememberer Olmayne. My chamber is close. 
“Tomis!” a voice cried. 
I was seized and thrust ahead, 
into the familiar suite, now a 
scene of devastation. 
A dozen Rememberers stood 
about, fingering their shawls in 
distress. 1 recognized among them 
the taut and elegant figure of 
Chancellor Kenishal, his gray 
eyes now dull with despair. Beneath a coverlet to the left of 
the entrance lay a crumpled figure in the robes of a Pilgrim: the 
Prince of Roum, dead in his own 
pooled blood. His gleaming 
mask, now stained, lay beside 
him. At the opposite side of the 
room, slumped against an ornate credenza containing Second 
Cycle artifacts of great beauty, 
was the Rememberer Elegro, 
seemingly asleep, looking furious and surprised both at once. 
His throat was transfixed by a 
single slender dart. To the rear, 
with burly Rememberers flanking her, stood the Rememberer 
Olmayne, looking wild and disheveled. Her scarlet robe was 
tom in front, revealing high 
white breasts; her black hair 
tumbled in disorder; her satiny 
skin glistened with perspiration. 
She appeared lost in a dream, 
far from these present surroundings. 
“WKat Has Happened here?” I 
asked. 
“Murder twice over,” said 
Chancellor Kenishal in a broken 
voice. He advanced toward me, 
a tall Haggard man, white-haired, 
an uncontrollable tic working in 
the lid of one eye.” When did 
you last see Uitse people alive, 
apprentice?” 
“In the night” 
“How did you come to be 
Here?” 
“A visit, no more.” 
“Was tHere a disturbance?” 
“A quarrel between tbe Rememberer Elegro and tKe Pilgrim, yes,” I admitted. 
“Over what?” asked the Chancellor thinly. 
I looked uneasily at Olmayne, 
but she saw nothing and heard 
less. 
“Over Her,” I said. 
I beard snickerings from the 
other Rememberers They 
nudged each other, nodded, even 
smiled; I had confirmed the 
scandal. The Chancellor grew 
more solemn. 
He indicated tbe body of the 
Prince. 
“This was your companion 
when you entered Perris,” he 
said. “Did you know of his true 
identity?” 
I moistened my lips. “I bad 
suspicions,” 
“That he was — ” 
“The fugitive Prince of Rourrt,” 
I said. I must not attempt subterfuges; my status was precarious. 
More nods, more nudges. 
Chancellor KenisHal said, “This 
man was subject to arrest. It was 
not your place to 1 conceal your 
PERRIS WAY 
knowledge of his true luei.L. 
I remained mute. 
The Chancellor went on, “You 
Have been absent from this ball 
for some hours. Tell us of your 
activities after leaving tbe suite 
of Elegro and Olmayne.” 
"I called upon the Procurator 
Manrule Seven,” I said. 
Sensation. 
“For what purpose?” 
“To inform the Procurator,” 
I said, “that the Prince of Roum 
Had been apprehended and was 
now in the suite of a Rememberer. I did this at the instruction 
of the Rememberer Elegro. After 
delivering my information I 
walked the streets several Hours 
for no particular end, and returned here to find — to find — ” 
“To find everything in chaos,” 
said Chancellor KenishaL “The 
Procurator was here at dawn. 
He visited this suite; both Elegro and the Prince must still have 
been alive at that time. Then he 
went into our archives and removed — and removed — material 
of the highest sensitivity — removed — material not believed 
accessible to — the Highest sensitivity — ” The Chancellor faltered. Like some intricate machine smitten with instant rust, 
He slowed his motions, emitted 
rasping sounds, appeared to be 
on the verge of systemic breakdown. Several high Rememberers rushed to his aid; one thrust 
ja drug against his arm. In moments the Chancellor appeared 
to recover. “These murders occurred after the Procurator departed from the building,” He 
Bald. “The Rememberer 01paayne Has been unable to give 
Us information concerning them, 
PerBaps you, apprentice, know 
Something of value.” 
“I was not present Two Somnambulists near the Senn will 
testify that I was with them at 
the time the crimes were committed.” 
Someone guffawed at my mention of Somnambulists. Let 
them; I was not seeking to retrieve dignity at a time like this. 
I knew that I was in peril. 
The Chancellor said slowly, 
“You will go to your chamber, 
apprentice, and you will remain 
there to await full interrogation. 
Afterwards you will leave the 
building and be gone from Perris within twenty Hours. By virtue of my authority I declare 
you expelled from the guild of 
Rememberers.” 
Forewarned as I had been by 
Samit, I was nevertheless stunned. 
“ Expelled ? Why?” 
“We can no longer trust you. 
Too many mysteries surround 
you. You bring us a Prince and 
conceal your suspicions; you are 
present at murderous quarrels; 
you visit a Procurator in ‘the 
middle of the night. You may 
even have helped to bring about 
the calamitous loss suffered by 
our archive this morning. We 
have no desire for mot of enigmas here. We saver our relationship with you.” The Chancellor 
waved his Hand In a grand sweep. 
“To your chamber now, to await 
interrogation, and then go!” 
I rushed from the room. As 
the entrance pit closed behind 
me I looked back and saw the 
Chancellor, his face ashen, topple into the arms of his associates, 
while in the same instant the 
Rememberer Olmayne broke 
from Her freeze and fell to the 
floor, screaming. 
XI 
A lone in my chamber, I spent 
a long while gathering together my possessions, though I 
owned little. The morning was 
well along before a Rememberer 
whom I did not know came to 
see me, bearing interrogation 
equipment. I eyed it uneasily 
thinking that ail would be up 
with me if the Rememberers 
found proof that it was I who 
Had betrayed the location of that 
compound record to the invaders. Already they suspected me 
of it; the Chancellor had Hesitated to make the accusation only 
because it must Have seemed odd 
to him that an apprentice such 
as myseif would have cared to 
make a private search of the 
guild archive. 
Fortune rode with me. My interrogator was concerned only 
with the details of the slaying; 
and once he had determined that 
I knew nothing on that subject, 
he let me be, warning me to depart from the hall within the allotted time. I told him I would 
do so. 
But first I needed rest. I had 
had none that night; and so I 
just drank a three-hour draught, 
and settled into soothing sleep. 
When I awakened a figure stood 
beside me: the Rememberer Olmayne. 
She appeared to have aged 
greatly since the previous evening. She was dressed in a single chaste tunic of a somber color, and she wore neither ornament nor decoration. Her features were rigidly set. I mastered 
my surprise at finding her there, 
and sat up, mumbling an apology for my delay in acknowledging her presence. 
“Be at ease,” she said gently. 
"Have I broken your sleep?” 
“I had my full hours.” 
"I have had none. But there 
will be time for sleep later. We 
owe each other explanations, 
Tomis." 
“Yes.” I rose uncertainly. “Are 
you well? I saw you earlier, and 
you seemed lost in trance.” 
“They have given me medicines,” she replied. 
“Tell me what you can tell 
me about last night.” 
Her eyelids slid momentarily 
closed. “You were there when 
Elegro challenged us and was 
cast out by the Prince. Some 
hours later, Elegro returned. With 
him were the Procurator of Perris and several other invaders. 
Elegro appeared to be in a mood 
of great jubilation. The Procurator produced a cube and commanded the Prince to put his 
hand to it. The Prince balked, 
but Manrule Seven persuaded 
him finally to cooperate. When 
he had touched the cube, the 
Procurator and Elegro departed, 
leaving the Prince and myself together again, neither of us comprehending what had happened. 
Guards were posted to prevent 
the Prince from leaving. Not long 
afterward the Procurator and 
Elegro returned. Now Elegro 
seemed subdued and even confused, while the Procurator was 
clearly exhilarated. In our room 
the Procurator announced that 
amnesty had been granted to the 
former Prince of Roum and that 
no man was to harm him. Thereupon all of the invaders departed.” 
“Proceed.” 
f~\ lmayne spoke as though a 
Somnambulist. “Elegro did 
PERRIS WAY 
not appear to comprehend what 
had occurred. He cried out that 
treason had been done; he 
screamed that he had been betrayed. An angry scene followed. 
Elegro was womanish in his fury; 
the Prince grew more haughty; 
each ordered the other to leave 
the suite. The quarrel became 
more violent that the carpet itself began to die. The petals 
drooped; the little mouth’s gaped. 
The climax came swiftly. Elegro seized a weapon and threatened to use it if the Prince did 
not leave at once. The Prince 
misjudged Elegro’s temper, 
thought he was bluffing, and 
came forward as if to throw 
Elegro out Elegro slew the 
Prince. An instant later I grasped a dart from our rack of artifacts and Hurled it into Elegro’s 
throat THe dart bore poison; he 
died at once. I summoned others, and I remember no more.” 
“A strange night” I said. 
“Too strange. Tell me now, 
Tomis: why did the Procurator 
come, and why did lie not take 
the Prince into custody?” 
I said, “The Procurator came 
because I asked him to, under 
the orders of your late husband. 
The Procurator did not arrest 
the Prince because the Prince’s 
liberty had been purchased.” 
“At what price?” 
“The price of a man’s shame,” 
I said. 
“You speak a riddle to me.” 
“The truth dishonors me. I 
beg you not to press me for it.” 
“The Chancellor spoke of a 
document that had been taken 
by the Procurator — ” 
“It has to do with that,” I 
confessed, and Olmayne looked 
toward the floor and asked no 
further questions. 
I said ultimately, “You have 
committed a murder, then. What 
will your punishment be?” 
“The crime was committed in 
passion and fear,” she replied. 
“There will be no penalty of the 
civil administration. But I am expelled from my guild for my 
adultery and my act of violence.” 
“I offer ray regrets.” 
“And I am commanded to undertake the Pilgrimage to Jorslem to purify my soul. I # must 
leave within the day, or my life 
is forfeit to the guild.” 
“I too am expelled,” I told her. 
“And I too am bound at last for 
Jorslem, though of my own choos
* tf 
mg. 
“May we travel together?" 
'll /Ty hesitation betrayed me. I 
had journeyed here with a 
blind Prince; I cared very little 
to depart with a murderous and 
guildless woman. Perhaps the 
time had come to travel alone. 
Yet the Somnambulist had said 
I would have a companion. 
Olmayne said smoothly, “You 
luck enthusiasm. Perhaps I can 
create some in you.” She opened 
her tunic. I saw mounted between the snowy hills of her 
breasts a gray pouch. She was 
tempting me not with her flesh 
but with an overpocket. “In 
this,” she said, “Is all that the 
Prince of Roum carried in 
his thigh. He showed me those 
treasures; and I removed them 
from his body as he lay dead in 
my room. Also here are certain 
objects of my own. I am not 
without resources. We will travel 
comfortably. Well?” 
“I find it hard to refuse.” 
“Be ready in two hours.” 
“I am ready now,” I said. 
“Wait, then.” 
She left me to myself. Nearly 
two hours later she returned, 
clad now in the mask and robes 
of a Pilgrim. Over her arm she 
held a second set of Pilgrim’s 
gear, which she offered me. Yes, 
I was guildless now, an unsafe 
way to travel. I would go, then, 
ns a Pilgrim to Jorslem. I donned the familiar gear. We gathered our possession. 
“I have notified the guild of 
Pilgrims,” she declared as we left 
the Hall of Rememberers. "We 
nre fully registered. How does 
the mask feel, Tomis?” 
“Snug.” 
“As it should be.” 
“Our route out of Perris took 
us across the great plaza before 
the ancient holy building of the 
old creed. A crowd had gathered; 
I saw invaders at the center of 
the group. Beggars made the 
profitable orbit about it. They 
ignored us, for no one begs from 
a Pilgrim; but I collared one rascal with a gouged face and said, 
“What ceremony is taking place 
there?” 
“Funeral of the Prince of 
Roum,” he said. “By order of 
the Procurator. State funeral 
with all the trimmings. They’re 
making a real festival out of it.” 
“Why hold such an event in 
Perris?” I asked. “How did the 
Prince die?” 
“Look, ask somebody else. I 
got work to do.” 
He wriggled free and scrambled on to work the crowd. 
“Shall we attend the funeral?” 
I asked Olmayne. 
“Best not to.” 
“As you wish.” 
We moved toward the massive 
stone bridge that spanned the 
Senn. Behind us, a brilliant blue 
glow arose as the pyre of the dead 
Prince was kindled. That pyre lit 
the way for us as we made our 
slow way through' the night, eastward to Jorslem. 
—ROBERT SILVERBERG
SFGRAM_STOP_SILVERBERG
REMEMBER: 
New subscriptions and changes oi address 
require 5 weeks to process! 
PERRIS WAY 
Keep Moving 
by MIRIAM ALLEN DeFORD 
The besf way to upset the applecart 
is to stop all the apple-polishing 
and let the stones gather some moss I 
TT^hen in 2119 James Stokes 
* * instituted the first Live-in, 
nobody thought he was inaugurating a revolution. At most he 
was considered a minor nuisance, a subject for wisecracks 
on tridimens comedy shows. Because, how would he Stay Put 
when there was nowhere to stay 
put on? 
In the Historical Museum of 
Midwestcity there is preserved 
one of the first tapes he broadcast, and it is consulted for playoff by students more frequently 
than any other in the files. At 
the time all it got him was ridicule and harrassment, but now 
it is recognized as a prophecy. 
It began with a survey of Un
iversal Moving, all the way back 
to the mid-20th century. Probably the first adumbration was 
the drive-in movies, or perhaps 
the restaurant drive-ins. Then 
came drive-in bank deposit, 
drive-in laundries and cleaners, 
then drive-in funerals (that was 
started by a mortician in Atlanta — now part of Southeastcity — who installed picture 
windows so that acquaintances 
of the deceased could drive by 
and pay their respects without 
stopping), then drive-in supermarkets and drugstores, then 
drive-in everything, from church 
to school to postoffice. Once everybody in the United States 
owned or had familiar part-own
ership in a car, and once every 
car was equipped with a shortwave phone so that orders, messages, and inquiries could be 
phoned ahead to auto-receptors 
and the goods, acceptances, or 
answers be ready at the requested moment, there was no longer 
any need or place for stationary 
dwellings from which the inhabitants had to emerge to do business or carry on their social or 
civic life. 
It was the one possible solution of the overcrowded and unsafe cities. Gradually people gave 
up their houses and apartments 
and moved permanently into 
their autos. The auto companies 
in response provided equipment 
that made every car a compact 
dwelling outfitted with every possible labor-saving device. Children learned to drive as early 
as once they had learned to walk. 
People who were tired of driving could turn off on the nearest 
spacious Rest Stop to recuperate; 
otherwise every car had to Keep 
Moving — which became the 
first commandment of the American Decalogue. 
With all except public, commercial, and industrial buildings 
tom down, and freeways, 
throughways, and crossways covering all the space they had once 
occupied, major social changes 
naturally followed. For one 
thing, all the permanent buildings 
left were fully automated and 
operated by remote control. For 
another, the former urban units 
ceased to exist, and the country 
was divided into geographical 
sections called — by courtesy — cities, from Northeastcity to Southwest city, and from Southeastdty 
to Northwestcity. It became obvious then that a man could no 
longer be affiliated with any political collective such as state or 
county. He voted by short wave 
and all elections were national. 
All goods, services, and communication systems were identical 
all over the country, so it did 
not matter where anyone was at 
any given time. 
nphere were always odd-balls, 
of course, long before James 
Stokes, who could not accommodate themselves comfortably to 
this completely sensible way of 
living. They had an out. They 
could drive to the nearest Parking Area (each as large as a big 
town used to be), with its adjacent Air Terminal, and take a 
flying holiday for as long as 
they could afford one. Usually 
that would be to the moon or to 
one of the satellites, for there 
was no point in flying to another 
part of the earth when one could 
always drive to it at will and everybody had been everywhere 
many times. Once the oceans 
would have made that impossi
KEEP MOVING 
ble, but by 2075 underwater engineering had connected the 
whole world by air-conditioned 
sub-oceanic tunnels through 
which any car could drive. 
For those still more atavistically inclined, there were the 
primitive Wilderness Areas, 
though no one received an entry 
passport to them who could not 
produce his certificate of graduation from a physio-training 
school and his proof of qualification as a pedestrian. Youth being what it is, nearly all adolescent boys and girls did qualify, 
and the Wilderness Areas were 
reputedly the place for Boy to 
meet Girl for temporary or permanent association. (It was a 
stale joke how many first-bom 
children were named Sequoia or 
Appalachia or Bryce in loving 
memory.) Of course vacationers 
who outdid their strength or suffered accidents could be rescued 
quickly; there was always a nearby transmitter to summon a 
chopper-ambulance to take them 
to the district hospital. 
Hospitals themselves were fully automated; physicians, surgeons, and supervising nurses, 
immediately alerted, kept in 
constant touch with the robotechs. Most doctors had never 
been inside a hospital, any more 
than they had been inside a medical college except for the final 
examinations after their years of 
study by means of the tridimens. 
It was a beautifully organized 
economy, and 99.9% of its beneficiaries took it for granted as 
normal and functioned smoothly 
within it. And then along came 
James Stokes with his absurd and 
heretical and even treasonable insistence that, with the exception 
of Bedouins and Gypsies and 
Australian Blackfellows and Pygmies, mankind had given up the 
nomadic life back in the Neolithic Age, and that he for one wanted not to Keep Moving but to 
Stay Put. 
To which the logical answer 
was: sure, for thousands of years 
human beings had lived in permanently stationed houses. But 
they had also, for thousands of 
years before that, lived in caves. 
You can’t buck progress. 
can you? After his first 
broadcasts Had brought him 
nothing but sarcastic or belligerent phone calls — plus a polite 
warning from Government that 
much more of this would cause 
him to be examined by psychiatrists and if necessary consigned 
to one of the few permanent residences still in existence — a 
Corrective Hospital — for an indefinite term after a thoroughly 
fair and legal court hearing, 
James Stokes blew a gasket. He 
announced that he, individually, 
would defy the Establishment. 
On a named date in the near future, lie proposed to stop His car 
at a specified place and stay 
there. As a citizen he was coowner of all land currently beneath his wheels; and He intended to transform his car into a 
stationary dwelling. He would 
disregard all orders to submit 
himself to examination or trial; 
let them come and get him. He 
would fight to the last ditch any 
attempt to incarcerate him; it 
would constitute a test case 
which would be the beginning of 
a new deal for the social order. 
It should be made clear that 
James Stokes was not a mere insignificant crank or eccentric. 
He was a distinguished lawyer, 
who had often functioned as 
judge, under the communicative 
judicial system. He had served 
in several high-up administrative and political posts. He had 
plenty of money. And he was a 
bachelor, with' no close relatives, 
so that he was not subjecting 
anyone else to the hazards he 
knew he faced. 
In his rather grandiloquent 
definite broadcast, he compared 
himself to Luther — “Here I 
stand; I cannot do otherwise” — 
and to Galileo, only instead of 
saying “But still it moves,” he 
was saying, “I will not move.” 
He concluded with a couplet 
from a forgotten author named 
Scott: “Come one, come ail! This 
rock shall fly From its firm base 
as soon as I.” 
On September 28, 2119, James 
Stokes halted his car toward evening on a Rest Stop about a 
hundred miles from Midwestcity. 
So did several other drivers, but 
after a short pause for rest and 
use of the facilities they took off 
again. He did not. Instead, he 
took out of the car four large 
stones he had collected and hammered them firmly in place under 
his four wheels. Then he settled 
down for the night, sure that 
no one would bother him until 
morning; strictly speaking, it was 
taboo to remain at a Rest Stop 
more than an hour or two, but 
people who had no other driver 
to spell them off frequently slept 
over in one, and the authorities 
were lenient, since solitary drivers were so few. 
It was the first Live-in. The 
Stay Put Revolution had begun. 
He was awake early, and after 
a Heartening breakfast He waited impatiently for the hostilities 
to begin. When nothing happened, he brought out a large placard He had prepared and propped it up against his right-hand 
front door. It read: “Permanent 
Residence of James Stokes.” 
Tt was mid-morning before any 
-*■ of the stream of cars passing by in both directions turned 
into the Rest Stop. The driver of 
KEEP MOVING 
the first was a woman, a goodlooking, red-haired young woman, 
and she was alone. She drew up 
to about ten feet from him. 
James Stokes, watching her, saw 
her attention attracted by his 
sign, and though he could not 
be sure, he thought he saw her 
smile. But she made no attempt 
to accost him; instead, she settled down with a tape-recorder 
into which she dictated, inaudibly to him. Undoubtedly that 
had been her reason for leaving 
the freeway. 
Perhaps she was a reporter? 
Publicity was what he needed 
most. He watched and waited so 
as not to interrupt her, and the 
minute she stopped dictating, before she could take the wheel and 
leave, he jumped out of his car 
and ran over to her. 
She looked at him interrogatively. Irrelevantly he noticed 
that her eyes were beautiful — 
a true violet, that rarest of eyecolors. There was no fear in her 
glance, and there was no reason 
why there should have been; the 
kind of danger that had existed 
in the bad old times whenever a 
woman alone faced a strange man 
of course had vanished with the 
cities. The constant streams of 
drivers-by, and the button in 
every car which would instantly 
summon a police chopper, made 
every driver safe. 
“Excuse me,” said Stokes po
litely. “But I noticed you were 
taping, and I wondered if by 
chance you were a tridimens or 
newstape reporter.” 
She smiled. 
“Far from it,” she said. “I’m a 
poet. I was working on a poem.” 
“Oh.” 
“But if you mean, did I notice your sign, and the rocks under your wheels, yes, I did. And 
yes, I’m curious. Tell me.” 
He told her, at considerable 
length. She was a good listener, 
though she smiled too often to 
suit him. He reminded himself 
that he must not become a fanatic, or only other fanatics would 
become his disciples. 
“So what do you call your 
project?” she asked when he had 
finished. 
“I call it a Live-in. I propose 
to stay here until they take me 
off forcibly, and then I shall 
carry the case all the way to the 
World Court if necessary.” 
“I see.” 
She sat pondering. Then she 
said: “If I had been a reporter, 
what would you have expected 
me to do?” 
“I’d have hoped that you 
would broadcast or tape a story 
about the project, so as to get 
my campaign going.” 
Again she was silent for a few 
minutes, then she smiled again — 
a different and much more welcome kind of smile. 
“I don’t understand exactly 
what you have in mind, or why, 
but I like anyone who comes out 
against the deadly boredom this 
peripatetic life of ours has become. I don’t have a thing I 
must do until next month, when 
I must be in Northeastcity for 
the publication of a book. I’m 
Mary Ellen Carrington. I don’t 
suppose you’ve ever heard of 
me?” she added wistfully. 
James Stokes never had — he 
didn’t read poetry more modern 
than the early 21st century — 
but he was a gentleman. ‘‘Of 
course I have,” he lied gallantly, hoping devoutly that she 
wouldn’t expect him to go into 
particulars. 
She probably saw through him, 
but she responded in kind. “And 
you?” she inquired. 
“I'm James Stokes, as my sign 
says.” She looked blank, so he 
added hastily, “Lawyer, judge, 
political administrator — quite 
respectable, I assure you.” 
“Why, certainly, James Stokes,” 
she said brightly. “I should have 
realized. This is quite an honor.” 
He decided she was a good fibber, too. 
“Now, this is my idea,” she 
went on. “Suppose I stop here 
also, and you make me a placard like yours. Not that I really expect to stay here permanently,” she added hastily, “but 
the more of us there are, the 
faster the news will get around.” 
“Wonderful. I’ll letter the sign 
at once. And I have some more 
rocks in the trunk to shore your 
car up.” 
'VTow there were two of them. 
-*■ And it worked like wildfire 
— perhaps the sight of a goodlooking woman helped more than 
that of an also good-looking but 
indubitably middle-aged male. 
People drove past, gaped, drove 
on to where they could turn, 
came back, drove onto the Rest 
Stop, and asked questions. Most 
of them laughed and went away 
again; some of them got angry 
and argued and went away. But 
before dark there were three 
more in the colony — an elderly 
couple and a boy of about 20. 
By noon the next day there was 
no more room in the Rest Stop 
for other cars, and what Stokes 
knew must happen arrived soon 
after — some of the scoffers and 
argucrs had reported their find, 
and the authorities landed. 
The sound of the police helicopters caused a sudden exodus. 
Five of the colonists started their 
cars at once and got out in a 
hurry. But as the first chopper 
landed Stokes made a quick 
count and found that the Livein still boasted 16 members besides Mary Ellen Carrington and 
himself. 
“What’s going on here?” growl
75 
KEEP MOVING 
ed the fuzzsarge in immemorial 
police phraseology. James Stokes, 
pioneer, founder, and spokesman, 
came forward and addressed him 
suavely. 
“This is $ Live-in. We are 
tired of being perpetually on the 
move, and we have decided to 
settle down and Stay Put.” 
“Not in my precinct you 
won’t!” retorted the sergeant. 
“Okay,” Mary Ellen said suddenly. “Arrest us!” 
At which nine of the 16 quietly escaped. James was too startled to notice them. Mary Ellen 
had all at once become an ally 
instead of an amused tolcrator. Her violet eyes were flashing — the first time he’d even 
known that violets could flash. 
“I hate being bullied,” she 
muttered. 
The fuzzsarge sounded his supersonic whistle and two more 
choppers came down. In the excitement — what about their 
cars, Stokes demanded, and the 
fuzzsarge said he’d post men to 
tow them in — the other seven 
recruits sneaked away. So now 
he and the red-haired poet were 
the only permanent Stay Putters, 
and he decided not to go meekly 
after all. 
"Are we under arrest?” he 
asked mildly. 
“You guessed right, brother.” 
“But for what? I’m a lawyer, 
I’ve been a judge, and I know 
the law backwards. What law 
have we violated?” 
The sergeant looked a trifle 
taken aback. He hadn’t expected 
to catch quite so large a fish. 
“Well," he sputtered, “you’re 
not supposed to park here overnight.” 
“That ruling’s been abrogated 
by consistent neglect.” 
“But you say you’re going to 
settle down for good.” 
“There’s no law that forbids 
action that hasn't yet taken place 
— except proof of conspiracy to 
murder, and neither I nor this 
lady would dream of murdering 
you or anyone else. We’re not 
obstructing traffic, our licenses 
are in order, and we haven’t so 
far broken one solitary viable 
statute. How would the commissioner like it if we sued the department for false arrest? 
The sergeant glanced angrily 
at his official inferiors, some of 
whom were concealing grins. 
They had gathered quite a large 
audience from the freeway by 
now, too. His face purpled. 
“You know, Mr. Stokes,” said 
Mary Ellen sweetly, “I was just 
reading a booktape about all 
those demonstrations for different 
causes, back 150 years ago. Do 
you know what they used to do 
when they were threatened with 
arrest? They would go limp and 
let the cops drag them to the — 
well, they had police cars then 
instead of choppers, but it’s tKe 
same idea. If somebody drags 
you over rougH ground, it’s a 
good basis for a charge of police 
brutality.” 
he fuzzsarge gave up. 
“I’ll .be back!” he yelled. 
“I’ll be back tomorrow, and I’ll 
have a copy of the rules and regulations about parking in Rest 
Stops. And if you’re still here — ” 
“Do that, sergeant,” Stokes retorted. “You’ll find they’re very 
vague. And we’ll be here. 'This is 
a Live-in.” 
Mary Ellen Carrington nodded firm assent 
“This is simply marvelous 
publicity,” she chirruped. "Just 
what we needed. Do give us 
more.” 
Whatever Happened between 
the sergeant and his superiors, 
he didn’t come back the next 
day. Neither did any other officials. Apparently the idea was 
to bury the rebels in neglect. 
But it was too late. The newstapes and the tridimens had the 
story, and they blew it up to 
full capacity. In 24 hours there 
was a massive block on the freeway. There was no room left at 
all in the Rest Stop. 
Something had to give — and 
it wasn’t going to be James 
Stokes and Mary Ellen Carrington. 
Two days later they had a call
er, of distinctly higher rank. He 
represented the national government — a Mr. McDiarmuid 
from the Department of Public 
Relations, which had long ago acquired Cabinet rank and ambassadorial status. The urbane Mr. 
McDiarmuid must have been at 
the very least a charge d’affaires. 
“We have been considering 
your case, Judge Stokes,” he began. 
“I am not at present a judge,” 
James said stiffly. But it helped 
that he still had some standing in 
the Establishment. He suspected 
that video wires had been busy 
in an emergency. The Stay Put 
movement must not be allowed to 
burgeon in an atmosphere of 
journalistic sensationalism. “Burgeon” was the proper word; Mr. 
McDiarmuid was here to nip it 
in the bud. 
“We can appreciate the need 
of an honored public servant for 
rest and relief in his well earned 
retirement,” he went on smoothly. “Believe me, many of us 
would wish to follow your example if duty did not chain us 
to our phones and screens. 
“And I think we have hit on 
the ideal solution of your problem. How would you like a permanent parking place for your 
car in any of the Wilderness 
Areas you may select? As for 
this young lady — ” 
KEEP MOVING 
“I am not retired,” roared 
James Stokes, "nor superannuated nor weary! I am on a crusade! And I do not intend to be 
relegated to a ^ wilderness concentration camp where I can be 
displayed like an animal in a 
zoo. I am inaugurating a campaign for a new way of life. I 
want freedom for myself, and for 
anyone else who feels as I do, to 
settle down on one spot in the 
midst of my fellow-citizens. 
“This seems to me an admirable location,” he concluded in a 
meditative tone. 
A/Tr. McDiarmuid repeated 
1YA himself imperturably. 
“As for this young lady — ” 
“I am Mary Ellen Carrington,” she said icily. “Mary Ellen 
Carrington, the well known poet.” 
“Oh, of course,” McDiarmuid 
murmured. It was obvious that he 
had never heard of her. 
“And I agree entirely with Mr. 
Stokes. I don’t want to be sequestered or segregated, either.” 
“But the Rest Stops,” McDiarmuid objected, “are public property.” 
“And we are members of the 
public,” said Stokes. 
“But if you people fill up all 
the Rest Stops — ” 
“Ah! you prophesy we shall 
soon have that many followers? 
Thank you!” 
“I said if. If you do, where 
78 
will the — ■ the normal people be 
able to stop and rest?” 
“If there are enough of us, few 
Rest Stops will be needed any 
more. And by that time we’d be 
willing to give them up — for 
traffic would be reduced to the 
point where more and more of 
the present freeways could be 
cleared and used as dwelling 
sites. As in the better days*of the 
past.” 
“The better days!” McDiarmuid sounded about ready to 
explode. “You mean the days of 
individual cities, of fuel-driven 
cars and air and water pollution 
and overcrowding and rampant 
crime in the filthy streets?” 
“None of those things is necessary. Look, Mr, McDiarmuid, 
let’s be sensible about this. I grant 
that the majority of Americans 
today like the peripatetic life — 
they’ve known nothing else but 
that all their lives and it seems 
normal to them. All I’m — ” 
He glanced at Mary Ellen, and 
the admiration in those violet 
eyes sent a small squiggle down 
his spine. “All we are asking 
is that those of us — call us 
throwbacks or whatever you 
like — who don’t enjoy Keeping 
Moving, who want to Stop and 
Stay Put; be allowed to do so 
and to find reasonable places for 
our permanent location. Is that 
too much to ask?” 
McDiarmuid’s face showed 
plainly that he thought it was. 
But his training in diplomacy 
kept him from the retort he 
would have liked to make. So 
lie merely bowed and said: 
“You may be right; 1 shan’t 
argue with you. But you will 
agree you will have to prove your 
point legally — you as a lawyer 
certainly know that. And that 
being so, I am empowered to tell 
you that you have 24 hours to 
leave this Rest Stop and be on 
your way; and if you take a similar stand anywhere else you will 
be given 24 hours to get out of 
there too. You and Miss Carrington don’t intend to spend the 
rest of your lives going from Rest 
Stop to Rest Stop for a day and 
a night at a time, do you?” 
“That would be most unconventional,” remarked Mary Ellen 
demurely. James opened his 
mouth to add that Miss Carrington was due in Mideastcity in a 
month to see her book off the 
press and was his temporary associate only. He closed it again 
then reopened it in astonishment 
as he heard her say: 
“But you needn’t worry about 
that aspect of the matter, Mr. 
McDiarmuid. We are planning to 
dial the License Bureau and the 
Marriage Registry today. Anything the authorities want to do 
from now on they will have to 
do to the two of us together.” 
“Why — ” James Stokes be
gan and shut up at a warning 
glance from her. “Exactly,” he 
mumbled in corroboration. 
“I congratulate you,” said Mr. 
McEHarmuid. “The eviction notice will be served on you at — ” 
He looked at his finger-watch. 
“ — 3:15 p.m. tomorrow. It will 
bear both your maiden and your 
married names, Miss Carrington, 
to avoid any slip-up. My best 
wishes for your happiness.” 
He bowed again and dialed 
for the chopper which had been 
hovering above to await his departure. 
A lone again, James gazed bej. 1 mused at Mary Ellen. She 
laughed. 
“Please don’t be alarmed,” she 
remarked lightly. “I’m not 
shanghaiing you. I could see 
that he was getting ready to invoke the Illegal Cohabitation 
Act of the 2104 code if he could 
not get us any other way, and 
I thought I’d stall him for 24 
hours while we talked things 
over.” 
“But — ” That was as far as 
he could get. He was overcome 
by a flood of conflicting emotions — surprise, sudden realization, diffidence, determination. 
“I — I wish you had meant 
it. But of course you couldn’t 
have.” 
“Why?” So women still blushed! 
KEEP MOVING 
“Because — why, good Lord, 
you scarcely know me. You never 
saw me till a few days ago. For 
all you know, I might be married already.” 
“You’re too modest. If you 
must know, last night I dialed 
the Biographical Reference Computer Center and I know your 
whole life history. Perhaps I’m 
inveigling you into a trap.” 
“And I’m old enough to be 
your — ” 
“Don’t say it. You’re certainly not. You’re just 41 and I’m 
nearly 33. I never heard of an 
eight-year-old human father, 
did you? 
“Incidentally, I’m not married, 
either — I’ve never had time, 
and I never met a man I felt I 
wanted to spend the rest of my 
life with. What with the new NeoPuritanical Code — which I’d 
never thought of that way, but 
which is certainly an outgrowth 
of all this constant wandering 
life among strangers — it’s altogether too hard to get out of an 
unsatisfactory marriage nowadays, so I’ve never wanted to 
tie myself up in one. 
“ . Until now.” Her voice 
dropped, and she looked away. 
“Me too!” choked James in a 
sudden burst of glory. He reached out his arms, and she melted 
into them. There was a tableau 
which a number of drivers-by 
enjoyed to the full, though none 
of them was loutish enough to 
stop. One tooted his horn, and 
that brought them to their senses. They separated, both a little 
dazed. 
“Come on,” said James, heading for his car — his house. 
“Let’s dial that Bureau right 
away.” 
By the blessings of automation, James Stokes and Mary Ellen Carrington were electronically wedded before sundown. They 
moved their cars together to make 
a two-room house, and the wedding supper they ordered delivered from the nearest store 
was graced with champagne. The 
delivery boy stared at them curiously, but honeymooners often 
spent their wedding night in a 
Rest Stop. Apparently he did not 
connect them with the story of 
the Stay Putters which was headlining the human interests sections of all the newstapes and 
the tridimens. 
Mr. McDiarmuid did not reappear the next afternoon. Neither did the original fuzzsarge. 
What arrived was a process server with a subpoena. The authorities had done their homework, 
and it was made out to summon 
James and Mary Ellen Stokes. 
They were to appear without 
fail by 6 p.m. that day at the 
branch court and police headquarters ten miles away. If they 
did not come on time, officers 
would be dispatched to evict 
them and bring them in. 
The thought of subjecting his 
bride to this humiliation — undoubtedly witnessed by hordes 
of curious and jeering drivers-by 
— for a moment weakened 
James’ resolution. But Mary 
Ellen was made of more ferrous 
stuff. 
“Take this back,” she commanded the process server. 
“Neither of us will accept it. 
And tell them to come and get 
us if they dare.” 
A s the baffled official departed, 
she smiled comfortingly into 
her new husband’s worried face. 
“It’s all right, darling,” she 
said soothingly. “I have an inspiration. We’ll be ready for 
them.” 
“I’m afraid I don’t see how. 
I’m a lawyer, and this time I 
have to admit they’ve got the law 
on their side.” 
He had been willing to undergo any martyrdom for the sake 
of principle, he reflected dourly, but that was when he was on 
his own. How could he stand the 
thought of Mary Ellen in a cell 
in a Corrective Hospital? 
“You’re a lawyer,” she said, 
“but I’m a poet. And it wasn’t 
just vanity that made me tell 
that man I was a well known 
one. I am. I have readers and 
admirers in some very high plac
es — why else do you think they 
wanted me in Mideastcity for a 
big party to celebrate the publication of my latest book? Just 
because you’ve never read my 
work — and believe me, my love, 
when all this is over you’re going to — ” 
“I will,” said James humbly. 
“But — ” 
“We’ve got only two hours,” 
his wife interrupted. “I’ve got 
to start phoning.” 
Six o’clock came and went, but 
nobody arrived to evict them. Instead, the Rest Stop began rapidly filling with newcomers who 
parked their cars and then came 
over to consult with Mary Ellen. 
She had had James busy making 
placards, which she passed out to 
the new arrivals. In a free moment, James requested information. 
“Oh,” she said casually, "it’s 
not just here. Every Rest Stop 
in the country is being infiltrated, with a deputation there first 
to give out signs. That’s another 
thing I learned from the history 
of the 20th-century demonstrations and sit-ins — pack the jails 
and the authorities will be overwhelmed.” 
“But who are they? Where do 
they come from?” 
“My colleagues,” Mary Ellen 
said smugly. “We professional 
writers stick together. I alerted 
the Authors League and the Po
KEEP MOVING 
etry Society of America. Then 
the news spread, and the rest of 
the old established professional 
societies joined in — first the 
Science Fiction Writers of America, then the Mystery Writers of 
America, and then the American 
Newspaper Guild. Pretty soon it 
will be spreading to the other 
creative arts — to Actors Equity 
and the American Guild of Variety Artists and the Artists 
Guild and all the rest. And of 
course a lot of them have families to swell the throng.” 
“I see,” said James dazedly. 
He tried in vain to imagine the 
Bar Association moved by such 
a stimulus. 
T>y the next morning, when 
they turned on the tridimens, they learned that a national crisis was at hand. Every Rest 
Stop on the continent was jammed and ordinary drivers were 
unable to leave the freeways for 
even five minutes’ rest. It was 
utterly impossible to evict or arrest all these announced Stay 
Putters; there wouldn’t be room 
for them anywhere even if they 
could have been arrested, and 
government officials were running around in circles. What 
made it worse was that these 
people were not mere private 
citizens, but outstanding and articulate members of venerable 
and distinguished organizations — 
and many of them, as individuals, known to every adult American. The announcer almost 
shrieked as he reported that the 
Associated Advertising Clubs 
were threatening to join in. Then 
he said abruptly: “Sorry, folks; 
I just got word from my own 
union and I have to leave.” The 
tridimens went dead. 
Half an hour later James had 
a phone call from the National 
Council itself — successor of 
both the executive and legislative 
branches of national government, 
and the highest authority there 
was in the U.S.A. 
This time nobody was scolding, 
jeering, or threatening him; the 
speaker was respectful flattering and appealing. Would Mr. 
and Mrs. Stokes be so good as 
to drive to national headquarters 
for a personal conference to try 
to find some solution satisfactory 
to all concerned? -They could 
leave one of their cars as a residence token and come in the 
other. Would they — please? The 
voice almost broke; the worried 
face looked close to tears. 
“Uh-uh,” said James Stokes 
succinctly. “If you want to talk 
to us, send somebody here. This 
is our permanent home.” 
There was a gasp, a splutter, 
a shocked groan, and then another official took over and said 
they would call back in ten minutes. 
“We’ve won!” cried Mary Ellen triumphantly. "We have 
them on the run.” 
“Thanks to you.” 
“No, thanks to you — you 
started it I’m only implementing 
your plan.” 
They were still trying to give 
each other credit when the phone 
rang again. A third speaker — 
stiff voice but harassed countenance — said that a delegation would call on Mr. and Mrs. 
Stokes that afternoon. Mary Ellen grabbed a loud-speaker and 
gave the news to all their new 
neighbors and in the echo of 
their cheers started phoning it to 
headquarters of all the organizations concerned, for relay to 
their members. 
Bo tli sides knew very well that 
99% of the new adherents had 
no intention of actually Staying 
Put. But they also knew that 
none of them would leave their 
intrenched positions until the real 
Stay Putters had won their victory. When an irresistible force 
meets an immovable body, the 
immovable body learns to move 
if the irresistible force commands 
sufficient publicity. 
A 11 this of course, was 20 years 
ago. 
Mr. and Mrs. James Stokes no 
longer live in a Rest Stop. There 
are enough Stay Putters now to 
have reduced traffic sufficient
ly, all over the country — and, 
indeed, all over the world — to 
allow many freeways to have 
been tom down and transformed 
into dwelling sites. The Stokeses 
still own cars, but they do not 
live in them; the latest fashion 
is to build actual immobile 
houses — prefabricated, of course, 
and with all the amenities of the 
car-homes. Naturally they take 
to the road often — when Mary 
Ellen has a speaking engagement, 
or when James is needed for personal attendance in connection 
with his new post as Dwelling 
Dispute Judge, or just to attend 
meetings of their respective professional groups or to rendezvous 
with friends — but when they 
come back it is to a stationary 
home surrounded by stationary 
neighbors. 
Neither of their teen-age children has ever learned to drive. 
— MIRIAM ALLEN DE FORD 
YOM POSTMASTCR SUGGESTS: 
Make ThoseW&FM Connections 
MAIL EARLY IN THE DAY! 
KEEP MOVING 
Building On 
The Tine 
by GORDON R. DICKSON 
Illustrated by MORROW 
Building on the Line is how the 
human race expands to the stars 
— at a price only heroes can pay l 
I 
/^rack-voiced, off-key, in every 
4 way like a fingernail drawn 
across the blackboard of his soul, 
the song cauterwauled in John 
Clancy’s helmet earphones: 
“ . Building on the Line, 
Team! Building on the Line! 
Building Transmit Stations, 
all along the goddamn Line! 
Light-years out, and all 
alone — 
We have cannibalized the 
drone — 
And there’s no way to go 
home — 
’Till we get the Station finished 
for the goddamn Line!” 
Clancy closed his mind to the 
two thousandth, four hundred 
and — what? He had even got to 
the point where he had lost count 
of the times Arthur Plotchin had 
sung it. Was that a win, he wondered, suddenly — a point for 
Plotch', in finally driving him to 
lose count? Or was it a point 
for him, in that he had managed 
to shut out the singing, at least 
to the point of losing his involuntary count of the times PlotcK 
had sung it? 
A bright light hit him in the 
faceplate, momentarily blinding 
him; and the singing broke off. 
“Heads up. Clance!” It was 
Plotch’s voice, cracking like static now in the earphones. “Keep 
your mind on your work, dimbulb! Time to fire the wire!” 
Clancy deliberately did not answer, while he slowly counted off 
six seconds — One-Mississippi, 
tw-Mississippi ...” It was one 
of the things he could be sure 
rubbed Plotch the wrong way; 
eve* as he knew Plotch was sure 
by this time that the endless 
repetition of the Line Song was 
like sandpaper to Clancy’s raw 
nerves. 
“What?” Clancy said, at the 
end of the sixth second. 
“You heard me, you . ” 
Plotch choked a little and went 
silent, in his turn. 
Clancy grinned savagely inside his helmet. With the flash 
from Plotch’s signal-light blinked out of his eyes, now, he could 
make out the other’s silver-suited figure with’ the black rectangle 
of tinted glass that was its faceplate. Plotch stood holding his 
wire gun by the other of the last 
two terminal rods in the almostcompleted Star-Point. He was 
some hundred yards off across 
the barren rock of this Hell-bom 
world, with its two hundred degrees below zero temperature, its 
atmosphere that was poisonous, 
and almost non-existent to boot, 
with' its endless rock surface, its 
red clouds always roiling threateningly overhead and the notquite-heard gibber of uneasy native spirits always nagging at a 
man just below the level of his 
hearing. 
TJlotch was trying to turn the 
■*- deaf treatment back on 
Clancy. But that was a game 
Clancy played better than his 
dark-haired, round-headed teammate. Clancy waited; and, sure 
enough’, after a few moments, 
Plotch broke first. 
“Don’t you want to get back 
to the ship, horse’s-Head,” shouted PlotcK, suddenly. “Don’t you 
ever want to get home?” 
Was PlotcK starting to sound 
a little hysterical? Or was it 
Clancy Himself, imagining the 
fact? Maybe it was neither. Maybe it was just the hobgoblins, as 
BUILDING ON THE LINE 
Line Team 349 had come to call 
the native life-form, putting the 
thought into Clancy’s head. 
For the hobgoblins were real 
enough. There was no doubt by 
this time that some form of immaterial life existed in the fugitive flickers of green light among 
the bare rocks of XN-4010, as 
this frozen chunk of a world had 
been officially named. Something 
was there in the green flickering, 
alive and inimical; and it had 
been trying to get at him and 
Plotch all through the five days 
they had been out on the job 
here, setting up Number Sixteen 
of the twenty-six Star-Points required for a Transmit Receive 
Line Relay Station. Luckily, one 
of the few good things about the 
survival suits they were wearing 
this trip was that they seemed to 
screen out at least part of whatever emanations the hobgoblins 
threw at them. 
Clancy broke off in the middle of his thoughts to switch 
the living hate within him, for 
a moment, from Plotch to R. 
and E. — the Research and Experimental Service, which seemed 
to be just about taking over the 
Line Service, nowadays. Thanks 
to an evident lack of guts on the 
part of the Line Service Commandant. 
The work on the Line Teams 
was bad enough. Fifteen men 
transmitted out to a drone re
ceiver that had been lucky 
enough to hit a world suitable for 
a Relay or Terminal Station. 
Fifteen men, jammed into a 
transmit ship where every cubic 
inch of space and ounce of mass 
was precious because of their 
construction equipment, was balanced against the weak resolving powers of the drone. Jammed 
together, blind-transmitted on to 
a world like this, where you 
lived and worked in your suit 
for days on end. That was bad 
enough. 
Add Plotch for a partner, and 
it became unbearable. But then 
add R. and E. and it went beyond 
unbearable. It was bad enough 
five years back, in the beginning, 
when a fifteen-man Team would 
be testing perhaps a dozen new 
items for R. and E. Now Clancy 
had a dozen new gadgets in his 
suit alone. He was a walking 
laboratory of specialized untried 
gimmicks, dreamed up on comfortable old Earth. Plotch had a 
dozen entirely different ones; and 
so did all the others. Though 
who could keep count. 
Clancy bent ostentatiously to 
tug once more on the immovable 
terminal rod he had just spent 
three hard physical hours of labor in planting six feet deep in 
XN-4010’s native rock. 
I T e Had in fact been down with 
-*■ the terminal for some min
utes before Piotch called. But 
he had been pretending to be 
still working, for the sake of making Piotch struggle to get him 
to finish up. But now it was time 
to tie in. These terminals were 
the last two of the nineteen that 
made up a Star-point, as the 
twenty-six Star-points, spread 
out over a diameter of eighty 
miles, would, when finished, 
make a working Relay Station. 
Tying in these last two terminals would activate the Starpoint. They could go back to the 
transmit ship for ten blissful 
hours outside their suits before 
they were sent out on the next 
job. Head down, still tugging at 
the rod, Clancy grinned bitterly 
to himself. 
There was usually a closeness 
between members of a Line Team 
that was like blood-brotherhood. 
But in this case, if the hobgoblins were trying to stir up trouble between Piotch and him, they 
were breaking their immaterial 
thumbs trying to nunch a button that was already stuck in on 
position. Clancy straightened up 
from the rod and spoke over his 
helmet phone to Piotch. 
“Yeah,” he said. “I’m done.” 
He drew his own wire gun and, 
resting it in the sighting touch 
of the terminal rod, aimed it at 
the rod Piotch had just set up. 
He saw Plotch’s gun come up, 
glinting red light from the glow
ing clouds overhead, and aim in 
his direction. For a second the pinhole of light that was sighting 
beam from Plotch’s gun flickered in his eyes. Then, looking 
at his post, he saw its illumination there, like a small white dot. 
“Ready?” Plotch’s voice sounded in his earphones. 
“Ready!” answered Clancy. 
“On the count of three, fire together with me. One . two . 
three!” 
“Ready?” Plotch’s voice sounded in his earphones. 
“Ready!” answered Clancy. 
“On the count of three, fire together with me. One . two . 
three!” 
He pressed the firing button of 
his wire gun as he spoke the final word. An incredibly thin 
streak of silver lightning leaped 
out from the end of his gun 
through the receptor on the side 
of the post before him and buried its far end in the receptor on 
the post beside Piotch. In almost 
the same second a similar streak 
of lightning-colored wire joined 
Plotch’s post in reverse to his. 
The physical shock of the suddenly activated Star-Point field 
sent both men stumbling backward awkwardly in their protective suits; and a varicolored aurora of faint light sprang up 
about the star-shaped area of 
grounded Relay equipment, enclosed by the twenty rods joined 
BUILDING ON THE LINE 
by double lengths of fine wire. 
Number Sixteen Star-Point of 
the Relay terminal on XN-4010 
was in and working. Now they 
could get back to the ship. 
But then, as if the Star-Point’s 
completion had been a signal, 
the low-hung clouds just over 
them opened up in a sort of hailstorm. Objects came hurtling toward the surface below — objects 
of all shapes and sizes. They 
looked like large rocks or small 
boulders, most of them. But for 
one weird moment, incredibly, 
it seemed to Clancy that some of 
them had the shape of Mark-70 
anti-personnel homing missiles; 
and one of these was headed right 
for Plotch. 
“ Plotch !” shouted Clancy. 
Plotch whirled and his dark faceplate jerked up to stare at the 
rain of strange objects arcing 
down at them. Then he made an 
effort to throw himself out of the 
path of whatever was coming at 
him. 
But he was not quite fast 
enough. The missile, or whatever 
it was, struck him a glancing 
blow high on the shoulder, 
knocking him to the rock surface 
underfoot. Clancy himself huddled up on the ground having no 
place to hide. Something rang 
hard against his helmet, but the 
shock of the blow went into his 
shoulders, as the supporting metal collar of his suit — another of 
R. and E.’s test gadgets — for 
once paid its way by keeping the 
helmet from being driven down 
onto the top of bis bead, inside 
Around him there were heavy 
thuddings. One more, just beside 
him. Then silence. 
He got up. There were no more 
rocks falling from the skies. All 
around him there was only the 
silent, shifting, colorful aurora of 
radiation from the connected terminal rods; and the motionless, 
spacesuited figure of Plotch was 
a hundred yards off. 
Clancy scrambled to his feet 
and began to slog toward tKe 
still figure. It did not move as he 
got closer, in the stumbling run 
which was the best speed be 
could manage, wearing bis suit. 
II 
'tTT’hen at last he stood over 
' ' Plotch, he saw his teammate 
was completely unmoving. 
Plotch’s suit had a bad dent at 
the top front of the right shoulder joint; and there was a small, 
dark, open crack in the suit at the 
center of the dent. There was 
only rock nearby; no sign of any 
missile. But Plotch lay still. With 
that crack in it, his suit had to 
have lost air and heat instantly. 
His faceplate was white now, 
plainly opaqued on the inside by 
a thick coat of ice crystals. 
Clancy swore. The gibbering of 
the hobgoblins, just out beyond 
the frontiers of his consciousness, 
seemed to rise in volume triumphantly. He reached down instinctively and tried to straighten out Plotch’s body, for the other man lay ljalf-curled on his side. 
But the body would not straighten. It was as a figure of cast iron. 
There was no doubt about it. 
Within his suit, Plotch wgs now 
as rigid as the block of ice that, 
for all practical purposes, he now 
was. 
Plotch was frozen. Dead. 
Or was he? 
Clancy abruptly remembered 
something about the experimental gadgets in Plotch’s suit. Had 
not one of them beefi an emergency cryogenic unit of some 
sort? If that was so, maybe it was 
the unit that had frozen Plotch 
— working instantly to save him 
when the suit was pierced. 
If that was so, maybe Plotch 
was salvagable after all. If it 
really was so. 
“Calling Duty Lineman at 
Transmit ship!” Clancy croaked automatically into his helmet 
phone, activating the long-distance intercom with his tongue. 
“Calling whoever’s on duty, 
back on the Xenophon! Come 
in, Duty Lineman! Emergency! 
Repeat, Emergency! This is 
Clancy! Answer me, Duty Lineman. ...” 
Static — almost but not quite 
screening out the soundless gibbering of the hobgoblins — answered, roaring alone in Clancy’s earphones. His head, a little dizzzy since the rain of rocks, 
cleared somewhat and he remembered that he should not have 
expected an answer from this 
ship. There was interference on 
XN-4010 that broke communication between a suit transmitter and the mother ship. It cut 
off, at times, even communication between a flitter’ s more owerful communication unit and 
the Xenophon. He struggled to 
his feet and, bending down, took 
hold of Plotch’s stiff body underneath the armpits of the suit. 
He began to drag it toward their 
flitter, just out of sight over a 
little rise of the rocky ground, a 
couple of hundred yards away. 
r T''he ground was rough, and 
Clancy sweated inside his 
suit. He sweated and swore at 
his frozen partner, the hobgoblins, the R. and E. Service for 
its experimenting — and Lief 
Janssen, the Line Service Commandant, for letting R. and E. 
do it. The gravity on XN-4010 
was roughly .78 of Earth normal, 
but the rocky surface was so fissured and strewn with stones of 
all sizes from pebble to boulder 
that Plotch’s unyielding figure 
kept getting stuck as it was pulled along. Eventually, Clancy was 
forced to pick it up clumsily in 
his arms and try to carry it that 
way. He made one attempt to 
put it over his shoulder in a grotesque variation of the fireman’s 
lift; but the position of the arms, 
crook -elbowed at the sides prevented the bend in the body 
from balancing on his shoulder. 
In the end he was forced to carry what was possibly Plotch’s 
corpse, like an oversized and 
awkward baby in his arms. 
So weighed down, he staggered along, tripping over rock, detouring to avoid the wider cracks 
underfoot until he topped the 
rise that hid the flitter from him. 
Just below him and less than 
thirty feet off, it had been waiting — an end and solution to the 
grisly and muscle-straining business of carrying the frozen and 
suited figure of Plotch in his 
arms. 
It was still there. 
— But it was a wreck. 
A boulder nearly two feet in 
circumference had struck squarely in the midst of the aft repulsor units, and the tough but 
lightweight hull of the flitter had 
cracked open like a ceramic eggshell under the impact. 
Clancy halted, swaying, where 
he stood, still holding Plotch. 
“I don’t believe it,” he muttered into the static-roar of his 
helmet. “I just don’t believe it. 
That flitter’s got to fly!” 
For a moment he felt nothing but numb shock. It rose and 
threatened to overwhelm him. 
He fought his way up out of 
it, however; not so much out of 
determination, as out of a sudden rising panic at the thought 
of the nearly thirty miles separating him from the transmit 
ship. 
The flitter could not be 
wrecked. It could not be true 
that he was stranded out here 
alone, with what was left of 
Plotch. The flitter had to save 
them. 
Then, suddenly, inspiration 
came to him. Hastily, he dropped 
onto one knee and eased Plotch 
onto a flat area of the rock under foot. Leaving Plotch there, 
balanced and rocking a little, 
grotesquely, behind him, Clancy plunged down the rubbled 
slope to the smashed flitter, 
crawled over its torn sides into 
what had been the main cabin 
and laid hands upon the main 
control board. He plugged his 
suit into the board, snatched up 
the intercom hand phone and 
pupched the call signal iorXenopon. 
“Duty-Lineman!” he shouted 
into the phone. “Duty-Lineman! 
Come in, Xenophon! Come in!” 
Suddenly, then, he realized that 
there were no operating lights 
glowing at him from the control 
panel before him. The phone in 
BUILDING ON THE LINE 
his hand was a useless weight, 
and his helmet ear phones, which 
should have linked automatically 
with the flitter receivers of the 
intercom sounded only with the 
ceaseless static and the endless, 
soundless gibbering. 
Q lowly, almost tenderly, he un^ plugged his suit, laid the 
phone back down on the little 
shelf before the dark instrument 
panel and dropped dbwn on the 
one of three seats before the 
control board that was not wrecked. For a little while he simply 
sat there, with the hobgoblins 
gibbering at him. His head swam. 
He found himself talking to 
Plotch. 
“Plotch,” he was saying, quite 
quietly into his helmet phone. 
“Plotch, there’s nothing else for 
it. We’re going to have to wait 
here until the ship figures there’s 
something wrong and sends out 
another flitter to find out what 
happened to us.” 
He waited a few moments. 
“You hear me, Plotch?” 
Still there was only silence, 
static, voiceless gibbering in his 
earphones. 
“We can stick it out of course, 
Plotch,” Clancy muttered, staring at the dead control panel. 
“Inside of two days they ought 
to figure we’re overdue. Then 
they’ll wait a day, maybe, figuring it’s nothing important. Fi
nally they’ll send one of the other 
teams out, even if it means taking them off one of the other 
jobs. Oh, they’ll send somebody 
eventually, Plotch. They’ll have 
to. Nobody gets abandoned on the 
Line, Plotch. You know that” 
The five days of bone-grinding 
manual labor on the Star-Point 
took effect on him, suddenly. 
Clancy fell into a light doze, inside his suit, sitting in the 
wrecked control room of the flitter. In the doze he half-dreamed 
that the gibbering voices took on 
their real hobgoblin shape. They 
were strange, grotesque parodies 
of the human figure, with bulbous bodies, long skinny arms 
and legs and turnip-shaped heads 
with the point upward, possessing wide, grinning, lipless 
mouths, a couple of holes for a 
nose, and perfectly round, staring eyes with neither eyebrows 
nor eyelashes. They gibbered 
and grinned and danced around 
him, kicking up their heels and 
flinging their arms about in joy 
at the mess he was in. They 
stretched their faces like rubber 
masks into all sorts of ugly and 
leering shapes, while they chanted at him in their wordless gibberish that they had got Plotch 
— and now they 'were going to 
get him, too. 
“No!” he said, suddenly aloud 
in his helmet — and the spoken 
word woke him. 
i 
Ill 
H e glanced around the ruined 
flitter. The hobgoblin shapes 
of his dream had disappeared, 
but their gibberish still yammered at him from somewhere unseen. 
“No,” he said to them, again. 
“If you could rain rocks like 
that all the time, you’d still be 
doing it I don’t think you can 
do that except now and then. 
Even if it was you who did it. 
All I’ve got to do is wait.” He 
corrected himself. "All we’ve got 
to do is wait — Plotch and I. 
And a flitter will come to pick 
us up.” 
Plotch is dead! Plotch is dead! 
gibbered the hobgoblins triumphantly. 
“Maybe,” muttered Clancy. 
“Maybe not. Maybe the cryogenic 
unit caught him in time. Maybe 
it froze him in time to save him. 
You don’t know. I don’t know.” 
A thought struck him. He got 
wearily up from his seat, clambered out of the wrecked flitter 
and struggled up the slope to 
where Plotch’s frozen body in its 
suit still sat balanced, although 
by now it had stopped rocking. 
Clancy stood staring down at it 
— at the thick coating of white 
on the inside of the faceplate, 
ruddied by the red light from the 
clouds overhead. 
“You dead, Plotch?” he asked 
after a little while. But there was 
no answer. 
“So, maybe you’re alive, then, 
Plotch, after all,” said Clancy out 
loud to himself in the helmet. 
“And if you’re alive, then that 
cryogenic unit works. So you’re 
safe. You won’t even have to 
know about the time we spend 
waiting for them to send a flitter 
after us. — Or, maybe . ?” 
A sudden, new cold doubt had 
struck Clancy. Something he 
half-remembered Plotch’s saying 
about the unit. 
“I can’t remember, Plotch,” 
he muttered fretfully. “Was it 
supposed to be good for as long 
as necessary, that cryogenic action? Or was it just supposed 
to keep you for a few hours, or 
a few days, until they could 
freeze you properly, back at the 
ship? I can’t remember, Plotch. 
Help me out You ought to remember. What was it? Permanent or temporary?” 
Plotch did not answer. 
“Because if it’s temporary, 
Plotch,” said Clancy, finally, 
“then even if you’re alive now, 
maybe you won’t still be alive 
by the time the rescue flitter 
gets here. That’s not good, 
Plotch. It’s a dirty trick; having 
a cryogenic unit that won’t last 
for more than a few hours or a 
few days. ...” For a moment 
he was on the verge of emotional 
reaction; but he got his feelings 
BUILDING ON THE LINE 
under control. Anger came to 
stiffen him. 
“Well, how about it, Plotch?” 
he shouted after a moment into 
the sileaoe and the gibbering. 
“How about it — can you last 
until the fitter gets here or not. 
Answer mel” 
T> ut Plotch still did not answer. 
-*■ ' And a cold, hollow feeling 
began to swell like a bubble under Clancy’s breastbone. It was 
a realization of the dirtiest trick 
in the universe — and Plotch just 
lay there, saying nothing, letting 
him, Clancy, flounder about with 
it in him, like a hook in a fish. 
“You dirty skull!” burst out 
Clancy. “You planned it like 
this! You deliberately got in the 
way of that rock or whatever it 
was! I saw you! You deliberately got yourself all frozen up the 
way you are now! Now you want 
me to let you just sit here; and 
maybe sat too long before the 
ship sends somebody to rescue 
us? Is that it? Well, you know 
what, Plotch?” 
Clancy paused to give Plotch 
a chance to answer. But Plotch 
maintained his unchanging silence. He was finally learning 
how to outdo Clancy on the notans wering bit; that was it, 
thought Clancy lightheaded ly. 
But Plotch's learning that was 
nothing now, compared to this 
other, dirtier trick he was pulling. 
“Well, I’ll tell you what, 
Plotch,” said Clancy, more quietly, but venomously. “I’m not 
going to take you into the ship 
myself. How do you like that?” 
Plotch obstinately said nothing. But the hobgoblin voices 
chanted their gibber in the back 
of Clancy’s head. 
All that way with a dead man! 
Plotch’s dead! Plotch’s dead! 
chanted the hobgoblin voices. 
But Clancy ignored them. He 
was busy calculating. 
They had come out due east 
of the ship, Plotch and he. It 
was now afternoon where they 
were. All he had to do was to 
walk into where the clouds were 
reddest, because that was where 
the western sunlight was. The 
days were sixteen hours long 
right now in this latitude on XN4010, and the nights were a brief 
four hours. He had a good six 
hours to walk now, before darkness came. Then he could rest 
for four hours before picking up 
Plotch again, keeping the brightest light at his back this time, 
and carry on. It would be six 
days at least before the ship 
would be likely to come to a 
certain conclusion that he and 
Plotch were in trouble — and at 
least another day, if not two, before another flitter and two-man 
team could be diverted from their 
regular job to investigate what 
had happened out here. Seven 
days at least — and thirty miles 
to the ship. 
Thirty miles — why, that was 
only a little over four miles a 
day. He could do that any time, 
carrying Plotch. In fact, he ought 
to be able to do twice as much 
as that much in a day. Three 
times as much. Ten or twelve 
miles in a sixteen-hour day ought 
to be nothing. It was less than a 
mile an hour. Clancy got Plotch 
up in his arms and started off, 
his feet in the boots of the suit 
jarring one after the other against 
the naked rock beneath them. He 
walked down, past the damaged 
flitter, no longer looking at it, 
and thumped away, carrying his 
unyielding load in the direction 
of the brightest red clouds. 
F ar ahead, as far as he could 
see to the horizon, the rock 
plain seemed fairly level. But this 
was an illusion. As he proceeded, 
he discovered that there were 
gentle rises and equally gentle 
hollows that blended into the 
general flatness of the area, but 
which caused him to spend at 
least a share of his time walking 
either downhill or uphill. His 
legs took this effort without complaint; but it was not long before 
his arms began to ache from 
holding Plotch’s stiff body in 
front of him, although he leaned 
back as much as he could to 
counterbalance the weight. 
Eventually he stopped and 
once more tried to find some 
other way of carrying his burden. Several times he tried to 
find a position in which Plotch 
could be balanced on one of his 
shoulders, but without success. 
Then, just before he was ready 
to give up completely, he had a 
stroke of genius, remembering 
the gimmick collar on his suit 
that kept the inside of his helmet 
top from touching the top of 
his head. Testing, he discovered 
that it was possible to carry 
Plotch grotesquely balanced on 
top of his head, with the top of 
Clancy’s helmet resting against 
the frozen man’s unyielding 
stomach and with a knee and an 
elbow resting on Clancy’s right 
and left shoulders, respectively. 
The helmet pressed down upon 
the collar and the weight upon it 
was distributed to the rigid 
shoulders of Clancy’s suit, with 
the assistance of Plotch’s frozen 
knee and elbow — and for the 
first time Clancy had a balanced 
load to carry. 
“Well, Plotch,” said Clancy, 
pleased. “You aren’t so bad to 
take after all.” 
The flush of success that 
spread through Clancy lightened 
his spirits and all but drove 
away the unending gibbering of 
the hobgoblins. For a moment 
his mind was almost clear; and 
in that bit of clear-headedness it 
BUILDING ON THE LINE 
suddenly occurred to Him that He 
Had not set his pedometer. Carefully rotating about, holding 
PlotcH balanced on his head and 
shoulders, he looked back the 
way he Had come. 
'-pile wrecked flitter was just 
*• barely visible in the distance, 
its tom parts reflecting a few 
ruddy gleams of red light Gazing at the smashed vehicle, Clancy did his best to estimate the 
ground He had covered so far. 
After a few seconds, he decided 
that He had come approximately 
a third of a mile. That was very 
good going indeed, carrying 
PlotcH the way he Had, to begin 
with. Carefully holding PlotcH 
in place now with' his left hand, 
he readied down with his right 
and set the pedometer, which was 
inset in the front leg of his suit 
just above the knee, giving himself credit for that third of a 
mile he had already covered. 
Only twenty-nine and some twothirds of a mile to go to reach 
the ship, he told himself triumphantly. 
“How do you like that, 
Plotch?” he asked his partner. 
He started off with fresh energy. Perched on top of Clancy’s 
Head, Plotch rode with’ a fine, 
easy balance, except when Clancy came to one of the hollows 
and was forced to walk downslope. Then it was necessary to 
Hold hard to Plotch’s knee and 
elbow, to keep the frozen body 
from sliding forward off the helmet. For some reason, going upslope, the knee and elbow dug 
Clancy’s shoulders and helped 
hold Plotch in place, almost by 
themselves. All in all, thought 
Clancy, he was doing very well. 
He continued to slog along, facing into the dwindling western 
light behind the fiery masses of 
the clouds. Like all Line Team 
members, he was in Class Prime 
physical shape, checked every 
two weeks in the field, and every 
two months back on Earth to 
make sure he was main tainin g 
his position in that class. He was 
five feet eleven inches in height, 
somewhat large-boned and normally weighed around a hundred 
and ninety. Here on XN-4010, 
his weight was reduced by the 
lesser gravity to about a hundred 
and fifty pounds. Plotch, who 
was five-nine, lighter boned and 
usually weighed around a hundred and sixty on Earth', here 
weighed probably no more than 
a hundred and thirty. On Earth, 
Clancy would have expected himself to be able to put on a hundred and thirty pound pack and 
equipment load on top of his suit 
and make at least a mile an 
hour with it over terrain like 
this — and for at least as many 
hours in a row as there were in 
the ordinary working day. That 
was, provided he stopped routinely for a rest — something like 
a ten-minute break every hour. 
Here, he should do at least as 
well as that. Still, the calculation 
had reminded him that periodic 
rest was necessary. He sat down, 
eased Plotch off his shoulders 
and looked at his watch to measure off a rest period of ten minutes. He looked almost genially 
at the figure of Plotch with its 
frosted faceplate, as he sat, elbows on knees, resting. 
“How do you like that, Plotch, 
you bastard?" he asked Plotch. 
"It’s no trouble for me to carry 
you. No trouble at all. Maybe 
you thought you’d get out of 
something by playing dead on 
me. But you’re not. I'm going to 
take you in; and they’re going 
to thaw you out and fix you up. 
How do you like that, Plotch?” 
Plotch maintained his silence. 
Clancy’s thoughts wandered off 
for a while and then came back 
to the present with a jerk. He 
glanced down at his watch and 
stared at what he saw, A good 
half hour had gone by — not 
just the ten minutes he had planned on. Had he fallen asleep, or 
what? 
^"phe light filtering redly through 
-*■ clouds was now low on the 
horizon ahead of him. He looked 
at the pedometer on his leg and 
nuw that he had only covered a 
little over a couple of miles. Sudden fear woke in him. There 
would be no making the ship in 
a few days if he went along at 
this pace — no Hope of it at all. 
Suddenly his throat felt dry. 
He tongued his drinking tube into position before his mouth and 
drank several swallows before he 
realized what he was doing and 
pushed the tube away again. The 
recycling equipment in these 
light-weight survival suits could 
not be all that perfect. Certain 
amounts of water were lost in 
the ejection of solid body wastes 
and in various other ways which, 
though minuscule, were important. That loss had to be made 
up from the emergency tank built 
into the back shoulder plates of 
his suit; and with the flitter 
wrecked, now some miles behind 
him, there would be no chance 
of refilling that tank — which at 
best was only supposed to carry 
enough supplementary water for 
two or three days. He would have 
to watch his liquid intake. Food 
he could do without . but he 
suddenly remembered, he had 
plenty of stimulants. 
He tongued the stim dispenser 
lever in his helmet and swallowed the small pill that rolled onto 
his outstretched tongue, getting 
it down with only the saliva that 
was in his mouth. Then he struggled to his feet. He had stiffened, 
even in this short period of sit
BUILDING ON THE LINE 
ting; and he had to go down on 
one knee again to get Plotch 
back up on his shoulders before 
rising. 
Once more burdened, he plodded ahead again, toward the horizon and the descending red light 
behind the unending clouds. Now 
that he was once more on his feet 
and moving, the voiceless gibber 
of the hobgoblins made itself noticeable again. The stim pill was 
working through him now, sending new energy throughout his 
body. Up on his shoulders, the 
frozen body of Plotch felt literally light. But the increase of 
energy he got from the pill had 
a bad side effect — for he seemed to hear the hobgoblin voices 
louder, now. 
IV 
T Te had about another two and 
a quarter hours before the 
sun started to set along the edge 
of the horizon; and the wide 
rocky land began to mix long, 
eerie black shadows with its furnace-glare of sunset light. He 
stopped at last for the night, before the last of the light was 
gone, wanting to take time to 
pick a spot where he could be 
comfortable. He found it, at last, 
in a little hollow half-filled with 
stones, so small that they could 
fairly be called gravel., But, when 
he laid Plotch down and checked 
with the pedometer at his knee, 
he found that the day’s walk so 
far had brought- him only a little over seven miles — although 
the last two hours he had been 
making as good speed as he 
could without working himself 
into breathlessness inside his suit 
— which could have been dangerous. 
He lay down on the gravel. 
It felt almost soft, through the 
protection of his suit. He stared 
up at the darkening cloud-belly 
overhead. The hobgoblin voices 
began to increase in volume until 
they roared in his head, and he 
began to imagine he saw their 
faces and bodies as he had in his 
dream of them, imagined now 
in the various, scarlet-marked 
formations of the blackening 
clouds. He tongued for a tranquilizer; and as it took effect, 
the light and the forms faded together. The roar sank to a whisper. He slept. 
He woke abruptly — to find 
that the sun was already well 
above the opposite horizon behind 
him. The roiling clouds were furnace-bright with a morning redness too fierce to look on, even 
through his tinted faceplate. He 
drank a little water, took a stim 
pill to get himself started and got 
himself back on his feet with! 
Plotch on his shoulders. Turning 
his back on the morning light he 
began a new day’s march. 
Even through the clouds, the 
light was strong enough to throw 
shadows. He kept his own moving 
shadow pointing straight ahead of 
him, to be sure he was headed 
due west. Even with the best he 
could do about maintaining his 
bearings, the odds were all against 
his passing within sight of the 
ship, itself. On the other hand, 
once the pedometer showed he 
was within a three or four mile 
radius of the ship, he could try 
to reach them with a constant signal from his suit intercom. And 
even if the intercom had trouble, 
the regular scanar watch by the 
Duty Lineman then should pick 
up his moving figure on its screen, 
if he passed anywhere within horizon distance of the ship. 
TTe took his rest regularly ev*■ ery hour; and he was alert 
each time to see that he did not 
exceed the ten minutes he had 
allowed himself. Together with 
the exercise and the increasing 
daylight, he began to warm to 
his task — even to become expert 
at it, this business of plodding 
over an endless rocky desert with 
the frozen body of Plotch balanced on his shoulders. He grew 
clever to anticipate little dips, 
hollows or fissures. The hobgoblins were clamorous; but under 
the combined effect of the walking and the stim he almost welcomed them. 
“Thought you’d helped Plotch 
to get away from me, didn’t 
you?” he taunted their gibbering, 
voiceless voices. “Well, see what 
I’m doing? I’m hanging on to 
him, after all. How about that, 
you hobgoblins? Why don’t you 
throw some more rocks at us?” 
The voices jabbered without 
meaning. It struck him suddenly, 
as an almost humorous fact, that 
they were not entirely voiceless 
now. They had gained volume. He 
could actually — if he concentrated — hear them in his earphones; 
about as loud as a small crowd 
of buzzing gnats close to his ears. 
“I’ll tell you why you don’t 
throw any more rocks at us,” he 
told them, after a while. “It’s 
the way I figured it out back at 
the flitter. You’ve got to work 
something like that up; and that 
takes several days. And you’ve 
got to work it up for a particular 
spot — and I’m moving all the 
time now. You can’t hit a moving 
target.” 
His own last words sent him off 
into a humorous cackle, which he 
stopped abruptly when he realized it was hurting his dry throat 
to laugh. He plodded along, trying to remember whether it was 
time for him to allow hi -self a 
drink. Finally, he worl d out 
that it was time — in fact, it was 
past time. He allowed himself 
three sips of the recycled water. 
If he was correct, his shoulder 
BUILDING ON THE LINE 
tanks should still be about half 
full. 
But as he went on through the 
day and as his shadow shortened 
before him until the most glaring 
cloud light ^was directly overhead, 
he began to feel the effort of his 
labors, after all. He took advantage of the sunlight being overhead to rest for a little longer 
than usual, until SN-4010’s star 
should once more have moved 
ahead of him. 
It was still too high in the 
cloud-filled sky for him to use it 
as a directional guide, when he 
forced himself to his feet once 
more. But he walked with his 
faceplate looking ahead and 
down, noting the short shadows 
thrown backward by the rocks 
he passed and making sure that 
he walked parallel to those shadows. 
Meanwhile, the hobgoblin 
voices got louder. By mid-afternoon they were very nearly deafening. He was tempted to take a 
tranquilizer, which he knew 
would tune them down. But he 
was afraid that a tranquilizer 
would have just enough of a sedative effect to make the now 
almost intolerable job of carrying 
Plotch over the uneven ground 
too much for him. 
By the time the sun was far 
enough down the western sky to 
be visible as a bright spot behind 
the clouds ahead of him, he was 
staggering with fatigue. He stopped for one of his breaks and fell 
instantly asleep — waking over 
an hour later. It took two stim 
pills this time, washed down with 
several extra swallows of the precious water to get him on his feet 
and moving. But once he was upright he cackled at the hobgoblin 
voices which had once more 
thronged around him. 
“Just call me Iron Man Clancy!” he jeered at them hoarsely, 
through a raw throat and staggered on toward the horizon. 
A t the end of the day, his pedometer showed that he had 
covered nearly sixteen miles. He 
exulted over this; and, exulting, 
fell into sleep the way a man 
might fall into a thousand-footdeep mine shaft. When he woke, 
the next day was well started. 
The sun was a full quarter of the 
way up the eastern horizon. 
Cursing himself and Plotch 
both, he stimulated himself and 
struggled to his feet and set out 
once more. That day he began 
to walk into nightmares. The 
hobgoblin voices became quite 
clear — even if they still gibbered without sense — in his earphones. Moreover, now as he 
staggered along, it seemed to him 
that from time to time he caught 
glimpses of turnip heads and 
skinny limbs peering at him from 
time to time, or flickering out of 
sight when he glanced quickly in 
the direction of some boulder 
larger than the others. 
Also, this third day of walking, 
he found he had lost all logical 
track of the time and the periods of his rest halts. Several times 
he fell asleep during a halt in 
spite of himself; and, by the time 
the red furnace-glow of the sun 
was low behind the clouds on the 
horizon before him, he was simply walking until he could walk 
no more, then resting until he 
could walk again . and so on . 
At the end of the day the pedometer showed that, to the nearly sixteen miles covered the previous two days, he had added 
only seven. There was a good 
eight miles to go yet before he 
would be — theoretically at least 
— in the neighborhood of the 
spaceship. 
Eight miles seemed little after 
covering more than twenty. But 
also, it seemed to him, as he sank 
down for the night and unloaded 
Plotch from his shoulders, that 
the eight miles might as well be 
eight hundred. Literally, he felt 
as if he could not take another 
step. Without bothering to find a 
comfortable position, he stretched out on the bare rock beneath 
him; and sleep took him with the 
suddenness of a rabbit taken by 
the silent swoop of a great horned owl. 
— When he woke on the fourth 
day, he had Plotch on his shoulders and was already walking. It 
seemed to him that he had been 
walking for some time, and the 
moving shadow of himself projected before him, which he followed, was already short. 
Around him, the desert of bare 
rock had altered. Its loose boulders, its little rises and hollows, 
its fissures — all of these had 
somehow melted together and 
changed so that they made up the 
walls and rooftops of a strange 
weird city of low buildings, straggling in every direction to the 
horizon. The flat rock he walked 
on flowed upward off to his left 
to become a wall, tilted away to 
his right to become a roof; and 
among all these buildings, the 
city was aswarm with the hobgoblins. 
V 
/ 1 ray-bodied, turnip-headed 
^ and skinny-limbed, they 
swarmed the streets of their city ; 
and all those within view of 
Clancy were concerned with him 
and Plotch. They were concerned 
for him, they implied, in their 
leering, jeering way. Their gibber 
still would not resolve itself into 
words; but somehow he understood that they were trying to 
tell him that the way he was going he would never make the 
spaceship. For one thing, he had 
BUILDING ON THE LINE 
gotten turned around and was 
headed in the wrong direction. 
His only hope of making it to the 
ship was to sit down and rest. — 
Or, at least, to leave Plotch behind, turn around and head back 
the way he had come. They were 
trying to help him, they suggested, even as they sniggered, 
and postured and danced about 
him. But somehow, a certain sort 
of animal cunning would not let 
him believe them. 
“No!” he stumbled on through 
their insubstantial mass of gesticulating bodies. “Got to get 
Plotch to the ship. If I leave him, 
he’ll get away from me.” Clancy 
giggled suddenly, and was shocked for a second at hearing the 
high-pitched sound within the 
close confines of his own helmet. 
“I want him back Earthside.” 
No! No! The hobgoblins gibbered and made faces and jostled 
about him. Plotch is through living. Clancy will be through unless he leaves Plotch behind. 
“You don’t fool me,” Clancy 
muttered, reeling and stumbling 
ahead with the dead weight of 
Plotch on his shoulders. “You 
don’t fool me!” 
After a while, he fell. 
He twisted as he went down, so 
that the stiff body of Plotch 
landed on top of him. Lying flat 
on his back on the ground with 
the hobgoblin’s bodies and faces 
forming a dome over them, Clan
cy giggled once again at Plotch. 
“Hope I didn’t chip you any, 
old boy.” He grinned at Plotch. 
He lay there for a while, thinking about everything and nothing. 
The labor of getting back to his 
feet and getting Plotch once more 
up on his head and shoulders 
loomed before him like the labor 
of climbing up the vertical side 
of a mile-high mountain. It was 
just not to be done. It was humanly impossible. But, after a 
while, he found himself trying it. 
He got to his knees, and after 
a great deal of slow effort, managed to get Plotch balanced once 
more stiffly on his helmet and his 
shoulders. But when he came to 
rise from his knees to his feet, 
bearing Plotch’s weight, he found 
his legs would not respond. 
You see, said a large hobgoblin smirking and pulling his rubbery face into different grotesque 
shapes directly in front of Clancy’s faceplate, Clancy has to 
leave Plotch if Clancy is going to 
get to the spaceship. 
“To hell with you!” 
Qomehow, with some terrific effort and a strength that he 
did not know was still in him, 
Clancy found himself back on 
his feet once more, carrying 
Plotch. He tottered forward, wading through the hobgoblins that 
clustered around him. There was 
nothing substantial about their 
bodies to clog and hold back the 
movement of his legs, but their 
attempts to stop him wearied his 
mind. After forty or fifty steps he 
stumbled and fell again, this timelosing his grip on Plotch, who 
tumbled to the rock, but lay 
there, apparently unbroken. Clancy crawled to the unmoving figure through the clutching mist of 
gray hobgoblin bodies. 
“You all right, Plotch?” Clancy muttered. 
He patted Plotch’s stiff, suited 
body from helmet to boots. As 
far as touch could tell, there was 
no damage done. Then he saw 
that above the frost the faceplate 
was starred with cracks. Gently 
he probed it with the gloved fingers of his right hand. But, while 
cracked, the faceplate seemed to 
be still holding together. 
“All right, Plotch,” he muttered. He made one more effort 
to get Plotch on his shoulders, 
and himself on his feet; but his 
body would no longer obey him. 
Still kneeling, half-crouching over the figure of Plotch, he fell 
asleep. At first the sleep was like 
all the other sleeps, then gradually a difference began to creep 
in. 
He found himself dreaming. 
He was dreaming of his appointment ceremony as a Lineman back in the main tower of 
Line Service Headquarters, back 
on Earth. He and all the other 
cadets were dressed in the stiff, 
old-fashioned green dress uniforms, which, in his case, he had 
not put on again since. The uniforms had a high stand-up collar; and the collar edge of the 
cadet in front of him had already 
worn a red line on the back of the 
cadet’s neck. The man kept tilting his head forward a little to 
get the tender, abraded skin away 
from the collar edge, while the 
voice of the Commandant droned 
on: 
“. You are dedicating yourself today," the Commandant was 
saying, harshly, “to the Line, to 
that whole project of effort by 
which our human race is reaching 
out to occupy and inhabit the 
further stars. Therefore you are 
dedicating yourselves to the service of your race; and that service 
is found within the Line from everyone in our headquarters staff 
out to the most far-flung, two-man 
teams on new Terminal or Relay 
Worlds. All of us together make 
up the Team which extends and 
maintains the Line; and we are 
bound together by the fact that 
we are teammates. ...” 
The Commandant, Leif Janssen, was still senior officer of the 
Line Service. He was a tall, stiff 
military-looking man with gray 
hair and gray mustache, trim and 
almost grimly neat in his green 
uniform with its rows of Station 
Clusters. He made an imposing 
figure up on the rostrum; and at 
the time of the appointment ceremony Clancy had admired the 
Commandant greatly. It was the 
past five years that had changed 
Clancy’s mind. Janssen was 
plainly pretty much a man of 
Straw — at least where R. and E. 
was concerned. It was strange 
that such an effective-looking 
man should prove so weak; and 
that a small bookkeeperish-looking character like Charles Li, the 
Head of R. and E„ should turn 
out to be such a successful battler. Theoretically, the two Services were independent and equal, 
but lately R. and E. had been 
doing anything it wanted to the 
Line Team. 
Up on the platform, in Clancy’s dream, the Commandant 
continued to drone on. 
“. For, just as the human race 
is the Line, so the Line is the 
Line Team, in its single ship sent 
out to hook up a new Relay or 
Terminal Station. And the Team 
in essence is its two and threeman units, sent out to work on 
planetary surfaces heretofore untrodden by human foot. The race 
is the Line Service. The Service 
is the Line Team, and the Line 
Team is each and every one of 
your fellow Lineman. ...” 
T he speech was interminable. 
Clancy searched for something in his mind to occupy him
self with; and for no particular 
reason he remembered an old film 
made of the hunting of elephants 
in Africa, before such hunting 
was outlawed completely. The 
hunters rode in a wheeled car 
after the elephant herd, which, 
after some show of defiance had 
turned to run away. Standing up 
in the back of the wheeled car, 
one of the hunters shot — and 
one of the large bull elephants 
staggered and broke his stride. 
Clearly the animal had been 
hit. Soon he slowed. A couple of 
the other bulls, evidently concerned, slowed also. The hit elephant was staggering; and they 
closed in on either side of him, 
pushing against him with their 
great gray flanks to hold him upright. 
For a while this seemed to 
work. But the effects of the shot 
were telling — or perhaps the 
hunter had fired again, Clancy 
could not remember. The wounded elephant slowed at last to a 
walk, then to a standstill. He 
went down on his front knees. 
The other two bulls would not 
abandon him. They tried to lift 
him with their trunks and tusks; 
but he was too heavy for them. 
Up close, the hunter in the wheeled cart fired another shot in close. 
There was a puff of dust from 
behind the elephant’s ear where 
the bullet hit. The wounded bull 
shivered and rolled over on its 
BUILDING ON THE LINE 
VI 
side and lay there very still. 
It was. plain he was finally 
dead. Only then did the other 
two bulls abandon him. Screaming with upcurled trunks at the 
wheeled cart, they faced the hunter for a moment, stamping, then 
turned and ran with the rest cf 
the herd. The hunter and the 
others in the wheeled cart let 
them go . 
In his dream, it seemed to 
Clancy that the elephant was 
suddenly buried. He lay in a 
cemetery with a headstone above 
bis grave. Going close, Clancy 
saw that the name on the headstone was Art. There was something else written there; but when 
he tried to go closer to see — for 
it was just twilight in the graveyard and not easy to read the 
headstones — a dog lying on the 
grave, whom he had not noticed, 
growled and bared its fangs at 
him, so that he was forced to 
back off 
Slowly, from his dreams of 
graduating ceremonies, elephants 
and graveyards, Clancy drifted 
back up into consciousness. It 
seemed that he must have been 
sleeping for some time; and his 
mouth was wet, which meant that 
somehow he must have been 
drinking water — whether from 
his suit reserves, or from some 
other source. But he did not feel 
now as if he had his suit around 
him. 
T Te opened his eyes and saw, at 
-*■ ■ first, nothing but white, the 
white walls and ceiling of a small 
room aboard a spaceship. Then 
he became conscious of a girl 
standing beside the bed. 
She was dressed in white, also, 
so at first he thought that she 
a nurse — and then he noticed 
that she wore no nurse’s cap, 
only a small, strange-looking 
gold button in the lapel of her 
white jacket. 
“Who’re you?” asked Clancy, 
wonderingly. “Where is this?” 
“It’s all right, you can get up 
now,” the girl answered. “You’re 
on our ship. We’re Research and 
Experimentation Service, and we 
just happened to land less than 
half a mile from where you were. 
So we picked you up and brought 
you in. Luckily for you. You were 
headed exactly in the wrong direction.” 
“And Plotch?” Clancy demanded. 
“We brought in your teammate, too,” she answered. 
Clancy sat up on what he now 
saw was a bunk, and sat on the 
edge of it for a moment. He was 
wearing the working coveralls he 
normally wore underneath the 
suit; but they seemed to have 
been freshly cleaned and pressed 
— which was good. He would 
not have liked to face this very 
good-looking girl in his coveralls, 
as they must have been after six 
days of his wearing the suit. 
“R. and E.?” he echoed. For a 
second her words seemed to make 
sense. Then the great impossibility of what she was saying, struck 
him. 
“But you can’t have landed a 
ship on XN-4010!” he said to the 
girl, getting to his feet. “We’re 
still just putting out the StarPoint terminals. The only way 
another ship could get here would 
be to home in on the drone that 
our Line ship homed in on; and 
that’s been inactive since our second day here, when we started 
cannibalizing it for Station 
parts!” 
“Oh, no. This ship,” she answered, “uses a new experimental process, designed to bypass 
the wasteful process of sending 
out a thousand drones in hopes 
that one may home in on a planet that may be used as a Terminal or Relay point for a ship 
shifted from Earth. But here 
comes someone who can explain 
it much better than I can.” 
A short, round-faced man with 
black hair and a short, black 
mustache had come briskly into 
the room. After a second, Clancy recognized him from seeing 
him on news broadcasts, back on 
Earth. He was Charles Li, Head 
of the Research and Experimentation Service; and he wore a long 
white coat, or smock, buttoned 
in front, with a small gold button 
like the girl’s in his lapel. 
It was strange, thought Clancy woozily, how an impressive 
figure like Janssen could turn out 
to be so incapable of protecting 
his own Service, while someone 
like this fuzzy-looking little man 
could prove to be so effective. 
You certainly could not judge by 
appearances .... 
“I heard what you said, young 
man,” snapped Li, now, “and I’d 
warn you against judging by appearances. The method that 
brought this special ship here is a 
gadget of my own invention. Of 
course, it’s a million-to-one 
chance that we should land right 
beside you, out here; but that’s 
what scientific research and experimentation deal with today, 
isn’t it? Million-to-one chances?” 
/""Mancy had to admit silently 
that it was. Certainly most 
of the R. and E. gadgets in their 
survival suits seemed to represent 
million-to-one shots at coming up 
with something useful. But Li 
was already taking Clancy by the 
arm and leading him out into 
and down a white-painted corridor of the ship. 
“But there’s something you 
need to do for us,” he said in 
steely, commanding tones, his 
grip hard on Clancy’s arm. “It’s 
imperative your transmit ship be 
BUILDING ON THE LINE 
told of our arrival, as soon as possible. But the very nature of the 
device which brought us here — 
top secret, I’m afraid, so I can’t 
explain it to you now — places 
us under certain restrictions. 
None of us aboard here can be 
spared to make the trip to your 
ship; and the nature of our equipment makes it impossible for us 
to send a message over ordinary 
inter-ship channels.” 
He led Clancy into a room 
which Clancy recognized as an 
airlock. His suit was waiting for 
him there. 
“We’re sorry to put you to this 
trouble, particularly just after 
recovering from a good deal of 
exhaustion and exposure," said 
the black-mustached man briskly. “But we have to ask you to 
put your suit on once again and 
finish your walk to your spaceship, to tell them that we’re 
here.” 
“Why not?” said Clancy. He 
began to get into his spacesuit, 
while the other two watched; 
the girl, he thought, with a certain amount of admiration in her 
eyes. 
“Yes, it’s too bad one of us 
can’t be spared to go with you,” 
said the mustached man. “But 
we have no outside suits aboard 
the ship, and then if nothing else 
one would be needed for protection from the hobgoblins.” 
“Protection — ?” echoed Clan
cy. He paused, in the midst of 
sealing the trunk of his suit. For 
the first time it struck him that 
he could not hear the voiceless 
gibber of the hobgoblins here. 
The mustached man must 
have divined his thought, for he 
answered it. 
“Yes,” he said. “The special 
hull materials of this ship shield 
us from hobgoblin attempts to 
control us. A refinement of the 
shielding material in your suits. 
That same sort of protection we 
now have will be necessary for 
future Line Teams and whoever 
chooses this planet. I will have 
to recommend it once we get 
back to Earth.” 
“Yeah,” said Clancy, putting 
on his helmet, but with the faceplate still open. “I could have 
used some of that shielding myself, before this.” 
“You’ve done a marvelous 
job. Lineman,” said Charles Li, 
“in resisting hobgoblin attack so 
far. They haven’t been able to 
affect you at all, no matter how 
exhausted you’ve become. That 
will be going in my report, too. 
Well — good luck! And remember, head back the way you 
came.” 
Li reached out to shake hands. 
But, just at that moment, Clancy remembered something. 
“Plotch!” he said. “I’ve got to 
take Plotch on in with me! He’ll 
need medical attention.” 
"I’m afraid it’s too late for 
medical attention.” Li shook his 
head sharply. “Your teammate 
is dead.” 
“No, he isn’t!” insisted Clansy. “You don’t understand. There 
was a cryogenic unit in his suit” 
“Yes, I know ail about that,” 
Li interrupted, “but you’re mistaken. The cryogenic unit was 
actually in one of the other suits. 
Your teammate is indeed dead. 
Come along, I’ll show him to 
you.” 
T T e turned and led the way 
*■ once more into the corridor, 
the girl and Clancy following. 
They went down the corridor a 
little way and into another room 
with a single bunk in it. On this 
bunk lay Plotch, in his suit, but 
with the faceplate open and unfrosted; and with his hands folded on his chest. His face had 
the stiff, powdered and rouged 
look of a body that has been embalmed. 
“You see?” said Li, after a moment. “I sympathize with you. 
But your friend is quite dead; 
and carrying him, you might not 
have the strength to make it to 
your ship. You can leave him 
safely to us to be taken care of.” 
Clancy stared at Plotch, he did 
not believe Li. He thought he 
detected a slight rise and fall of 
Plotch’s chest, under his coveralls, which were now as clean 
and pressed as Clancy’s own. 
But cleverly, Clancy saw the 
futility of arguing with the powerful Head of the R. and E. 
Service. Clancy nodded his head 
and went back out into the corridor; he began to fasten up his 
faceplate. 
“Don’t bother to show me out,” 
he said, grinning. “I can handle 
the airlock by myself.” 
“Good luck, then,” said the mustached man. He and the girl 
shook hands with him and then 
went off down the corridor, 
around a bend of it, and disappeared. Clancy turned and walked heavily to the airlock entrance, 
walked into it, waited a second, 
then turned and tiptoed back 
into the corridor and back up to 
the room in which Plotch lay. 
TT'ven thawed out in his suit, 
■*— ' Plotch was a heavy load to 
get up from the bunk, but Clancy closed his faceplate and got 
him up in his arms in the same 
awkward, front-carrying position 
in which he had first tried to carry the other away from the 
smashed flitter. Carrying Plotch’, 
he tiptoed back out into the 
corridor into the airlock and cycled the lock open. Once outside, with the airlock’s outer door 
closed behind him, he started 
tiptoeing off toward a sunlightblazoned patch of clouds, which 
was only an hour or two above 
BUILDING ON THE LINE 
horizon. He was almost sure it 
was nearly sunset and that he 
was still headed in his original 
direction. 
As he went, the weight of 
Plotch forced him down off his 
toes, to walk flat-footedly. Slowly, Plotch seemed to gain heaviness, and tremendous weariness 
began to flood back into Clancy. 
He was dreadfully thirsty. But 
when he gave in at last to temptation and sucked on the water 
tube in his helmet, only a little 
raspy gasp of moisture-laden air 
came through his mouth. Somehow, although he could not remember doing it, he must have 
emptied his reserve water supply. But he could have sworn 
that there had been some liquid 
still in reserve. 
However, there was no help for 
him now. As if in compensation, 
he made the discovery that 
Plotch had frozen stiff once 
more in the same old position. 
Almost without thought, he maneuvered the frozen body back 
up on his helmet and shoulders 
in the same position in which 
he had carried it so far and tottered on toward the red, glaring 
patch of sunlight-illumined cloud 
before him. 
His head swam. With every 
step, the efforts of moving seemed to grow greater. But now he 
had no strength left, even for the 
process of reason. He did not 
know exactly why he was carrying Plotch, with such great effort, toward the sunset ; and it 
was too great an effort to reason it out. All he had strength 
for was to plod onward, one 
foot after another, one foot after 
another. 
Several times it seemed to him 
that he passed out, or went to 
sleep on his feet. But when he 
woke up he was still walking. 
Finally, he had lost all contact 
with his body and its strange 
desire to carry a frozen Plotch 
into the sunset. He stood as if 
apart from it in his mind and 
watched with a detached and uncurious amazement as that body 
staggered on, tilting precariously 
now and' then under its burden, 
but never quite going down, 
while the landscape danced about 
it, one moment being rocky plain 
— the next a fantastic, lcrw-walled city thronged with hobgoblins 
— the next a dusty African plain 
where elephants fled before 
hunters in a wheeled cart. 
He was still walking when the 
sun went down. And after that 
he remembered nothing . when 
he finally came to again, it was 
to a fuzzy, unreal state. He was 
lying on some flat surface and a 
body was bending over him; but 
the features in the face of the 
body danced so that he could 
not identify whoever it was. But, 
in spite of the unreality of it all, 
the smells were hard and familiar — the interior stink of a Line 
transmit ship, the smell of his 
own bonk aboard it, a mingled 
odor of men and grease. 
VII ' 
tt T Te’ll be all right,” a familiar voice said above him. 
It came from the figure with 
the mixed-up features, but it was 
the voice of Jeph Wasca, his 
Team Captain. 
“Plotch?” Clancy managed to 
croak. 
“What?” The blurry figure 
with the dancing features bent 
down dose to Clancy’s face. 
“Plotch. ...” Clancy felt the 
strength draining out of him. After a few seconds, the figure 
straightened up, the dancing face 
withdrawing. 
“I can’t understand you. Tell 
me later, then,” said Jeph’s voice, 
brusquely. “I haven’t got time 
to talk to you now, Clance. You 
go to sleep. When you wake up, 
you’ll be back Earthside.” 
The indefinite figure withdrew, 
and all the fuzzy lights, colors, 
sounds and smells surrounding 
Clancy whirled themselves into 
a funnel that drew him down 
into dark unconsciousness. 
When he woke this third time, 
he was indeed — as Jeph had 
promised — Earthside. He could 
tell it, if no way else, by the add
ed pull of gravity, holding him 
down harder upon the bed in 
which he lay. The room he opened his eyes upon was plainly a 
hospital room, and there was a 
bottle of glucose solution with a 
tube leading to a needle inserted in his wrist. 
He felt as if he had spent half 
a year locked up in a packing 
case with a pack of angry bobcats. Where he was not sore, he 
ached; and he did not feel as 
if he had strength enough to 
move the little finger of one 
hand. He lay for a while, placidly and contentedly watching 
the featureless white ceiling 
above him, and then a nurse 
came in. She put a thermometer 
sensor-strip into his mouth briefly, and then took it out again 
to examine it. Once his lips were 
free, he spoke to her. 
“You’re a real nurse?” he 
asked. 
She laughed. She had freckles 
on her short nose, and they 
crowded together when she laughed out loud. 
“They don’t let imitations 
work in this ward,” she said. 
“How’re you feeling?” 
“Terrible,” he said. “But just 
as long as I don’t try to move, 
I feel fine.” 
“That’s good,” she said. “You 
just go on not trying to move. 
That’s doctor’s orders for you 
anyway. Do you think you’re up 
BUILDING ON THE LINE 
to having some visitors later on 
this afternoon?” 
“Visitors?” he asked 
“Your Line Team Captain,” 
she said. “Maybe some other 
people.” < 
“Sure,” Clancy said. She went 
out; and Clancy fell asleep. 
Lie was awakened by someone 
4 speaking gently in his ear 
and a light touch on his shoulder. 
He opened his eyes and looked 
up into the face of Jeph standing 
at his bedside with another man 
— a tall man standing a little 
behind him. 
"How are you feeling, Clance?” 
Jeph asked, 
“Fine,” answered Clancy sleepily. His fingers groped automatically for the bed-control lever 
at the bedside and closed upon 
it. He set the little motors whirring to raise him up into halfsitting position. “The nurse said 
you might be in to see me.” 
“I’ve been waiting to see you,” 
said Jeph. "Got somebody here 
to see you.” The man behind 
Jeph moved forward; but Clancy’s eyes were all on Jeph. 
“Plotch?” Clancy asked. 
“He’s going to be all right,” 
Jeph answered. “They’ve got 
him defrosted and on his way 
back to normal — thanks to 
you.” 
“Don’t thank me!” exploded 
Clancy. “Jeph, I can’t take that 
guy any more! If I have to take 
any more of him, I'll kill him!” 
“Relax,” said Jeph, I’ve 
known that for some time. I 
made up my mind some months 
back that one of you had to 
leave the Team.” 
“One of us — ” Clancy went 
rigid, under the covers of the 
bed. 
“Plotch’s being transferred.” 
Clancy relaxed. 
"Thanks,” he muttered. 
“Don’t thank me,” said Jeph. 
“You earned it. You saved all 
our necks out there on XN-4010 
— and more. That’s why the 
Commandant’s here to talk to 
you.” 
Clancy’s gaze shot past Jeph 
for the first time; and the tall 
man stepped right up te the 
bedside. It was Janssen all right, 
with his gray, bristling little military mustache, just as Clancy 
remembered him. Janssen smiled 
stiffly down at Clancy. 
Clancy’s nerves, abraded by 
his sessions with the hobgoblins, 
took sudden alarm. 
“What about?” he demanded 
warily. 
“Let’s get you briefed first,” 
said Janssen sharply. He pulled 
up a chair and sat down, kicking 
another chair over to Jeph, who 
also sat down. 
“Sorry to put you through 
your paces like this,” Janssen 
said, not sounding sorry at all, 
“just the minute you get your 
eyes open. But when the tune’s 
ripe, the tune’s ripe. We’ve got 
someone else due to meet us 
here; and he may want to ask 
you some questions. I’m going to 
be asking you some questions 
for his benefit, in any case; and 
what I want you to do is just 
speak up. Give us both straight 
answers, just the way they come 
to you. You’ve got that?” 
Clancy nodded again, warily. 
( £ A 11 right. Now, to get you 
•^briefed on the situation,” 
said Janssen. “First, it seems you 
ran into something new out 
there on XN-4010. That planet’s 
got an actual sentient life form, 
which exists as something like 
clouds of free electrons. Beyond 
that, we don’t know much about 
them, except for three things; 
none of which we’d have known 
if you hadn't managed to carry 
Plotch on foot all the way back 
to the ship. One — ” 
Janssen held up a knobby 
forefinger to mark the point. 
“ — They can move material 
objects up to a certain size, with 
a great deal of effort - — as in 
that shower of rocks you remember,” he said. “But evidently it’s 
not easy for them. Also, they can 
affect human thinking processes — up to a point. Again, though, 
it’s not easy for them. For one 
thing, any kind of material en
velope, like the body of a ship, 
or a flitter, or a suit like you 
were wearing, shields them out to 
a certain extent, depending on 
its thickness. For another, it 
seems they only become really 
effective if the human is the 
way you were, near the end of 
your walk — in a highly exhausted condition; the kind of 
condition where lack of sleep or 
extreme effort might have 
brought you to the point of hallucinations, anyway. Third — 
and most important — they were 
trying to kill off all the men of 
your Team. It seems they were 
able to understand that with the 
drone dismantled, the ship unmanned and the terminal not 
yet fully built and operative, 
there’d be no way for another 
ship out to XN-4010. In fact, the 
chances of our hitting the planet on a blind -transmit once more, 
let alone getting another drone 
safely landed on it, were microscopic. For some reason they 
didn’t want us to know about 
their existence; and that suggests that maybe they wanted to 
make preparations of some kind 
• — either for defense or offense 
against the human race.” 
He paused. 
“Lucky for us,” he said 
brusquely to Clancy, “you frustrated them.” 
“Just by bringing Plotcli in?” 
Clancy demanded. There was 
BUILDING ON THE LINE 
something disproportionate in 
all this. He did not trust Janssen at all. 
“That’s right, Glance,” said 
Jeph. “There’s something you 
don’t know. If you’d decided to 
sit down out there and wait for 
rescue, you’d have dried up to 
dust inside your suit before any 
rescue came,” 
Clancy stared at the Team 
Captain. 
“All but one flitter and twoman crew,” said Jeph slowly, 
"we’re out on jobs — and the 
closest one out was farther away 
from the ship than you and 
Plotch were. Glance, every one 
of those flitters was smashed by 
rock showers, and its crew killed or stranded.” 
VIII 
/Clancy swallowed for the moment forgetting the Line 
Commandant. 
“Who ...” he could not finish 
the question. He only stared at 
Jeph with bright eyes. Jeph answered slowly, but without any 
attempt at emotion. 
“Fletch,” the Team Leader 
said, “Jim, Wally, Pockets, Ush 
and Pappy.” 
Clancy lay still for a moment, gazing at the wall of the 
room opposite. Then he looked 
back at Jeph. 
“What kind of replacements 
are we getting?” he asked. He 
looked at Janssen challengingly. 
“The best,” answered the Commandant. “And I’ll keep that 
promise. Again, because of you 
and your bringing Plotch in on 
foot.” 
“I still don’t see what that 
did — ” Clancy broke off, suddenly thoughtful. 
“Now you start to see it, 
don’t you?” said Jeph. “There 
were three of us and one flitter 
left in the spaceship. Twelve men 
and six flitters — including you 
and Plotch, all the other flitters 
and men we had — were out on 
work location. All of them overdue, and none of them back. 
What was I going to do? I could 
not risk sending out the two 
men I had left for fear the same 
thing would happen to them — 
they might not come back. On 
the other hand, without the Starpoints all finished, there was no 
way we could transmit the ship 
back Earthside. The only thing 
was for the three of us to stay 
put and keep the ship powered. 
We couldn’t transmit or receive, 
but with luck we could act as 
a beacon for another blind drone 
transmit from Earth — once 
Earth figured we were in trouble.” 
Jeph paused. Clancy slowly 
nodded. 
“Then you came staggering 
in, with your load of frozen 
Plotch,” said Jeph, “We shoved 
Plotch into the freeze-chamber 
and tried to find out from you 
what had happened. You weren’t 
up to talking consciously; but 
I pumped you full of parasympathetic narcos, and you babbled in your sleep. You babbled 
it all. Once I knew what I was 
up against, I was able to risk my 
last flitter and my last two men 
to go out on quick rescue missions to each of the work-points. 
After that we went out with the 
men who were left for only a 
couple of hours on the job at a 
time, until the last Star-point 
was finished and we could transmit ourselves back here.” 
Clancy nodded again. He was 
thinking of Jim, Wally, and all 
the rest who had not come back, 
looking out the window of his 
room at the green hospital 
grounds outside with unfocused 
eyes. Someone else had just 
come into the room; but Clancy was too full of feeling to bother to look to see who it was. He 
was aware of Jeph and the Commandant turning briefly to glance 
toward the newcomer, then they 
were back looking at him. 
(4 All right,” Janssen said 
grimly, with one eye still 
on whoever had just come in. 
“Let’s have your attention Lineman. There’s a question some 
people may be wanting to ask 
you. That’s how you were able 
to see through what the hobgoblins were trying to do to you, 
in making you leave Plotchin 
and go off in the wrong direction ; 
once they’d gotten you to hallucinating about a new experimental type §hip that didn’t 
need the Line to shift from Earth 
out to XN-4010?" 
Clancy scowled down at the 
white bedspread. 
“Hell,” he grumbled, "I didn’t 
see through it! I mean I didn’t 
start adding up reasons until later. Like the rescue ship landing 
right beside me; and the people 
on her using our Team’s own 
word for the ‘hobgoblins’; when 
they hadn’t heard me calling 
them that myself.” 
“But you didn't leave Plotchin the way they wanted you to. 
And you didn't take their word 
for it that you were headed wrong 
for your ship," said Janssen. 
“Of course not!” Clancy growled. “But it was just because I felt 
there was something wrong about 
it all; and 1 wasn’t going to leave 
Plotch behind, as long as there 
was a chance they were lying 
about his being dead.” 
“All right. Wait a minute.” It 
was the newcomer to the room 
speaking. He stepped close to the 
bedside. “Wasn’t I given to understand you hated this teammate of yours — this, uh, Plotchin?” 
BUILDING ON THE LINE 
Clancy looked up and goggled. 
He was gazing at a short man 
with a round face, black hair and 
a little black mustache. The man 
of his hallucination, only this 
time he was real: Charles Li, the 
head of Research’and Experimentation Service. 
Li’s voice was not as deep as 
it had been in Clancy’s hallucination — in fact there was almost a 
querulous note in it. But he 
sounded decisive enough. 
“Why — I still hate him!” 
snapped Clancy. “I hate his guts! 
But that didn’t mean I was going 
to leave him out there!” 
He stared at Li. Li stared back 
down at him. 
“I guess you haven’t heard the 
latest interpretation of that, 
Charlie,” Janssen said stiffly to 
Li, and the Head of R. and E. 
turned about to face the Commandant. “Our Service psychologists came up with a paper on it 
just a couple of hours ago — I’ll 
see you get a copy of it by the 
end of the day.” 
Li frowned suddenly at Janssen. 
“Never mind,” Li said, “just 
give me the gist of it.” 
“It’s simple enough,” said Janssen. “The immaterial life forms 
on XN-4010 got control of Clancy’s conscious mind. But the only 
way they could make him hallucinate was by telling him what 
he ought to see and then letting 
him drag the parts to build the 
hallucination out of his own mind 
and memory. So while they had 
control of him pretty well, consciously, they never did get down 
into the part of him where his 
unconscious reflexes live. And did 
you know that team loyalty lives 
down among the instincts in some 
men, Charlie?” 
“Team loyalty, an instinct?” 
Li frowned again. “I don’t know 
if I can see that.” 
tt'T'ake my word for it, then,” 
said Janssen, “but it’s 
easy enough to check.” He looked 
down at the shorter man. “Not 
only humans, a lot of the social 
animals have the same reflex. 
Porpoises hold another porpoise 
up on top of the water after he’s 
been knocked unconscious, so 
that he won’t drown — that’s because the porpoise breathing 
mechanism is conscious, not unconscious like ours. Land animals 
too.” 
“Elephants . ’’muttered Clancy, suddenly remembering. But 
none of the other men were paying any attention to him. 
“Under an instinct like that,” 
Janssen was going on, raspingly, 
to the R. and E. Service Head, 
“the loyalty of every team member is to the team. And every 
other man on it. And the loyalty 
of the team’s to him, in return. 
As long as there’s a spark of life 
left in him, his teammates will do 
anything they can, at any cost to 
themselves, to care for him, to 
rescue him, or bring him home 
safely — ” 
“Lief, not one of your spiels, 
please — ” began the shorter man, 
but Janssen overrode him by 
sheer power of voice. 
"Bat,” went on the Commandant, “the minute he’s dead, their 
obligation’s lifted. Because they 
all know that now he has to be 
replaced by a new man on the 
Team, someone to whom the loyalty they used to owe the dead 
man 'will have to be transferred. 
What tripped up those hobgoblins on XN-4010 was the fact that 
Clancy here couldn’t be sure 
Plotchin was dead. It didn’t matter how much he hated Plotchin; 
or how overwhelming the evidence 
was that Plotchin was dead, or 
that trying to save Plotchin might 
only mean throwing his own life 
away, too. As long as the slightest chance was there that Plotchin could be rescued, Clancy was 
obligated by his Team instinct to 
do his best for his teammate. 
That’s why Clancy brought the 
man in, in spite of how he felt 
about him, personally, and in 
spite of all those aliens could do, 
and in spite of the near physical 
impossibility, even under the 
lower gravity there, of carting a 
frozen dead man, weighing nearly 
as much as he did, for miles.” 
Janssen stopped talking. All 
the while he had been speaking, 
Li’s face had been growing sourer and sourer, like a man who has 
discovered a worm in the apple 
into which he has just bitten. 
“Can I talk now?” demanded 
Li. The querulous note in his 
voice was mounting to a pugnacious whine. 
“Go ahead,” said Janssen. 
“All right.” The smaller man 
drew a deep breath. “What’s this 
all about? You got me over here 
to see this man, telling me you 
had something to show me. Evidently you wanted to prove to 
me he’s a hero. All right, I agree. 
He’s a hero. Now, what about it?” 
Janssen turned to Jeph, 
“Shut the door, there,” he ordered. Jeph complied. Janssen’s 
eyes raked from the Line Team 
Captain to Clancy. “And if either 
of you breathe a word of what 
you hear in this room from now 
on, I’ll personally see that you 
get posted out on a job two hundred light-years from Earth, and 
forgotten there.” 
IX 
/'"Mancy’s stomach floated suddenly inside him, as if an 
elevator he was in had just dropped away under the soles of his 
feet. His premonitions of trouble 
on seeing Janssen had been only 
too correct. Here, the man who 
BUILDING ON THE LINE 
had evidently lost five years of 
battles with the Head of R. and 
E. was about to take one more 
swing at the other Service Head, 
using Clancy <; as a club. Two 
guesses, thought Clancy, as to 
what the outcome would be — 
and what would happen to Clancy himself as a result. 
He had escaped the hobgoblins 
on XN-4010, only to be trapped 
and used by the super-hobgoblin 
of all — his own tough-talking, 
but ineffective Line Service Commandant There he was now — 
Janssen — tying into Li as if he’d 
been the winner all these last five 
years, instead of the other way 
around. 
“I’m glad to hear you admit 
that, Charlie,” Janssen was snapping, “because Clancy here is a 
hero. A real, live hero. A man 
who damn near killed himself 
doing a superhuman job in the 
face of inimical alien action to 
save his teammate. Only he nearly didn't make it, because he was 
already chewed down past the 
exhaustion point when he started. Not just from fighting his 
job and the aliens — but from being worn thin by a round damn 
dozen of your Service’s useless 
ivory-tower experiments, built into his working suit!” 
Li stared at him. 
“Whatire you talking about?” 
bristled Li. “It was the collarinnovation on his own suit that 
kept him from being brained 
when that rock hit his helmet. If 
it hadn’t been for the experimental cryogenic unit in Plotchin’s 
suit, Plotchin wouldn’t be alive 
now!” 
“Sure. Two!” snarled Janssen. 
“Two gadgets paid off, but of — • 
what? A total of twenty-three, 
for both men’s suits? What did 
the other twenty-one gadgets do 
for either of them? I’ll tell you. 
Nothing! Nothing, except to 
wear them out to the point where 
they were ready to cut each other’s throat like half the rest of 
my men on the Line Teams 'nowadays!” 
Li’s face was palely furious 
behind the black mustache. 
“Sorry. I don’t see that!” he 
snapped. “Your man’s still only 
a hero because the cryogenic unit 
gave him a revivable teammate 
to bring back. And credit for the 
cryogenic unit being in Plotchin’s 
suit belongs to us!” 
“You think so?” grated Janssen. Li’s voice had gone high in 
tone with the argument. Janssen’s 
was going down into a bass 
growl. Both men looked ready 
to start swinging at each other at 
any minute. Janssen’s gray mustache bristled at Li. “Stop and 
think again for a moment. What 
if your cryogenic unit hadn’t 
worked? What if Plotchin had 
actually been dead? Clancy 
wouldn’t have had any way of 
knowing it, for sure. And so he’d 
have brought Plotchin in, anyway! You think you can take his 
hero status away from him just 
because your unit worked? He 
did what he did out of a sense 
of duty to his teammate — and 
whether there was a live man or 
a dead one on top of him at the 
time doesn’t matter.” 
UQo?” snarled Li. 
^ “So!” barked Janssen. 
“I’ve been lying back and waiting for something to hang you 
with, Charlie, for four years. 
Now I’ve got it. I’m starting to 
punch buttons the minute I leave 
this hospital. We’re both of us responsible to Earth Central, and 
Earth Central’s responsible to 
the taxpayers. I’m going to set 
the wheels going to bring my 
hero up in front of a full-dress 
Central Investigating Committee 
— to determine whether the excessive number of experiments 
your Service has been forcing 
upon my Line Teams might not 
have caused the Relay Station 
installation on XN-4010 to fail in 
the face of attack by inimical 
aliens, who then might have gone 
undiscovered and eventually posed a threat to the whole Line, if 
not to the whole human race.” 
Clancy had a sudden, irrational impulse to pull the bedcovers 
up over his head and pretend 
they had all gone away. 
“Are you crazy?” snarled Li. 
“You tried fighting me, five years 
ago, when we first got Central 
permission to test experimental 
equipment under working conditions, on your Line Teams. And 
Central went right along with me 
all the way.” 
“That was then, Charlie!” 
Janssen grated. “That was then, 
when you had all the little glittery, magic-seeming wonderworld-tomorrow type of gadgets 
to demonstrate on the TV screens 
and grab the headlines. All I had 
was honest argument. But now 
it’s the other way around. All 
you’ve got is more of the same 
— but I’ve got the real glitter. 
I’ve got a hero. Not a fake hero, 
flanged up for the purpose. But 
a true hero — an honest hero. 
You can’t shoot him down no 
matter what angle you try from. 
And I’ve got villains — real villains, in those alien hobgoblins, or 
whatever they are. I’m going to 
win this inquiry the same way 
you won the last one. Not in 'he 
Committee Room, but out in the 
News Services. I can get you and 
your experiment wiped clean out 
of my Service, Charlie! And I’ll 
play hell with your next year’s 
appropriations, to boot!” 
Janssen shut up, his mustache 
stiff with anger. Clancy held his 
breath, resisting the impulse to 
shut his eyes. The Line Service 
Commandant had taken his 
BUILDING ON THE LINE 
swing; and now — how, Clancy 
did not know, but there would 
undoubtedly turn out to be a way 
— Li would lower the boom. 
“All right,” said Li, bitterly. 
“Damn you, ^Lief! You know I 
can’t afford any threat to next 
year’s appropriations now that 
the drone by-pass system is ready 
to go into field testing! Name 
your price!” 
/'"'lancy blinked. He opened his 
^ eyes very wide and stared 
at Li. 
“But you wipe me out, and 
you’ll regret it, Lief!” continued 
the R. and E. Head, bursting out 
before Clancy could get his 
brains unscrambled. “Admit it or 
not, but a lot of our ivory-tower 
gadgets, as you call them, have 
ended up as standard equipment, 
saving the lives of men on your 
Teams!” 
“Don’t deny it!” snapped Janssen. “I don’t deny it and never 
did. And I don’t want to wipe 
you out. I just want to get back 
the right to put some limit on 
the number of wild-eyed ideas 
my men have to test for your lab 
jockeys! That’s all!” 
“All right,” said Li. He, too 
was relaxing, though his face was 
still sour. “You’ve got it.” 
“And we’ll draw up an intraService agreement,” said Janssen. 
“All right.” Li’s glance swung 
balefully to fasten for a second on 
Clancy. “I suppose you know 
you’ll be holding up progress?” 
“That won’t matter so much',” 
said Janssen, “as long as I’m upholding my Linemen.” 
“Excuse me,” Li answered stiffly, looking back at him, “I don’t 
see that. As far as I’m concerned, 
progress comes before the individual.” 
“It does, does it?” said Janssen. “Well, let me tell you something. You get yourself a fresh 
crop of laboratory boys out of 
the colleges, every year, all you 
want, to work in your nice, neat, 
air-conditioned labs. But I get 
only so many men for work on 
the Line — because it takes a special type and there’s only so 
many of that type born each generation!” 
Clancy stared guiltily at Janssen. Clancy’s conscience was undergoing an uncomfortable feeling — as if he had just been 
punched in the pit of his stomach. 
“I know,” Li was answering, 
with a sour glance at Clancy. 
“Heroes.” 
“Heroes, hell!” exploded Janssen. “Race horses! That’s what 
my boys are — race horses! And 
you wanted to turn them into 
pack mules for your own purposes. Not damn likely! Not any 
more damn likely than I was to 
roll over on my back and let you 
get away with using a full-dress 
Central Investigation Committee 
to get permission to stick your 
nose into my Line Service! Open 
your eyes for once, Charlie! Use 
your imagination on something 
living! Can you imagine what it’s 
like to do what these men do, 
jammed at best into the few clear 
cubic feet of a tiny transit ship 
you could cover with a large tent? 
And at worst — living in their 
suits out on the job for days on 
end, working harder than any 
manual laborer’s worked on 
Earth in fifty years, always under 
strange conditions and unknown 
dangers like those hobgoblins on 
XN-4010?” 
J anssen had to stop for a second to draw breath. 
“Can you imagine doing that?” 
he went on. “Just to put in a 
Line Station for a million fat 
tourists to use; just about the 
time you’re maybe getting killed 
or crippled putting in another 
Station out on some world the 
tourists have never heard of yet?” 
“No, I can’t,” he said, dryly. 
"And I don’t believe any normal, 
sensible man can. If the work’s 
that bad, what makes any of your 
men want to do it?” 
“Listen.” Clancy propped himself up on one elbow. His conscience and the recognition of how 
wrong he had been about Janssen was finally bringing him into 
the fight. It was late. But better 
late than never. 
“Listen — ” he said again to Li. 
“You get a feeling you can’t describe at the end of a job — when 
a working Station finally goes into the line. You feel good. You 
know you’ve done something, out 
there. Nobody else did it, but you 
— and nobody can take it away 
from you, that you’ve done it!” 
“I see.” The short man’s mustache lifted a little. He turned to 
the door, opened it, and looked 
back at Janssen. “They’re romantics, your Linemen. That’s it 
in a nutshell. Isn’t it?” 
“That’s right, Charlie,” said the 
Commandant coldly. “You named it.” 
“Yes,” said Li, “and no doubt 
the rest of the race has to have 
them for things like building the 
Line. But, if you’ll excuse me. 
personally I can’t see romantics. 
Or romanticism, either.” 
He went out shutting the door. 
“No,” said Janssen, grimly, 
looking at the closed door. “You 
wouldn’t. Your kind never does. 
But we manage to get things done 
in spite of you, one way or another.” 
He glared suddenly at Clancy, 
who was staring at him with a 
powerful intensity. 
“What’re you gawking at, Lineman?” he barked. 
“Nothing,” said Clancy. 
— GORDON R. DICKSON 
BUILDING ON THE LINE 
course the submarine is named 
after the marine animal, but in 
a rather roundabout way. Back 
in 1924, Sir Hubert Wilkins acquired a surplus submarine from 
the first world war, intending to 
use it to reach the North Pole by 
traveling under the floating arctic 
ice (something that was actually 
done three decades later), and he 
re-named the submarine Nautilus. 
Both Admiral Rickover’s and Sir 
Hubert’s submarines were named 
after Jules Verne’s fictitious submarine in Twenty Thousand 
Leagues Under the Sea. Jules 
Verne, in turn, named his submarine after an actual small submarine designed and built by the 
American painter and inventor 
Robert Fulton and tested in the 
Seine river during the early years 
of the nineteenth century. The 
river water proved to be so 
muddy that Fulton could see for 
a distance of about five feet, and 
that, combined with Napoleon’s 
lack of interest, ended the experiments. But it started the use of 
the name. 
Where did Fulton get the 
name? 
■ He lived in the days — sometimes I think of them as the fortunate days from the point of 
view of education — where a 
young man had to learn the classical languages before he was admitted to the study of anything 
else. Hence he knew that in Greek 
naus means a ship, nautes means 
a sailor and that the latter word 
has a poetical form: nautilos. 
But Fulton did not have real or 
even ghostly sailors in mind, he 
thought of a shell of the kind 
that is in front of me on my dsek. 
It came from far away — namely 
the Philippine Islands — and 
could be bought in curio shops. 
When sawed in half carefully, it 
showed a large number of chambers; and since the days of George 
Everard Rumphius of the Dutch 
East India Company, it was 
known that something resembling 
an octopus lived in tire foremost 
and largest of these chambers. 
It is a peculiar octopus, but 
since it is peculiar mainly when 
compared with other octopi, we 
first need a general discussion of 
the tribe, before we can dwell on 
nautilus. 
nphe scientific term for octopuslike animals is cephalopods, 
the “head-footed ones,” for the 
simple reason that not all of 
them have eight arms as is implied by the name octopus. They 
are molluscs, like snails and 
clams, but they are the most 
highly evolved molluscs there are. 
Most molluscs are helpless in the 
face of an attack; at best they 
have a hard shell into which to 
retreat. The cephalopods are 
usually the attackers. Very many 
molluscs are blind; the cephalo
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
pods have well developed and especially large eyes. Some deepsea forms have even evolved luminous organs in addition to their 
eyes. (There is one, just one, 
blind cephalopod, a small deepsea form discovered by the oceanographic expedition with S/S 
Valdivia in 1899.) It is quite impossible to imagine anything less 
intelligent than an oyster, but the 
cephalopods have a degree of intelligence that might be compared to that of a bird of prey, and 
it may well be higher. Most molluscs are small; some cephalopods are the largest living creatures in the ocean, if you don’t 
count the whales. Finally molluscs, if they move around at all, 
do so at the proverbial snail’s 
pace; the cephalopods are the 
speediest inhabitants of the 
oceans, if only for short dashes. 
As a matter of fact they use jet 
propulsion. 
Like all other molluscs, the 
cephalopods are geologically old. 
The oldest known fossil of a 
cephalopod was found in rocks 
from the Cambrian period of 500 
million years ago. They have 
flourished ever since and still do, 
though at times the number of 
different forms was larger than 
it is now. About 10,000 fossil 
forms are known; the number of 
living forms in around 650. It is 
an amusing fact that two or three 
of the living forms are known 
only from the contents of stomachs of toothed whales; they have 
not yet been caught directly. 
For purposes of classification, 
the cephalopoda are divided into 
two orders: the dibranchiata 
(meaning : two gills) and the 
tetrabranchiata (four gills) ; nautilus is the only living form that 
belongs to the second order. The 
first order has a very obvious 
sub-division into two groups. One 
group consists of the ectopoda 
with eight arms of about equal 
length and equipped along their 
whole length with suction disks; 
quite often the arms are joined 
by a web at their bases. The other 
group is that of the decapoda 
with eight arms of about equal 
length and two so-called tentacles 
that are longer, sometimes much 
longer, than the arms. The tentacles are without suction disks 
except at their broadened tips; in 
some forms, there are claws in 
addition to the suction disks on 
those tips. 
The three most common and 
therefore best known types of the 
Fig. 1 . Common octopus, lumping a crab. 
MANTLE 
Fig. 2. Schematic drawing of a squid (Loligo), showing 
main analomical features. 
living cephalopods are the common octopus (the Ktake of the 
Germans and Scandinavians) 
with an egg-shaped body and 
arms joined by a web. (Fig. 1) 
The scientific designation of the 
common type is Octopus vulgaris. 
The next one is the cuttlefish 
( Sepia officinalis), which provides 
the cuttlebone for caged canaries 
and finches and is slightly more 
elongated in body shape than the 
common octopus. The third wellknown type is the squid, the 
calamaro of the Italians (scientific designation: Loligo), which 
has a torpedo-shaped body and 
especially large eyes. While the 
shapes differ, the internal construction is more or less the same 
— it might be called a bag within 
a bag. 
The outer bag is known as the 
mantle, a flexible container of 
tough skin and many muscles. 
The inner bag bears the inelegant 
name of “visceral mass” and is 
attached to the mantle in only a 
few places. The space between 
visceral mass and mantle is filled 
with sea water; logically the gills 
are located in this watery space 
between the two bags (Fig. 2). 
The animal has complete control 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
of the mantle and can close it 
tightly around what must be called its neck. If it is closed in this 
manner and if the whole mantle 
is then contracted sharply, the 
water can escape only through 
the funnel (technically known as 
the hyponome, but more frequently called the “siphon”) below the head. This produces a 
powerful jet of water, and the 
reaction principle causes the animal to move rapidly in the opposite direction. When this 
mechanism is used for escape, 
the discharge of the water from 
the mantle cavity is usually accompanied by a discharge from 
the ink sack, but this discharge 
does not act like an underwater 
“smoke screen” as one can read 
in many places. Anybody who has 
actually observed it has seen that 
the ink does not spread out rapidly; it stays in one blob for some 
time, a blob of about the size 
and the lumpy shape of an octopus. In short, the ink discharge 
produces something like a phantom octopus, while the animal 
itself is rapidly disappearing. This 
disappearance is aided by the fact 
that most cephalopods can change 
their color rapidly. A fleeting 
cephalopod makes itself look as 
pale as it can. 
As for the color of the ink, 
it is deep brown in squids, blueblack in cuttlefish and plain black 
in the case of the octopus. 
Fig. 3. The deep-sea decapod Spirula, 
showing internal sheU. 
Qince the discussion is aiming in 
^ the direction of the shelled 
nautilus, we’ll have to discuss the 
hard parts of the cephalopods 
next. The term mollusc comes 
from the Latin mollu scus, meaning “soft,” but most of the softbodied molluscs do produce something hard, the oyster shell being 
an example of exceptional hardness. The cephalopods of our seas 
have only two hard parts, namely 
the two mandibles of their beaks 
and the flat bony piece imbedded 
inside the mantle in their back. 
The mandibles are usually described as being like a parrot’s 
beak in shape, and this description is quite good. To be fully 
accurate, however, it should read: 
like a parrot’s beak upside down; 
for the lower mandible is the larger one which closes over the upper 
mandible. As for the bony material on the back, the cuttlefish 
has relatively the largest one, 
which covers the whole back of 
the visceral mass. The common 
octopus has only a small remnant of this “cuttlebone” — students who dissect an octopus 
sometimes have trouble finding 
it — while Loligo has what has 
been named its “pen” which looks 
like the active end of a native 
spear. 
The foregoing discussion of the 
living cephalopods that do not 
produce shells can be summarized 
by saying that they have well or
ganized and well coordinated 
bodies capable of rapid movement. They are characterized by 
highly evolved eyes with lenses 
just like our own, by the possession of ink sacks and the ability to change color at will. 
At present there are three — 
not two as popular books have 
it — kinds of shell-producing 
cephalopods in the oceans. The 
one that became known last and 
also happens to be the smallest 
is a decapod named Spirula 
spirula. Its shell has a diameter 
of only half an inch and looks like 
a tiny snail shell. In fact, the 
shells were well known because 
they were often washed up along 
tropical shores. Just what kind 
of creature produced these shells 
was not known, and I doubt 
whether anybody guessed that it 
might be a cephalopod. The first 
specimen of the animal was 
dredged from a depth of 360 
fathoms by the British oceanographic expedition of H.M.S. 
Challenger just about a hundred 
years ago. The decapod measures 
V /2 inches in length without the 
two tentacles; the tentacles, when 
fully extended, measure another 
V /2 inches. (Fig. 3). 
In 1900 only four specimens 
were known. By 1920 the number 
had risen to fourteen. Then the 
Danish zoologist Johannes Schmidt began to look for the breeding grounds of the river cels and 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
found it to be under the Sargasso Sea. His nets, designed to 
capture tiny eel larvae, also 
caught Spirula, but many questions remained open until the two 
Danish expeditions on the ship 
Dana (twenty years ago) gathered a total of 188 specimens that 
could be observed alive and dead, 
could be photographed in black 
and white, in color and with Xrays. Because of these studies, 
conducted mainly by Anton F. 
Bruun, we know that Spirula 
lives at a depth of between 2000 
and 3000 feet, that its normal 
position is vertical, with the head 
hanging down, that its movement 
in the ocean is also vertical with 
a vertical range of about half a 
mile, that the little shell is completely enclosed in the mantle, 
and that there are two small fins 
at the rear end of the mantle — 
that is, on top. Between the fins 
there is a luminous organ. 
nphe shell-producing octopod 
that has been known for the 
longest time, namely since classical antiquity, because it occurs in 
the Mediterranean, has an appropriate classical name: Argonauta 
argo. Otherwise it is known as 
the paper nautilus because the 
shell it produces is paper thin and 
white and, incidentally, fairly 
elastic. 
But here we are dealing with 
a specialized case that does not 
Fig. 4. Cross section through a Nautilus, 
showing chambers in the shell. 
have much to do with the general evolution of the cephalopods. 
To begin with, only the female 
forms a shell; the male is shellless and tiny, about half an inch 
long. The female has six normal 
arms and two that are broadened 
into nearly circular disks. A secretion from these two arms, upon 
exposure to the water, forms the 
shell. Classical writers told that 
these two arms were used as sails 
when Argonauta floated at the 
surface. This happens not to be 
true, but modem observers did 
see that they are used as paddles. 
The shell of the paper nautilus 
is not attached to the body anywhere and seems to serve mainly 
as a cradle for the eggs. Argonauts sometimes leaves its shell 
voluntarily, but Italian experts 
are firm in their assertion that it 
will die when removed from the 
shell for any length of time. 
And now we come to the true 
nautilus of the western Pacific, 
sometimes called the “pearly nautilus” because it occasionally 
forms inferior pearls in its shell, 
presumably as a response to a local irritation. That it differs fundamentally from other living 
cephalopods is shown by the fact 
that it has four gills. But it differs in many other ways too. Its 
eyes are not like the lensequipped eyes of the other cephalopods — they are “pinhole 
cameras.” It does not have an 
ink sack, and it lacks salivary 
glands. It has “many” arms instead of eight or ten, but they 
are all short, soft instead of tough, 
and they lack suction cups. Evidently we have here a primitive 
form of the cephalopods, an ancient type that managed to survive without major and probably 
even minor changes. (Fig. 4). But 
the very fact that it survived unchanged shows that Nature made 
a certain invention at an early 
date. 
The animal lives in the large 
front chamber of its shell, but 
maintains a connection with the 
gas-filled smaller chambers by 
means of an appendage (called 
the siphuncle) that goes through 
small holes in the chamber walls, 
all the way back to the smallest 
chambers. Not many observations 
could be made, but it seems that 
there is also a gas bubble in the 
front chamber behind its body. 
When the animal protrudes a 
little from its shell, all the gas 
expands and the whole becomes 
lighter so that it rises to the surface, or to nearer the surface. 
When it squeezes itself back in its 
shell, the gas is compressed and 
nautilus dives deeper. Since Spirula has a similar, though internal, 
chambered shell and a siphuncle, 
it probably uses this method for 
performing its vertical migrations, with the fins used only for 
course corrections. 
Even if one knew nothing about 
the primitive organization of 
nautilus except that it has a 
chambered shell, one would immediately think of the extinct 
forms of cephalopods and wonder 
what connection there is. One 
type of extinct cephalopods goes 
under the name of ammonites 
(Fig. 5). In some areas of E 'rope 
they are the best known fossils, 
and vintners and quarry workers 
have picked them up by the 
dozens each year for hundreds of 
years, probably taking them to 
be gigantic snails. Ammonites 
come in all sizes, from a few 
inches in diameter to the unbelievable Pachydiscus seppenradensis, found near a place named 
Seppenrade a century ago. The 
not quite complete shell measures 
nine feet in diameter. 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
Fig. 5 . Four European Ammonites. 
Ceratites lived during the Middle Triassic (Muschelkalk Seo), Cosmoceras and 
Arletites during the early part of the Jurassic period, while Crioceras lived 
during the Cretaceous period. 
The same vintners and quarry picked up other fossils without 
workers — and the fisherman of knowing what they were. They 
Lyme Regis in England — also were stony round dowels, each 
with one pointed end. The best 
modern comparison is a cartridge 
for an infantry rifle. Even the 
size is about the same in most 
cases. They were called thunderbolts by the populace; educated 
people called them belemnites, 
from Greek belemnon which 
means a crossbow dart. They 
were also remains of ancient 
cephalopoda; the largest known is 
Megateuthis, seven feet in length. 
T^eeling that we don’t know as 
much about them as one 
could wish, I reached for an old 
book on fossils, printed in 1885. 
Well, we still don’t know very 
much, but there certainly has 
been some progress compared to 
four score years ago. This is how 
our current knowledge of the 
evolution of the cephalopods 
looks: 
Late in the Cambrian period, 
about 500 million years ago, the 
first cephalopods made their appearance with the first of the 
“nautiloids.” During the Ordovician period that followed the 
Cambrian period and which lasted about 85 million years these 
nautiloids fantastically increased 
in numbers (most of them still 
with straight, not coiled, shells) 
and they fully Held their own during the 40 milli on years of the 
Silurian period that followed. 
Near the end of the Silurian 
period (that is, about 360 million 
years ago) a separate branch began to split off, the ancestors of 
the later ammonites, the group 
being referred to as “ammonoids” i 
During the following Devonian; 
period (50 million years), the carboniferous period (85 million 
years) and the Permian period 
(25 million years) the nautiloids 
slowly diminished in numbers and 
later on kept diminishing until 
only one form is now left. The 
ammonoids, though all this time, 
held their own until, with the beginning of the Triassic period 
(about 195 million years ago), 
they exploded into multitudes of 
forms, reaching their maximum 
during the Jurassic period that 
followed the Triassic. They were 
still very numerous during the 
Cretaceous period that followed the Jurassic, but at the end of 
the Cretaceous, about 60 million 
years ago, they became completely extinct. Since soft parts of 
bodies rarely fossilize, we don’t 
know what the late ammonites 
looked like; the general impression is that of a kind of super 
nautilus, with true arms and 
modem eyes. We do know that 
some Had ink glands. 
Just at the time the ammonites 
began to flourish, at the beginning 
of the Triassic period, the dibranchiate? made their appearance, at first as belemnites. 
Though the belemnites themselves became extinct, the di
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
dorsal 
shield 
BELEMNITES CLAVATUS 
(Bavarian Lias formation) 
FI®, 6. Cross section through the hard parts of a Jurassic belemnile. Usually 
the rostrum breaks off near the broken line so that only the solid portion 
to the left of the broken line is found. 
braacHiates Have increased in 
numbers ever since. 
Fig. 6 shows a cross section 
through a late and reasonably 
complete belemnite. At the left 
we have the tail end or rostrum; 
it ia solid but must have been inside the mantle while the animal 
was alive. The section I labelled 
“coae” (technically the “pHragmokoa” from Greek phiagmos, 
meaning barricade) shows the location of the tail end of the living 
body. The “cone” then continued 
as the “dorsal shield” (technically the “pro-ostracum”) which 
probably covered the whole back 
to the “neck,” as does the cuttlebone of the living Sepia. 
Because the rostrum looked so 
Heavy, the German paleontologist 
O. Jaekel, in 1902, suggested 
changing the term rostrum to 
pallix (little spike) and visualized 
the belemnites as sticking in the 
bottom mud with these spikes, 
Heads up waving their arms 
about in search of prey like sea 
anemones. 
It was an amusing thought but 
a simple calculation showed that 
a gas bubble filling only half of 
the volume of the “cone" would 
fully compensate for the weight 
of the rostrum. If we assume tail 
fins outside the rostrum, we get a 
form quite like the living Loligo. 
It is known that some belemnites 
Had ink glands, and some especially fine fossils from Lyme Regis 
This scan was produced and 
distributed free by the 
Pulpscans Group. If you 
paid for this digital 
document or a compilation 
of this and other digital 
pulps, you got ripped off. 
But you can still have this 
and more than a thousand 
more pulps for free by 
coming over and joining us 
at pulpscans @yahoogroups . com. 
indicate only six arms for these 
particular belemnites. Faint impressions in the rock have been 
interpreted as a line of curved 
claws along their arms; whether 
they had claws only or claws next 
to suction disks is not known. 
And that is the story so far. 
To go farther, we need not just 
more, but better fossils of ancient 
cephalopods. But if it were not 
for the beautiful living fossil, the 
nautilus, we would be on far more 
shaky ground in tinderstanding 
what lived in the seas while the 
dinosaurs were walking the land. 
— WILLY LEY 
★ ★ ★ ★ ★ 
FORECAST 
Ramond F. Jones is a veteran among science-fiction writers; thirty years 
or so ago he was writing some of the most provocative stories around, 
but in recent years we've seen little of his work. Next month Galaxy plans 
to remedy that lack. The story is a long novelette, which has to do with an 
unusual form of space travel; title is Subway to the Stars. 
Also back with us after much too long a lapse of time is the spry young 
Englishman who, in the sixth decade of his life, decided it was about time 
he got married, did so, and now lives on the outskirts of a pretty little 
town in southern England. You know the one we mean. You know him, 
anyway, if you've read The Day of the Triffids, seen Village of the Damned 
or come across any of the other polished, gentle and literate sciencefiction works signed by the name of John Wyndham. This particular example 
of his work is called A Life Postponed, and it's a novelette. 
Poul Anderson (with The Sharing of Flesh ) and Mack Reynolds (Spying 
Season) will also join us next month; so will two relative newcomers — 
Stephen Goldin and Joseph Green — both of whom are, as it happens, 
graduates of the "first" stories we publish each month in If. They've got 
their degrees now, as you'll see by the stories .... 
FOR YOUR INFORMATION 
The Market In Aliens 
by K. M. O'DONNELL 
Intelligent or not — 
the price was right. 
'T'tie first thing I did when I 
-*• brought the alien home from 
auction was to plop him right 
into the tub. No sense in taking 
chances, even though they had 
assured me as usual that he wag 
strong enough to exist out of the 
acqueous environment for several 
days. These were the same boys 
who had learned only after a lot 
of trial and error that they needed an acqueous environment in 
the first place, of course. The one 
thing I couldn’t take would be 
an alien dying on me right off, 
and thanks to the liars and cheats 
who run these farces, there’s a 
lot of precedent. 
The next thing I did, after I 
established that he was going to 
lie there quietly, breathing slowly, turning the water their characteristic black, was to make a 
Strong drink and call Intercontinental. I didn’t even want to try 
making conversation with him; I 
had gone through that with the 
earlier ones, and it always came 
down to the same frustration, 
backed by whistling. Some day 
they’re going to establish communication with them, and when 
they do, I’ll be happy to talk. 
But until then, it’s absolutely 
pointless. Besides, there is absolutely nothing an alien could say 
that would interest me in the 
slightest, not at this stage of the 
game. 
I was lucky. I got Black, my 
contact, on only the fourth or 
fifth try at the switchboard — 
Inter is in administrative collapse 
like almost everything these days 
— and after reminding him of all 
the favors I had done for him, I 
laid it right on the line. 
“I’ve got one in the bathtub,” 
I said. “A clean Healthy male, in 
the pink of maturity, I’d say. All 
reflexes in order, highly responsive and probably as intelligent 
as hell; he’s piping a blue streak. 
I just got him this afternoon.” 
Black shrugged, a common 
business technique, and then cut 
off his viewscreen. “Don’t need 
it,” he said. “We’re already overstocked.” 
“You need this one. Prime of 
life and all that. Furthermore, I 
was able to get him reasonable, 
and I can pass that saving right 
on to you.” 
tCQorry,” Black said. “We just 
^ don’t need it right now. 
These things Haven’t been moving as well as we had hoped in 
the last month. People are tired 
of them, and I think there’s a lot 
of guilt building up too. What 
the hell, they may be intelligent 
with these space machines and 
all. Speaking personally, I think 
the bottom has fallen out of your 
craze.” 
“Never,” I said. “You’re talking about the whole appeal.” 
“You don’t understand psy
chology. Not to get involved, 
though, and just because I’m curious, what would you want for 
it?” 
“Five hundred.” 
“Five hundred wEat?” 
“Dollars,” I said. Black was 
my contact at Inter; I Had sold 
him eight aliens at more or less 
fair prices. Nevertheless, all that 
sentiment aside, he could drop 
dead most of the time, as far as 
I’m concerned. 
“OH. I thought you meant five 
Hundred cents. At that level, we 
might have something to talk 
about, for taxidermic purposes 
anyway. But I can’t use it, Harry. 
We can’t move the stock we got. 
I tell you, the word is out on 
these things, now with the research. We don’t know what we’ve 
Hooked into.” 
“Three hundred,” I said, cutting 
out my own viewscreen* letting 
Black drift in uncertainty for a 
few moments, a legitimate Business technique. “For you. Just 
for the turnover. Hell, I got him 
at 275 so you can see that I’m 
practically crying.” 
“No, Harry. Speaking seriously, I probably could take him off 
your Hands at 150, maybe '175 if 
he shapes up. We could sneak it 
through. But I couldn’t ask you 
to take a loss like that, could I? 
A friend is a friend. Try Franchise.” 
“I will if I have to. But I don’t 
THE MARKET IN ALIENS 
like Franchise. I consider you my 
closest friend in this business, 
Black. Just to keep that relation' 
ship alive, I’ll let you Have Himi 
at cost price. All right, say 250. 
Just to Have 4he lines opened.” 
I Bad bought the alien for 100, 
land the auctioneer had been practically begging for that figure; 
Black was right about the bottom having fallen out. Nevertheless, I hated to concede a point. 
It was the first step to losing 
money, and I hadn’t lost a cent 
on the freaks yet. Not one. And 
not ever. 
Black sighed and put his viewscreen on again, gave me a good 
View of some cigarette-work. 
”200,” He said, “and you’ll have 
to deliver, and the beast better 
pass.” 
”225 and you make pickup. 
And he’ll pass. He was trying to 
Sing me a lecture in there before.” 
Black showed me some smoke. 
”210 and I’ll make pickup.” 
( ( T'vone,” I said, and flipped on 
my own viewsceen, projected some sensitive profile-action. “How soon you be over?” 
‘We’ll have a crew in about 
half an hour. You better get it 
sedated, Harry. Some of the 
crew! are getting nervous about 
this whole business, now. I don’t 
want any of that whistling.” 
“Leave it to me.” 
“Don’t overdose him now.” 
13d 
“Don’t worry about a thing,” 
I said. “I treat them right. He’s 
in perfect shape and He’ll stay 
that way, and he’ll be quiet as 
the tomb on the way over. You’ll 
Have the usual certificate for me, 
won’t you?” 
“Of course. You know how we 
do business. Personally, Harry, 
to loosen up a bit, I tell you that 
I don’t see much of a future in 
this business for either of us, not 
with these latest reports. But I 
agree that you always came 
across with fair merchandise, and 
if He’s a nice specimen, we might 
be able to turn him over to a 
lab, skip the zoo-route completely. I’ll do this for old time’s sake, 
but the lab pays only about 300, 
I want you to know, so who’s 
taking the loss here?” 
“Maybe the alien, is that whaf 
you’re trying to tell me?” I said, 
and switched off altogether. The 
hell with them. Unctuous bastard. 
If anybody was going to get crucified first, though, it was going 
to be the Blacks, not me. I was 
only performing a service for a 
public demand, and I could prove 
it. 
I went into the bathroom, feeling pretty disgusted with the 
whole conversation, and looked 
at the alien for a while. He was 
in a semi-doze, one of the usual 
comas, the eyes bright and fixated on me as He moved slowly 
on his back. His tentacles were 
twitching. No whistling, no gestures though. 
“Only a few minutes for you 
Eere and you’re gone, boy,” I 
said. I always try to communicate with them; / never said they 
weren’t intelligent. Deep inside 
me there is the belief that a bit 
of soul exists in everything. Hell, 
maybe they came to earth to cure 
us; how the hell do I know? 
When I see it, I’ll believe it, that’s 
all I know. 
I locked the bathroom door 
and went into the den and watched television for a time, waiting 
for the crew to come. As usual, 
Black’s boys were late. A bulletin 
came on saying that yet another 
of their ships had landed somewhere near Lake Michigan, the 
second in a week in that general 
area, and that the usual procedures were being followed. That 
relieved the depression a bit. It 
meant that if they were efficient 
there for a change, the auctidn 
would probably be ready to go 
by day after tomorrow. Detroit 
was a nice city; I hadn’t seen it 
for a while. So I called United 
and booked flight, taking coach; 
no sense overdoing pleasure with' 
business. 
Some time after that, just before the crew finally came, one 
of those damned scientists came 
on in an interview with the usual 
recent crap about mass guilt and 
stellar communication, and I 
switched that right off. The profit 
on the sale, less the airline deposit, left me with fifty clear and 
what I did was to call Ginny and 
take her out. We went to the 
zoo where I showed her the two 
specimens which were mine. On 
my own level, I’m very sentimental about the freaks. 
— K. M. O’DONNELL 
Next Month in IF 
CREATURES OF LIGHT 
An Extract from a Brilliant New Novel 
by Roger Zelazny 
NOW THAT MAN IS GONE 
by James Blish 
WHERE THE TIME WENT 
by James H. Schmitz 
— plus many other great science-fiction stories and features in 
the big November issue of If — the world's award-winning sf magazine! 
THE MARKET IN ALIENS 
The years whisk away like 
calendar pages . and new 
men strive against new fates ! 
inglake opened Hie thick, 
leather-bound, log book with 
distaste for the chore that lay 
ahead. It was no help to know 
that it was his own fault. If he 
had spent a few minutes each 
week keeping it up to date, he 
would not be faced now nearly 
a year’s arrears of entry. 
April. The crudest month. 
Nothing put down in the log book 
since September last. He fished 
in an untidy drawer for a vacation schedule. He would need to 
look up dates for periods when 
the school had been closed. 
The rhythmic thump of a pile 
driver started up again and his 
solid brass asH bowl began to 
sidle over the desk top. 
His long, thin, old-man’s hand 
reached out automatically for a 
black briar pipe, and He filled it 
carefully in a delaying tactic. 
With blue, fragrant smoke 
wreathing gratefully round his 
bead, He started again. 
It was a long record, running 
from the school’s building in 1892. 
Copperplate entries on the first 
pages. Signed every now and then 
by visiting inspectors to confirm 
that the children of the deserving 
poor were being put through their 
paces and kept in good order. 
Some of the entries were about 
rickets and Head lice — up to 
scratch, as they used to say. Not 
much of that now. Still some, 
though, in spite of the Welfare 
State. A Hard core that even the 
phalanx of do-gooders could not 
winkle out of squalor. 
He read the entry for November 11th, 1918. News of the Armistice had come in the course of 
the morning. The boys had been 
assembled in the school hall and 
had cheered for the return of their 
brothers and fathers. Well, children would cheer for a black pig. 
He wondered if they had been 
any more socially or politically 
conscious of what it was all about 
than a similar group would be 
today. Probably not. 
The headmaster Had sent the 
janitor down to the town hall to 
ask for the rest of the day as a 
holiday. Not granted; some regu
lation was against it. Millions of 
dead and the opening of a new 
era, but the books had to be neat. 
Morning sunlight came from 
tall narrow windows. He was 
grateful for the warmth in it. 
Blood getting thin. How many 
more winters could he stand? Retirement at the end of the session. 
Good or bad? More of Enid with 
her iron tongue and uncertain 
temper. That was a line of speculation He did not want to follow. 
He turned quickly through a 
hundred pages to his last entry. 
Changes of style in writing marked the careers of his predecessors 
in the post. Many of them careful record keepers. How would 
the next man assess his own crabbed contribution? 
Not many pages to body out 
twenty-five years. Bald statements of opening and closing. 
Many teachers, many children 
come and gone. What Had He 
done Himself? Not a lot. Kept 
the lunatic fringe of so-called 
progressives at bay. Allowed His 
staff freedom to do their job’. 
In the yellow light, He could 
see that the room was full of dust 
from the extensive alterations that 
were going on. All this wing was 
due to come down and be remodeled. 
Maybe it was the dust that was 
making Him light-headed. He had 
noticed it for the last two days 
particularly, like the beginning 
LOCUST YEARS 
of a feverish cold, with items in 
peripheral vision sliding about. 
The thump of the machine 
seemed to catch a harmonic of 
his heartbeat, and he felt suddenly that it; was controlling his 
breathing. Too much tobacco. 
He’d have to knock that off, or 
at least save it for the home front, 
where there was more need for a 
euphoric. 
A voice at his elbow surprised 
him; He had neither seen nor 
heard Prenton come in. 
“Are you all right, Mr. Kinglake?” There was a note of eager 
concern in the craft specialist’s 
voice. He was one who found a 
macabre delight in human pathology. So far, in their quarter 
century of brink confrontation, 
he had not yet had the pleasure 
of finding Kinglake in anything 
but health’. 
“All right? Of course I’m all 
right. What is it?" 
“The contractors, Mr. Kinglake. I promise you I’ll have to 
put in for a transfer if you don’t 
get them to see reason.” 
“What’s worrying you?” 
Prenton had a responsibility for 
general discipline at the boys’ end 
of the building. 
“It’s that hole, Mr. Kinglake. 
There was no call for that excavation! They should have waited 
till we were off the site. I tell you 
it’s like a mine shaft. Anybody 
falling in there has had His dinner 
I can tell you. Aye, and his tea.” 
T^inglake found that He heard 
the words as though his ears 
had been shifted away from his 
head and were passing on the 
data through a bad line. He forced himself to go through the motions of lighting a match and 
saw the flame tremble as he put 
it across the bowl of his briar. 
But the words seemed to come 
clearly enough. “Don’t worry 
about it, man. Nobody is going 
to fall in. They’ll put barriers up 
before the end of the morning.” 
“Barriers, barriers! No barriers 
are going to stop some of these 
little devils from getting near. 
Right at the boys’ door there. My 
flesh creeps every time they come 
out.” 
"I’ll talk to the foreman. Maybe they can put up a solid screen. 
It won’t be there long. I know 
they start pouring in the filling 
today.” 
Suddenly he felt ice-cold, as 
though he had been spotlighted 
in a beam of refrigeration. 
He clenched his teeth on the 
mouthpiece of his briar and controlled his voice with an effort. 
There was definitely something 
wrong. Pride made him determined to face it alone. He said, “Very 
well, Mr, Prenton, I’ll see to it. 
Leave it with me.” 
A form of words. How often 
had He used it? How often Had 
he found that there was nothing 
profitable to be done? 
He Heard the clamor of the 
construction work break in on 
Him as the door opened and mute 
slightly again as Prenton pulled 
it closed behind Kim . The walls of 
the room were shimmering as 
though He was looking at them 
through the convection currents 
above a coke brazier. 
A solid, dependable artifact — 
the brass, cauldron-shaped ash 
bowl — Had shifted itself until 
it was chocked against the spine 
of the log book. He put both 
Hands out and grasped it by its 
two lug Handles. 
From dead cold, he was now 
almost unbearably Hot. The bowl 
was vibrating like a dowser's rod. 
A focus for more thermal agitation than could be explained by 
the shaft of dusty sunlight falling 
there. His head was pulsing. 
Swelling and contracting like a 
pump diaphragm. Beating up to 
hit a frenetic rhythm, as though 
it was aligning itself to a fluctuating power field concentrated 
suddenly in this place. 
Something Had to go. Something Had to break. Kinglake was 
fighting to breathe. 
His own face, distorted by curvature, stared back at him from 
the polished surface. But was it 
his own face? It was plumped 
out. No wrinkles. Under forty 
you would think. A blue strip 
LOCUST YEARS 
under the chin puzzled him, and 
he saw one hand go up to his 
throat . 
fpHe wrist was momentarily 
strange; for one thing, it carried a multi-colored flat disk on 
a metallic strap. Yet he knew it 
was His. He was not leaving a 
familiar scene for a fantasy; but 
waking from a fantasy into reality
He Had been pulled through an 
iron gate into a new now, which 
was at once strange and not 
strange. The brief seconds that it 
took to orient himself were 
enough to sink the past. 
Kinglake was long gone. 
In front of him was the site 
console. He slivered and stretched. Too many late nights and early mornings. A lot of work to get 
through before the end of the day 
shift. 
His name was on the panel: 
Sam Taylor. He wondered why 
it Had momentarily seemed as 
though it belonged to somebody 
else. 
Both hands forward on the coordinator, He eased it along to 
take up some slack that had developed in his short catnap. Excavators were trailing on disposal 
cars; already two tubs were waiting to be filled and a third coming into the screen from the far 
comer of the site where it Had 
tipped its load. 
Nothing was seriously out of 
phase; but he prided Himself on 
keeping a sustained and balanced 
flow of effort. Also there was 
some waste. The waiting tubs 
were consuming' as much energy 
as they would if they were working and He had a budget to meet. 
Sam Taylor traversed the site 
and ran the data into a computer 
bank as it came from his long, 
oblong scanner. 
His machinery was all round 
the perimeter, like a siege train. 
Diggers, stabilizers, gyro jacks. 
He was virtually holding the old 
building up with one Hand and 
slipping in a new set of foundations. 
Tape chattered out to give Him 
a written gloss on the state of the 
operation. All to plan. Bore samples Had given a forecast of density and cohesive index that was 
being justified to a fraction of a 
per cent . Except at the corner 
of the site nearest His operations 
room. 
That was where the Holdup 
was. There was satisfaction in 
finding that it was something he 
could not have been expected to 
foresee. A development outside 
the probability level at which he 
was working. 
He pressed a request button for 
his works technician. He had a 
labor force of three for this assignment, all skilled maintenance 
men. They were Hardly neces
sary except for fine adjustments 
and some resetting of the robot 
tools when He wanted a change 
of function. Williams took a minute to answer the call, and Sam 
Taylor suspended work on the 
foundation for the new tower 
block. There was plenty to do 
elsewhere. It was a major reconstruction of the old polytecH. 
Sweeping through a physical 
education space, He paused for 
the recreational pleasure of focusing on the girl wKo was leading 
a class through a calisthenic drill. 
Helda Greer. An athletico-somafic type, currently poised in art 
arabesque that would Have Had 
Rodin’s dry bones rattling round 
for a hammer and chisel. 
Williams, coming through the 
door at His back, said sourly, 
“Must be an Amazon. That sort’s 
no good. I like something you can 
get Hold of.” He knew it would 
needle Taylor and it was one in 
a long line of jabs He Had been 
making since they started the assignment. 
At forty-nine Theo Williams 
had twice missed the regrading 
which should have put Him in the 
executive slot. He reckoned it as 
an insult to be put to work under 
a man who had stepped straight 
into control from a desk at Construction Faculty. 
Sam Taylor knew it and He 
had sidestepped every confrontation. He wanted the job to go 
well and he was prepared to move 
a long way in a man-management 
ploy. This time, However, He 
twisted round and took a steady 
look at the narrow, Welsh face of 
Eis top Hand. 
There was no mistaking the 
dark pleasure of malice. He said, 
evenly, “Okay, Williams, keep 
your mind on the job, and, we’ll 
get along. Take this sample. Run 
it through the analyzer and see 
what we have.” 
XT Williams hesitated for a long 
’ ’ second, then lifted the shining metal cylinder he had brought 
in and fed it into the receptor slot 
on the console. His back was eloquent enough; it said as plainly 
as if He Had spoken it out, “All 
right, you clever young bastard. 
You’re the boss. But I’ll wait my 
time.” 
Taylor went on with His review. 
Only ten minutes to the midday 
break. Then he would Have to 
stop work and leave the gear on 
safe while the two thousand students on the site milled around 
for their recreation period. He 
was meeting Helda in the staff 
refectory. Maybe she would be in 
a mood where He could push His 
case along, get her nearer a frame 
of mind to accept a marriage contract. 
Tracking through a practical 
History room, h’e stopped long 
enough to watch’ a woolly mam
moth materialize in the clear projection arena, behind floor-toceiling grilles of tough insulator. 
It was at the end of its tether. 
Bristling with’ throwing spears, 
literally foreshortened, because 
its front legs were sunk to the 
knees in a pit. Twenty stocky 
tribesmen were yelling their Heads 
off and pitching lianas over its 
back to anchor it down. 
Watching, the History projectors could be a life’s work. In 
fact, it would need to be for somebody, or all that redirected imagery would run to waste again. It 
was twenty years now since the 
first reflector probes had intercepted those etiolated ripples 
which had gone out from the 
Earth’s past and were still streaming away carrying pictures of the 
present. Accelerated and amplified, they were being beamed 
back again to give the first authentic reconstruction of time 
past. Not that it Had been done 
without teething troubles. The 
massive forces needed in the amplification stages had been hard 
to Handle. Spillover and freak effects Had been common. Some 
projection arenas Had been turned into charred ruin. There had 
been some doubt about whether 
His own influx of electronic machinery would unsettle the field. 
But as of now the projection 
looked okay. 
If He Hadn’t settled for engi
143 
LOCUST YEARS 
neering, Taylor reckoned He 
could have made a career in History. There was a lot to do. So 
far, it was a Hit and miss business 
to get the probes in the rigfit 
place. No selective refinement was 
yet possible. Particular places and 
particular times could not be isolated. But wKat Had been tapped 
put every record tKat Had ever 
been made out of date. Somewhere along the line, sometime, 
tKey would find the piece that 
finished the jigsaw of man himself. 
Williams broke in with, “It’s a 
mixture of straight concrete and 
a plastic filler. Some local soil 
variant acted as catalyst and the 
stuff went dense. It Happens.” 
“Not often. What’s the index?” 
“Fifteen per cent over what 
you gave as the maximum tolerance for auto adjustment” 
“The “you” was stressed just 
enough to suggest that Williams 
himself would not have been so 
stupid. 
Taylor went systematically 
round his console bringing everything to safe. Work ceased all 
round the perimeter. He could 
take a look at the rogue section 
before He started up for the afternoon run. Meanwhile His tolerance for Williams’s attitude was 
wearing thin. 
He said, “We used standard 
sampling practice. There was no 
way of knowing that there was 
a deviant patch at the tower foundation. But since you’ve brought 
it up, we’ll be sure. Make a fresh 
sampling at meter intervals, 
round the tower. See How far the 
condition goes. I’ll look at it before we start up.” 
In spite of the reasonableness 
of the tone, Williams recognized 
it as a turn of the screw. “That’ll 
take an hour. On my own time.” 
“If it’s time you want, Williams, I can arrange all the time 
in the world. The next Labor 
Board is Thursday. By Thursday 
week you could be on a ship for 
Xuthus, where they need all the 
civil engineers they can get.” 
It was the first time he had 
cracked the whip, and He waited 
for Williams to counter. It was a 
real enough threat, though. As 
engineer-in-charge, He Had absolute cbntrol of the work force and 
an adverse report could get any 
one of them up for redeployment. 
Coupled with a memo on attitude, it would be enough to close 
promotion prospects for all time. 
When it came, Williams’s response was almost deferential. 
“No need for that, Controller. Of 
course I’ll see to it right away.” 
'E'ager eyes, light-brown Hair 
curving into the nape of Her 
neck. Still wearing a pale-yellow 
practice leotard that blended in 
like a simple color cHange of 
brown skin, Helda Greer was al
ready waiting at a window seat 
table. Sam Taylor, making an approach run from Her left and 
unobserved until He spoke into 
tKe shell ear turned His way, 
would have preferred some quote 
of cosmic grandeur, but in actual 
fact said, “Hi. Sorry I’m late.” 
THeo Williams, watching it 
sourly on tKe scanner, rated it 
Higher than it deserved, working 
on the girl’s warm smile of welcome and the quick turn of the 
Head that sent Her Hair moving 
under centrifugal urge. “The 
smooth young bastard.” He toyed with the idea of dropping a 
non-recurrent sKock wave on the 
table and then reconsidered. “I’ll 
fix Him all rigfit and I’ll fix Him 
good. This project means a lot to 
Him. When I’ve finished. He’ll 
wisH He’d never taken it on.” 
He fish'ed round the site, waiting for the idea that was still in 
the germ stage to grow by division. 
In the History arena, the actualizer was still transmitting. A 
few students were watching tKe 
mammoth through its last agonifcs. Interrupting' that would be 
something. Part of the contract 
was an assurance that there would 
be no interference with the work 
of th'e college. 
He made some adjustments. He 
gathered a ball of free energy 
from the idle machines and Held 
it in a magnetic field. Enough to 
heat and light a fair-sized town. 
Dropping that in the arena would 
shatter any wave pattern thereabout. Taylor would Have to take 
the responsibility, and it would 
take some explaining away. 
With nice calculation, He aimed 
for the center of the beast* s foreKead and collapsed the containing lines of force. 
For a count of three, He believed he was on the wrong tack. 
Then matter from round the 
scene began to fold in. He saw a 
group of students scatter and try 
for the door. There was a trembling in tKe structure beneatH His 
own feet. Two men and a girl, 
who Had been standing up close 
to the barrier, were drawn through 
it in a mash and seemed to be 
sucked into the animal’s slab side. 
It reared up. Trailing ropes 
snapped like thread. In a ferocious concentration of energy, it 
Heaved its foreleg out of tKe pit 
and was charging for the barrier. 
Williams tried to re-establish 
the field beam, but His hands were 
slippery with sweat. Suddenly 
clumsy. He reinforced the plasma. 
A cfiarred swathe of destruction 
blacked across the screen. 
He threw the master key and 
killed output. Now Ke could Hear 
some of the racket that was coming from inside the building. It 
was time to get out. 
He picked up His gear and made 
for the tower excavation. He 
would be discovered busy about 
bis master’s business, zeal from 
tfie sole of His foot to His widow’s 
peak. 
WHen tfie plastic wall of tfie 
partition at His back shattered towards Him and a massive semitransparent Head broke tfirougfi, 
fie was leaning over tfie Hole, 
guiding a sampling tube into tfie 
deptfis. Turning and stepping 
back carried Him over tfie tfiresfiold of no return. 
He was falling even before tfie 
leading edge of turbulence nudged into His side. 
Qam Taylor Heard the outbreak 
^ of cfiaos from tfie refectory 
and tfiougfit at first that some of 
His Holding jacks had crumpled. 
He was out tfirougfi tfie door 
two seconds afiead of tfie nearest 
diner, unaware tfiat Helda was 
less tfian a meter befiind Him. 
Tfiey were in a spiral circulation space tfiat ran like a processional way to tfie Heart of tfie 
polytecH complex. Older elements 
of tfie building showed up at intervals. Part of Taylor’s assignment was to rationalize tfie structure and bring it all up to 22nd 
Century specification. 
Nearing tfie History arena at 
tfie center, He passed tfie turnoff 
for Kis control cabin. That would 
save time. He checked, turned 
and cannoned into Helda. Tfiere 
was a brief second to register tfiat 
she was fully with him in this, 
concerned that it should not be 
any fault tfiat could be pinned 
on Him. 
“In here! Use tfie screen to find 
out wfiat happened!” 
Methodically, He started at tfie 
middle and went out in concentric sweeps. It was easy enough to 
pick up. Devastation started in 
tfie wrecked arena and trailed out 
in tfie wake of some moving 
agent. Random movement, difficult to get a direction. 
Then tfiey saw it. Tfie energy 
ball filling out tfie mammoth 
shape Had blundered tfirougfi a 
relatively thin partition wall and 
Had come up against a piece of 
the old fabric. Solid stonework 
that Had once been an outside 
wall. Tfie mammotfi was nudging 
at it, swaying backward and forward a meter at a time. Somehow, 
the mind structures of tfie original beast were imposing a behavior pattern on the composite 
form. Rhythmic vibration was 
carried through to the floor at 
their feet 
Helda said, “I can’t believe it!” 
“Believe it or not, He’ll Have 
that wall down.” 
“Wfiat can you do?” 
Taylor was checking round to 
gather a power surge. Tfie positions of the controls worried Him. 
They were already in rougfi adjustment. 
With a sudden intuition, he 
IOCUST YEARS 
knew tliat they Had been used before. Williams! It had to be Williams. He had triggered this off. 
If that were so, another injection of plasma would be the worst 
thing. *■ 
Trying to reason it out, He 
said aloud, “It hasn’t all that 
much’ power or it wouldn’t be 
balked by that wall. Therefore we 
can neutralize it with enough inert material.” 
Near the tower, He had already 
lined up a caterpillar dumper, set 
to pour in new foundation material. In ten seconds flat, he was in 
its rugged cab With the controls 
on manual, spinning it slowly on 
its tracks. 
Helda said, “Is there anything 
I can do?” 
“Hold onto your seat.” 
The machine was never meant 
for crossing rubble. They leaned 
at a crazy angle as he followed 
the path the mammoth had taken when it backed away from 
Williams. 
Alarm bells were ringing in every corridor. A group of senior 
staff crossed their path, and he 
waved them away. The dumper 
was adding to the structural damage, and his mind was racing with 
calculation to assess if the building would take any more or fold 
up round them. 
The mammoth was still there, 
and edged round clumsily to face 
them. Small red eyes, set in a no
149 
tional, half-resolved head; stupid 
with pain and anger; level with 
the high-driving seat. 
As it lumbered forward, Taylor opened the sluice, 
A meter- wide jet of gray insulator hit between its tusks 
and began to set as it came into 
the air. Movement forward stopped. Head waving sluggishly from 
side to side, the mammoth tried 
to weigh up a menace which nothing in its past had prepared it for. 
Then it was knee deep, with 
the first layers already rock hard. 
He shifted the chute and set hoop 
bands over its back and then filled in, until there was a tight cocoon of material hiding it from 
sight 
When it was done, there was 
only a gray block, half filling the 
room. God, that would take some 
shifting! The foundation material 
was designed for use where it 
would never have to be moved 
again. There would be days of 
work there, with a labor gang 
chipping it out with lasers. 
Taylor sat still and considered 
fiis losses. Hardly a possibility of 
meeting contract date. And nobody was going to fall over backwards to make excuses for him. 
He’d bet all Lombard Street to a 
china orange that they would pull 
him back to the head office and 
send in another engineer. 
Another aspect of the affair 
struck home. Demoted from the 
top slot, he was in no position to 
push ahead for Helda. Only executive grades could jump the 
statutary age requirement. She 
wouldn’t be around in three years 
time. 
He said with Heavy finality, 
“That’s it, then. I’ll have to report this to Auto Union. There’ll 
be an investigation unit down 
within the Hour.” 
“But it isn’t your fault.” 
“Indirectly it may be.” He offered no other explanation and 
pushed past her to get through 
the Hatch. “Don’t hang about 
here. There may be more to come 
down.” 
One thing he could do — and 
that right away — was find Williams and squeeze the pips out of 
him. He had to know just what 
had set this up. 
The principal of the college, 
tall, balding, white-faced, met 
him outside his office. “I knew I 
should never have agreed to this 
work while the college was in 
session! Somebody will pay for 
this. Do you know there are seven 
students missing? Costly equipment ruined! Rooms smashed! 
We shall have to close.” 
“What makes you think I had 
any part in it? That projection 
developed out of your History 
arena. It Had to be stopped.” 
“Of course. Of course. But what 
made the actualizer fail? There 
are eye-witnesses, technicians at 
the actualizer control. An external power field was brought in. 
A failure, to say the least, in 
your equipment. Criminal charges 
could lie against your company. 
Criminal carelessness.” 
Sam Taylor knew the man Had 
a point; but he was too bitterly 
aware of the personal angles to 
try for conciliation. “All right. 
You’ll have your say. As for now, 
get off my back. See that all personnel are clear of the building. 
There may be more danger of 
collapse. I’ll make it safe.” 
A fter thirty minutes of intensive 
effort, with his machines 
moving along silent corridors, 
shoring, rebuilding, clearing rubble, he was satisfied. 
With the extension plans etched 
on his mind like a blueprint, He 
worked on lines that would fall in 
with' the final requirements for 
the site. In some ways, it was the 
most productive Half hour since 
the assignment had begun. Whoever carried on with it would find 
that there was no major part of 
the emergency work that had to 
be done over. 
He had talked to his other two 
men: Kestler, a heavy, slow-moving Swede who was clearly mystified by the whole business; Andy 
Clarke, elderly, a man of few 
words, one of the best workers in 
the whole Auto-Union labor force. 
LOCUST YEARS 
Neither could have done it. Nor 
did they know where Williams 
could be. 
TKe sampling gear was out of 
its rack. Sam Taylor reckoned He 
could start from there. Williams 
could have gone to the tower excavation. 
He took Kestler and Clarke 
along. If Williams was in a homicidal mood, he would need Help. 
In the event, it was Kestler who 
found the operating cable for the 
sampler, “Here, Controller. He 
was working here.” 
There was a thirty-meter drop 
and a slow swirl of white sludge 
at the bottom, with' darker patches that could be the outline of a 
body. Water had been coming in 
from the subsoil. 
Taylor said, “Rig a line. I’ll go 
down." 
Thigh’ deep, Ke found solid 
ground under his feet and Had to 
walk clumsily to catch Williams 
and lean him up against the central lump of foundation that His 
diggers had been working Hard 
to clear. 
As a witness for any side Williams now could only be readied 
by a crystal ball. Taylor ran His 
Hands over the dense material of 
the column. Since He was there, 
he might as well pick up a sample for himself. Other faces were 
looking down from the rim, a ring 
of heads staring at the trog in the 
Hole. 
They saw him gather in the 
sampling shuttle and activate it 
like a drill against the wall. They 
saw a long dark crack appear, as 
if the material had a flaw in it, 
and a ragged, oblong slab two 
meters high fall out, so that Taylor had to throw himself clear to 
get from under. 
Wh'at they did not immediately 
see was the dark cavity that it 
revealed and the well preserved 
body of a man who fixed him 
with sightless eyes in a face that 
was an older version of his own, 
before the air got to his vacuumsealed flesH and it disintegrated 
into dust. 
Qam Taylor collected his per^ sonal files and zipped them in 
a document case. Reaction from 
Auto Union Had been as swift as 
Ke guessed it would be. Suspension Had been immediate and a 
relief engineer was even now on 
His hotfoot way. There was no 
doubt, either, How the inquiry 
would go. 
He sat at the console, checking 
that he was leaving a straight 
edge for His successor. It was, 
anyway, something to do and 
gave his mind a non-self-regarding focus. 
Helda Greer was standing behind him before he had registered 
that she Had come through the 
door. 
“I Heard you were going and 
GALAXY 
I came right away. I’m sorry. It 
wasn’t your fault.” 
“THafs all right. It was. I 
ought to have known Williams 
was a nut.” 
“That makes two people you 
couldn't weigh up.” Her hands 
were on his shoulders and she was 
meeting His eyes in the reflection 
on the blank scanner. 
“Two people?” It was not a 
feint He really did not know 
what she was getting at. 
“You’re making this very hard 
for a well brought up girl. I’m 
sorry about the job; because I 
know what it means to you. But 
I’m not a status-seeker. It doesn’t 
make any difference as far as I’m 
concerned.” 
Sam Taylor sat very still. Obs|jnately he Had to be sure. “It 
wall be three years before I can 
offer a contract.” 
“I can wait three years.” Her 
Bead was over his shoulder, Bair 
a fragrant, silk pad against His 
cEeek. She quoted softly, “I will 
restore to you the years that the 
locust Has eaten.” 
Even the pale image in the 
screen carried the affirmative. An 
earnest that it was indeed so. Obscurely, He felt that there was a 
pattern in it. It seemed inevitable, 
now that it was out and said. As 
though something prepared a long 
time ago Had come to fruition. 
Helda Bad moved round between 
Eim and the screen and leaned 
back on the sloping presentation 
table. Taylor felt a sudden lightening of spirit as if the old man 
of the sea Had been lifted off His 
back. 
He put His Hands on either side 
of her Head. 
In the History Projection Lab' a 
maintenance mecH snapped back 
the last panel of a long spread. 
“Well, it’s okay. Nothing gone 
dis. You say it’s been working 
true? God knows why. Must Have 
been leaking harmonics all over 
th’e opera. You’ve been dead 
lucky there were no side effects 
of your own making. Don’t 
spread it about, or the legal boys 
won’t Have a cast against Auto 
Union.” 
T^inglake looked stupidly at the 
^ brass bowl between His Hands 
as tKougB Ee Had not seen it before in His life. 
How long He Had been sitting 
with His arms stretched forward 
on His desk, he could not tell. 
But His erect back twinged stiffly 
as He moved. 
Now there was no room for 
doubt. He would Have to see the 
quack. Get Home if possible. Better to phone from there. Ought 
He to drive His car? Hell, Be was 
past caring. He felt cold, with an 
indefinable sense of loss. As 
though the most important thing 
in the world Bad been taken from 
Eim. WHat was that, then? There 
LOCUST YEARS 
were precious few things he cared 
one way or the other about. That 
was age for you; he had been 
dying by increments for years and 
now the cumulative check had 
been rung up. 
Kinglake hearted himself out of 
his chair. When he was standing, 
his legs felt curiously light and 
tubular. His footsteps came to 
him as though his ears were twice 
as far from the ground as usual. 
A short dogleg corridor ran 
from his office to the school assembly hall and a small reception 
area inside the main door. 
There was the muffled sound 
of music as a class went through 
a broadcast rhythm and mime 
period. 
As he turned left to make for 
the main door, there was a surge 
of noise at his back as the Hall 
door opened. Someone coming 
out. 
Surprisingly, the girl who was 
closing the swing door was not 
known to him by name. A newcomer. Family Had moved in from 
a neighboring town during the 
week. Still, she would be able to 
pass on the message. 
Supporting himself with one 
hand on the wall, he said, “Just a 
minute — before you rejoin your 
class. Would you be so good as 
to find Mrs. Charlton? Tell her 
I have had to go home. I’ll telephone and let her know when I 
shall be back.” 
She was only two meters away. 
“Are you sure you’re all right to 
go alone, Mr. Kinglake?” 
Now he could see Her clearly. 
Oval face, straight Hair, light 
brown. Very expressive eyes, 
which Held genuine concern, turning suddenly to a puzzled kind 
of recognition as though she was 
seeing someone she knew well, 
but whose name she’d forgotten. 
His voice was the saddest 
sound she had ever Heard and the 
words, made no kind of surface 
sense, though' at a deep level she 
accepted that they were meant 
for Her. 
“Thank you, Helda. Whether I 
like it or not, I shall Have to manage alone for the locust years. 
Find Mrs. Charlton.” 
April sunshine in the porch, 
blinding his eyes. Kinglake put 
down Kis Head and went, unseeing, on a path He Had taken for 
so many years it was part of the 
furniture of his mind. 
It was not until He was in free 
fall He remembered the tower excavation. He clamped His jaw 
tight to hold back a shout and 
hit the bottom erect as a guardsman with his hands stiffly by His 
sides. 
As his feet touched down, the 
first pouring of a new plastic filler surged from the waiting chutes 
and filled the foundations to seven meters above his head. 
— DOUGLAS R. MASON 
THE TELL - TALE 
HEART - MACHINE 
by BRIAN W. ALDISS 
The heart is only a mechanical pump, 
hardly suitable symbol for love — 
unless you look below the surface! 
I Kad to charter a private plane 
to fly down to my country 
place on the island. All the way, 
even more insistent than the 
knowledge that I was ruined, 
I was haunted by the knowledge that, because I could no 
longer afford to be flown home, 
I would have to sell the 
island. It was that last bit of bad 
news that I most dreaded breaking to Jane. 
She met me with the ancient 
Bentley at the airstrip. 
“You look tired, Daddy. You 
are going to be fed and put to 
bed., Thus her first words. 
“You really know how to sap 
a man’s confidence! It’s all nonsense and, anyway, you always 
say that.” 
“It’s always true.” 
"And I always refuse to go to 
bed.” 
She was — well, it was five 
years since Viv was killed — 
yes, Jane was twenty-two. The 
plane crash, the death of her 
mother, my long spell as an invalid . they had distorted her 
life pattern. She was just slightly too bossy; she scared away 
the boys, although she was pretty enough. She drove well. Just 
like her mother. 
It was good to see the House 
again. Mrs. Singer, the Housekeeper, came and said Hello. I 
sat in a chair and relaxed while 
drinks were brought I raised the 
glass, Jane raised Hers. We 
drank. 
God, I thought what Happiness 
I Have survived, and wHat misery! 
“So you and Jerry Keynes are 
thrown out of Lawrence LifeForms, Daddy.” 
“Have you been watcEing the 
battle on TV?” 
She nodded. “You were right 
to stand up for your point of 
view.” 
“The share-holders thought 
otherwise.” 
“Will it Help you to talk about 
it?” There again was the note 
I dread to Hear in Jane. Life 
was passing Her by. She was living out of Her depth. Nobody 
really says: “Will it Help you to 
talk about it?” She Kad picked 
up the phrase from a telly-play. 
“I really am tired,” I said. I’ll 
take your advice, go to bed, sleep 
off the worries of the last week, 
wake like new in the morning.” 
“How’s your Heart, Daddy?” 
“Best bit of me. You know that!” 
We smiled — as we Kad smiled 
before, over those same words. 
As she left me at the top of 
the stairs, she said, “Tomorrow, 
you must come and see the dinosaurs. They like their new pens.” 
“Good!” But of course the dinosaurs would have to go, like 
everything else . 
Deciding to take a shower, I 
undressed slowly in the bathroom. 
In these rooms now, there were 
few reminders of my wife. The 
bedside lamp Had been Hers. She 
Ead chosen the carpet. She smiled 
from a photograph, a distant 
Viv, not enjoying the photographic studio. 
What would she Have said if 
she were alive to see her father, 
the great Sir Frank Lawrence, 
turn His son-in-law and the other 
junior partner out of the firm? 
She Had always known Ke was a 
ruthless man; Lawrence Chemicals Kad been his fathers creation; but the startling synthetic 
life-form developments of the 
nineteen-nineties Had been all 
Frank’s doing, as Ead the establishment of Lawrence Life-Forms. 
I Had helped substantially; but I 
Ead remained a contract man. 
As I sHd out of my vest and 
started the shower running, I 
told myself as he Ead started me 
in the business, He Had now pushed me out of it. THat counted as 
fair play, by worldly standards. 
And He brought His daughter into 
the world, the old bastard! 
I caught sight of myself in the 
long mirror as I climbed into 
the shower. Thin stringy body. 
Forty-five years old, looking 
more like fifty-five. Nothing to 
what I looked like after the 
plane crash, of course. 
I hadn’t touched another woman since Viv died. One of the 
reasons was plain to see. The surgeons Had made a good job of 
the operation, but the flesh across 
toy left breast was puckered and 
distorted by scar tissue. It filled 
toe with distaste still; I never 
wanted to see anyone else flinch 
away from it. 
After breakfast, Jane took me 
to see the steggies and b'rorttos. It was a typical island day, 
with more cloud than you need 
scudding by, but the sun frequently beaming forth. 
"We’re going to Have to sell 
all this, Jane.” 
I suppose I Had thought she 
would Have realized it. But she 
caught Her breath and stopped. 
“You’ll — be able to get another directorship, Daddy?” 
“Not at Frank’s salary.” 
“But you can start up in opposition now, making synthetic 
life of your own." 
“I’m finished with synthetic 
life, Jane. I really believe that 
this is the classic case where 
Man Has over-stepped His powers. Now that Frank has announced His Intention of synthesizing Human bangs, I’m more 
THE TELL-TALE HEART MACHINE 
sure than ever that I’m right. 
We really are pre-empting powers that do not belong to us.” 
Her jaw set. I saw it for the 
first time. She had something of 
her maternal grandfather in Her. 
She too disagreed with me. 
“I’ve never Heard you talk religion before now, father! What 
has been discovered is something 
slowly led up to, capping the 
scientific work of many centuries. You’re afraid of it!" 
“Yes.” 
Her face colored. She burst 
out, “I don’t wonder Grandfather 
threw you out!" With that, she 
turned and hurried away. 
Tlie dinosaurs were a solace, as 
always. They strutted in their 
new cages, before a romantic diorama, munching on the lush 
grass. Jane certainly took good 
care of them. 
These were the first animals 
to be synthesized. It Had been 
my idea to start on dinosaurs, 
building from fragments of bone 
presented from a museum. We 
Had four stegosaurs, two brontosauri wallowing in a little pond, 
and a brace of iguanadon. They 
stood about six inches High and 
were, of course, sterile. Nowadays, we — Lawrence Life-Forms, 
I mean — do considerably better. 
In a separate cage was a super 
little tyrannosaur, eight inches 
high, prowling about with cat 
movements, glaring at me. 
I stood for a long time, wondering what we had started. Synthetic life . When we had not 
solved one tithe of the problems 
of natural life . And Frank 
was promising {iis newly constituted board to Have a synthetic 
serving-man on the market 
within five years . 
In the end, rather than think 
about it, I wandered back to the 
house. 
T^'rank was there, standing 
against the empty fireplace. 
Jane stood near him. Mrs. Singer 
had brought them sherry. As I 
took in the scene, I realized I Had 
heard a helicopter fly over, but 
had taken no notice. 
“You shouldn’t Have come,” 
I said harshly. I thought that at 
sixty-five he looked as if he Had 
more years to go than I; but he 
was never involved in a plane 
crash. 
“THe board room battle was 
one thing,” he said. “You and 
Jerry Keynes were just two individuals who stood in my way, 
in the way of what I see as right. 
Privately it is a different matter, 
Robert. Keynes means nothing 
to me, but you are one of the 
family. I feel about you — ” 
“You can’t divorce the two 
sides, Frank,” I said. "I tried to 
go along with them too long; 
now that you’ve chucked me out, 
I don’t have to try.” 
“I didn’t chuck you out, manl 
You got outvoted 1” 
“Out-smarted!” 
“Daddy,” Jane said. “Try to 
listen to what Grandfather is going to say.” 
My anger was rising; I liked 
the feeling. “Don’t tell me — 
he’s going to make an offer!” 
“Wrong, Robert! I Have made 
an offer to Jane, and she Has accepted. I’ve offered her a very 
large sum for this estate.” He 
named the price; it was about 
three times as much as I’d have 
got on the open market. 
“You are forgetting. This is 
my estate, and I sell when I wish 
to whom I wish.” 
“Give it to Jane. She will sell 
it to me. I will give it to her.” 
“I’ve done my last deal wth 
you, Frank.” 
He came up close and said, 
gently, "Let me help you privately, Robert. As a favor to me. 
You know why.” 
“I don’t know why.” 
His gaze dropped. He said, 
“After the plane crash . you 
and Viv lingered near death for 
several days. I realized then How 
I loved my daughter, how little 
I had ever done for her.” 
“Don’t make me weep, Frank. 
I prefer you in your hard-hitting 
role.” 
“Maybe. I Had plenty of time 
to think. You were lying there 
on a Heart-machine; Viv was 
unconscious with irreversible 
brain damage. BotK your lives 
seemed to be suspended wHile 
I made up my mind.” 
“Egotism, Frank!” 
“THose days were years. Remember, my own wife bad died 
Only two months before, and I 
Bad been told she would never 
Save died if I Had turned up 
that last day as I Ead promised.” 
“You stayed at tKe office.” 
“Never mind that. That’s my 
business. I’m talking about you. 
On the tentK day, the surgeons 
decided Viv was dying. That was 
when they flew in the heart-op 
specialist from South Africa — 
at my expense. You know what 
Happened. There was nothing 
wrong with Viv’s heart; her damage was to brain and kidneys. 
They operated. They gave you 
her heart. So you survived.” 
T was shaking. Jane came to me. 
-1- “Why do you bring all this 
up again? Don’t I know it? Don’t 
I live with it every day? What 
are you trying to do, Frank — 
get your daughter’s Heart back 
from me? For God’s sake, you’ve 
done enough — go away!” 
He went to the other end of 
the room, sat down, lit a cigar. 
His Band trembled. 
“Robert, I am not reproaching 
you. In you, a part of my daughter lives, I only want to tell you 
what you did not know. The 
THE TELL-TALE HEART MACHINE 
problems with the heart-op come 
afterwards — in particular th'e 
body’s fight to reject its new 
Heart, the auto-immune reaction. 
You know what the surgeons 
said in your case? They said you 
Hardly manifested that reaction.” 
He stopped to let it sink in. I 
said nothing. 
“Well, it was a question of 
love, wasn’t it? Your mind controlling physical reaction, wasn’t 
it? You really loved Viv. You 
didn’t blame Her even subconsciously for the crash, or the 
usual immune reaction would 
have established itself. You lay 
there unconscious and proved 
your love was perfect.” 
“Would you leave, please, 
Frank? You are a Hard man, as 
you aspire to me. You also have 
a disgusting sentimental streak, 
as do most Hard men. This whole 
notion that love can overcome 
antibodies is sheer sentimental 
fantasy. I was simply a surgical 
case that worked out well — the 
operation is not the hazardous 
thing it was ten years ago.” 
I got up and walked out into 
the garden again. The sun was 
momentarily , shining. I went and 
stood in the shrubbery. Jane 
eventually found me there, 
“Father, I cannot, cannot understand you! I know How much 
you loved mother, and How Hard 
Her death hit you. Why should 
you make yourself out to be so 
callous in front of Grandfather?” 
I decided to touch her, and 
then thought better of it. 
“I can’t accept or attempt 
emotional blackmail, Jane?” 
“You mejjin you won’t do a 
deal with Grandfather!” 
“Of course I won’t do a deal, 
just to salve his conscience!” 
Tlie helicopter whirled overhead, turned, made for the mainland. 
I could see Jane was very angry. “Why the devil should you 
withhold the salving of his conscience? Wh’at special right have 
you to administer a moral law? 
It was precisely because you 
tried to do that that you were 
kicked out of Lawrence LifeForms! Now what future Have 
you? What future have I got, 
either? You’ve let me spend five 
years looking after you — ofi, 
I Have no complaints! — but 
you’re quite ready to see our 
home go down the drain just to 
spite someone who wanted to 
help us I” 
“It was not spite, Jane! It — ” 
“OH, don’t tell me! Ethical 
principles! You and your ethical 
principles! But really, it’s spite, 
isn’t it? You want to Hurt Grandfather — it’s just as simple as 
that! You have mother’s Heart, 
and you Have now taken it 
from Him!” 
“This heart — it’s an organ, an 
anonymous machine! Don’t try 
and build some symbolic thing 
about it! You’re angry and upset, Jane. Don’t say something 
you will regret, don’t spoil the 
relationship between us!” 
“I'm not sure I wan# any relationship with you!” And with 
that she turned and left me. 
So went our family quarrel. 
Nothing was resolved. 
Tt was four and a Half months 
before I saw my daughter 
again. I was living in my town 
flat then, with most of the rooms 
empty of furniture. 
When Jane appeared, I was 
so glad to see Her that at first 
I did not realize How ill she 
looked. 
Se took my Hand and asked, 
“Have you Heard the news?” 
The House was auctioned yesterday,” I said. “It fetched its 
reserve price. You shouldn’t Have 
walked out on me, Jane. At least 
give me the credit of meaning 
well with regard to your grandfather! And our quarrel — yours 
and mine — it must not be final. 
In life, only death is final. Emotional entanglements, financial 
entanglements — they’re never 
final.” 
“I’m going to live my own life, 
Father, from now on.” 
“Good! Do it for good reasons, though, not to defy me. 
Who’s right in all this, who’s 
wrong? I behaved — as I thought 
best. My morality is clear, to me 
at least. But I don’t understand 
Frank’s. Lawrence Life-Forms go 
from strength' to strength. Our 
pocket-sized dinosaurs are nothing now. The world’s zoos will 
soon be stocked with life-size 
dinosaurs. Synthetic human beings are just a few years away.” 
“Father, you could never have 
stopped that development!” 
“They’ll have trouble. I know! 
Am I not myself synthetic?” 
As I said this, I felt my heart 
beating strongly within its scarred cage. I forced myself to say, 
“Jane, I want your respect and 
— and your love. You must love 
me for myself, not just because 
I keep a part of your mother 
alive, as Frank does.” 
“I came to tell you, Father. 
That was my news. Frank shot 
himself yesterday. It’s in all the 
papers.” 
Reaction would come later. “I 
don’t look at newspapers any 
more,” I said automatically; 
then : “Why?” 
“You’ve always been the one 
finding clever reasons,” she said. 
As she looked down challengingly 
at me, I realized how she would 
be keeping something of her 
grandfather alive, down through 
the years. 
—BRIAN W. ALDISS 
MUSIC OF 
TOMORROW 
Here is music composed on computer and transducers, ranging 
from computer-played versions of 
Christmas carols and rounds to the 
complex sounds that offer a new 
dimension in musicology. Composers 
include Dr. John R. Pierce, Dr. M. 
V. Mathews, David Lewin, James 
Tenny, etc, etc. 18 selections on a 
12-inch, high-fidelity, long-playing 
record produced by Decca. A 
“must” for your record library and 
a conversation piece for all occasions. Priced $5.75 postpaid — send 
in the coupon today. 
Galaxy Publishing Corp. 
421 Hudson Street, 
New York City 10014 
Yes, send me my 12-inch hi-fi 
record of Music from Mathematics 
right away. I enclose check or 
money order of $5.75. 
Name 
Address 
City & State Zip Cade .... 
(Offer good In U. S, A. Only j 
THE TELL-TALE HEART MACHINE 
by ALGIS BUDRYS 
Tngratitude . that’s wKat it is. 
-*■ Here’s Judy Merril, who first 
publicized sucH talents as J. G s 
Ballard, and wKo went into caracoles of prosody at such books 
as The Genocides; wKo beat tKe 
drum for New Worlds at least as 
energetically as Columbus ever 
did; wKo is tKe MartKa Foley of 
this genre and as assiduous a 
literary politician; to be bitten by 
the New Thing as she has been 
at the present juncture I Thus: 
“A satisfying ‘Best' volume 
ougfit to meet the following minimum standards: 1. Its contents 
Should be science fiction — which 
means that at the very worst, 
every story ought to contain some 
trace of some science, and at best 
they ought to depend on it. This 
means no fantasies, nothing put in 
solely because the author wrote 
a best-selling mainstream novel in 1920, no political parables and no what-is-its.” So 
says James BlisK, in relation to 
his role as visitor to and latenight privatdozent at the Brian 
Aldiss Home. 
“When she asked me if I enjoyed Her last volume, I replied — 
politely or impolitely (I forget 
which) — that I found it a fascinating slice of autobiography.” 
So says Brian Aldiss. And they 
both say it in Best SF: 1967, 
(Berkley), which’, apart from 
being a very good anthology of 
very good reading, is also an 
unabashed advertisement for New 
Worlds, the English science-fiction magazine; for the New Thing 
as typified by such writers as 
Ballard and Ellison; and for 
literary politics. It is also the 
scene of a remarkably even-tempered and good-humored introduction by Harry Harrison, who 
was the principal editor of this 
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 
volume (Blish supplied the “Credo” which begins it, and Aldiss 
supplied the panoramic essay 
which completes it), saying, 
among other things: “As you will 
Have noticed, he [Blish] clears the 
field for this annual ‘Best* volume 
by shooting down the other entrants. Perhaps this uncompromising attitude pays off: to 
my knowledge, Blish is the only 
contemporary science fiction author quoted as a source in Webster’s Third International Dictionary." 
■ What we have here, in thiq 
book, then, is a direct assault on 
the market for Judith Merril’s 
provinces and on her annual anthologies — and a brush-block 
en passant on Don Wollheim’sTerry Carr’s similar book for 
Ace — via a book which Has 
three essayists all combining to 
produce the supportive matter 
which Miss Merril nowadays 
creates by her one-si es. It is at 
least as argumentative and didactic a book as any of hers, partly I think because one cannot 
avoid that effect when writing so 
much front, back and blurb matter, more importantly because 
Blish, Harrison and Aldiss are 
argumentative people by first intention. In time, it will be as 
generally effective at raising 
hackles and opposition as hers is. 
Certainly, it already betrays the 
same sense of a dormitory pillow
161 
fight covering more purposeful 
regulatory actions. It lias that 
fine eye for tHe apparently irrelevant but usdful detail (. source 
. Webster’s * . .) and generates 
tHe same air' of good fellowship, 
after all, that one gets at places 
like tHe Milford Writers’ Conference. In other words, it’s not 
merely a better book tHan tfie 
average Merril anthology — a 
detail we will be discussing immediately below. By reason of 
the details we’ve already discussed, it’s a Serious Threat to the 
Opposition. Following future developments promises to be rewarding. 
Now — as for the contents, 
these are: 
Th’e Credo by James BlisH, 
written at Harry Harrison’s request, laying down the rules 
whereby a book stands a chance 
of being a genuine reflection of an 
honest attempt to anthologize the 
year’s best science-fiction short 
stories. 
An introduction by Harry 
Harrison, calmly acknowledging 
BlisK’s points and then accepting 
the ones He wants. 
“Hawksbill Station”, by Robert Silverb'erg; “Ultimate Construction”, by C. C. Shackleton; 
John T. Sladek’s "1937 A. D.!”; 
“Fifteen Miles”, by Ben Bova; 
"Blackmail”, by Fred Hoyle; Kit 
Reed’s “THe Vine”, James Thurber’s “Interview With a Lem
162 
ming”; Frank M. Robinson’s 
“The Wreck of the Ship John. 
B.; “THe Left-Hand Way”, by 
A. Bertram Chandler; “The Forest of Zil”, by Kris Neville; “THe 
Assassination of John Fitzgerald 
Kennedy considered as a Downhill Motor Race”, by J. G. Ballard; “Answering Service”, by 
Fritz Leiber; “THe Last Command”, by Keith Laumer; “Mirror of Ice”, by Gary Wright, and 
Harlan Ellison’s best story that I 
know of — “Pretty Maggie 
Moneyeyes.” 
These are followed by Aldiss’s 
afterword — an essay entitled 
“Knights of The Paper Spaceship”, with which I do not agree 
in many particulars, and which is 
not an example of How to write 
persuasively, but is nevertheless 
worth the price of admission all 
by itself for the sake of its dear 
statement of what a leading New 
Thing theoretidan thinks it’s all 
about. 
Of the stories, Silverberg, like 
Ellison, is here with the best story 
he ever wrote to my knowledge; 
Leiber’s is one of the very best. 
THe Laumer is as good as all but 
the very best Laumer, and Bert 
Bova’s story is another that one 
could similarly characterize if 
Bova wrote enough to make the 
statement meaningful. Ditto the 
Robinson, which is the latest iri a 
canon of long-voyage stories by 
that author; the series, which may 
be as sKort as two, but which I 
believe includes other stories between this one and “The Oceans 
,are Wide”, extends sparsely 
across a long span of time. 
Like the Bova, the Silverberg, 
the Laumer and newcomer Gary 
Wright’s superb “Mirror of Ice”, 
the Robinson is firmly in the old 
tradition Aldiss puts behind him 
in his essay. 
All of these particular stories 
raise and answer questions about 
the nature of Man, whom they 
place in a technologically supported situation for that purpose. In 
the light of present days, one sees 
this type of story becoming indistinct from such “mainstream” 
Stories as, for example, Slim, 
William Wister Haines’s old 
novel about a power transmission 
lineman. 
But despite the very theoretical orientation of this book, or 
any other honest anthology based 
on whatever premise, one cannot 
as yet put together a satisfactory 
sf anthology without including 
approximately this proportion of 
technology fiction. 
We can trust to Harry Harrison’s instincts for that. We can 
thank his various crotchets, I 
suppose, for the inclusion of the 
Th'urber story — introduced with 
ns twisty a piece of ratiocination 
ns Judy Merril ever displayed 
while handing you an old chestnut and calling it a plum — 
scatological joke. Likewise, every 
editor has to have his inclusion 
from the unlikely source, so we 
can, I guess, get through the 
Sh'ackleton if we tiptoe rapidly 
with our eyes shut. The Ballard 
is fascinating because you would 
not ever have thought so many 
different editors would find these 
nonstory constructs worth attention; also because it is fascinating, 
which I guess answers my question on everybody’s behalf but 
yours. 
The Sladek, like the Wright, is 
gratifyiing because you know, just 
looking, that you’ve found two 
more names to leap out at you 
from tables of contents herefromafter. 
And the same, the very same, 
for the Ellison. 
B ut if you think the last word 
on The New Thing is about 
to be spoken, here comes The 
Best SF Stories from New 
Worlds, (Berkley), edited by that 
same Michael Moorcock, whom 
Aldiss has just finished calling an 
editorial genius, and who is the 
beneficiary of that geist which 
they keep piling upon him, in a 
manner quite different from the 
way Gemsback, Campbell and 
Boucher just reached out and 
grabbed. It must have given 
Moorcock a rare tremor to discover that the Harrison anthology contained but one story from 
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 
New Worlds, yet devoted mucK 
Aldisserie to Kim (and his “growing ambitions” — Is that the first 
or die last robin, do you suppose, 
Mike, or * some grayer bird of 
omen?) and His troubled, subsidizd English magazine, new focus 
of the bright minds in this genre. 
The editorial introduction is 
blather, stricken with blurb disease (If — is SF’s best craftsman, 
then — , next on the table of contents, is SF’s greatest stylist. 
Next, — ’s story is our genre’s finest example of — > and, besides, 
perfectly evokes the atmosphere 
of the author’s childhood in West 
New York), and thus no help. 
So we must go to the contents 
for oar insight on what The New 
Thing might be. (I’ll tell you 
ahead of time that this book is 
full of clues, but interpreting their 
meaning is, as usual, being left 
up to you, mostly because I probably don’t understand it.) 
The stories are by Brian W. 
Aldiss, Roger Zelazny, J.G. Ballard, John Brunner, David I. 
Masson, Langdon Jones and 
Thomas M. Disch; one assumes 
that with room for only seven, 
Moorcock chose carefully, and 
one proceeds to examine them 
with an eye to revelation. 
Aldiss's “The Small Betraying 
Detail” shifts its protagonist into 
a kind of alternate East Anglia 
where the otherwise exactly English scene, complete with beach
and-boardwalk desolation-supermare, is inhabited by a parallel 
race of people who never spent a 
(theoretically proposed) significant evolutionary period combing 
beaches, are therefore not as nearly hairless as we are, and who, 
consequently, always face inland 
when at the beach. (That’s the 
small, betraying, horrifying detail.) Really? But they Have seaside kiosks and boardwalks and 
trucks lettered in script descended 
from the alphabet of the Phoenician island race? & c? Sec? Really? 
I rather think not. This story 
is nonsense when examined for 
consistency with its rationale, as 
so many Aldiss stories are — the 
ones whose rationale isn’t nonsense to begin with. And this I 
think is either laziness, because 
the small details which betray 
this neglect could as easily have 
been in accord with' the premise, 
or else a lack of energy which 
prevents Aldiss from being both 
thorough and thoughtful. He is 
thoughtful. And effective; the 
mood is terrifying at the same 
time the story is ludicrous. The 
landscape is vivid in my mind; 
the general desuetude, the motionless sober, pelted nonbathers regarding me with their fathomless 
eyes as I drive by. It is a scene 
that could not conceivably have 
taken place in any reality. But 
it takes place in mine, having 
taken place in Aldiss’s. 
By some narrow margin, this is 
a story, though it’s weakest where 
it comes closest to transmitting 
a defined occurrence. But what 
of Ballard’s '‘The Assassination 
Weapon”, which is written as if 
on file cards tossed into the air 
and consists of short, symbolically connected declarative modules, 
ostensibly Having to do with a 
psychotic’s attempt to replace the 
“false” death's of John F. Kennedy, Malcolm X and Lee Harvey Oswald with ones that will be 
meaningful to him. The last line 
of this invention — this marvelously creative, patient, polished 
invention — is perfect. It happens to be the same last line 
as the last line of the best parody 
of Ballard: “Nothing happened.” 
When a man’s work so pluperfectly matches its own caricature, 
not much more need be said 
about it by any critic, right? But 
wh'at about the fact that it does 
seem to make sense, and that in 
some strange way it seems to express not the facts, but the prefigured feeling, of th’e mad week 
in which RFK and James Earl 
Ray became a couplet? 
Story? The worst things in 
this generally effective book are 
the stories . John Brunner’s 
“Nobody Axed You” and Langdon Jones’s “The Music Maker”, 
which you can see coming in 
Paragraph 2, and would Have 
been saved only if they had failed 
to follow formal structure. Even 
Zelazny’s “The Keys to December” is for once not good 
Zelazny, but merely good writing 
— beautiful writing, exactly realized, exactly detailed — on a 
basically tired old theme. And 
David I. Masson is at least as 
ingenious in ‘“A Two Timer” as 
he was with his earlier “Traveler’s 
Rest”, but his ingenuity this time 
has to do with the language and 
viewpoint in this story of a Seventeenth-Century man who finds a 
time machine and comes to 1964 
to marvel and commit adultery. 
I think many of us have wished 
we Had the educated ease to write 
a convincing story from such a 
viewpoint; pity the pace is so uncontrolled. But in the end this is 
a travelogue with a Punch and 
Judy ending; it’s good credentials 
for the author, thin fare for the 
reader. 
Then, “The Squirrel Cage”, by, 
Thomas M. Disch. What can I 
tell you? If the perfect Ballard 
last line is “Nothing happened,” 
the epitome of Disch is “It ran 
down.” There are few Disch 
stories which concern more than 
one character, that character trapped inside something that conveys 
him or nourishes him at its indifferent and impermanent pleasure. 
A few Disch stories are different 
to the extent that they are about 
several characters trapped inside; 
those are the novels. 
GALAXY BOOKSHELF 
And here, with this last story, not necessarily sharing the same 
this last layout of marks upon madness, for that would restrict 
paper, everything has actually tire reader appeal .... You 
ceased . , . there is no narrative know, that would account for it; 
resolution, no feeling, no com- the lying promise of the lucid 
munication*: that has not been spells, the impeccable rationale 
meticulously pre-anesthetized . issuing from the hysterical rictus, 
which, situation of course, does the paralogical appeal, the petconvey a message of its own. tisKness, the charm .... But, no! 
I said I was going to leave the No, obviously not. 
interpretation up to you. And I But it would certainly explain 
shall. But if you are thinking that why John Campbell can’t undertHe heart of the New Thing is stand us. 
commonality of being mad, while — ALGIS BUDRYS 
Announcing — 
THE GALAXY AWARDS 
Galaxy Publishing Corporation announces the establishment of annual awards for excellence in science-fiction writing. Every story appearing in the magazines Galaxy and If in issues dated 1968 will be eligible 
for the first series of awards, which will consist of: 
1968 Galaxy Award 
$1,000.00 
for the best story of the year. Honorable Mention will receive $250; the 
next runner-up will receive $100. 
The procedure by which the winning stories will be selected is intended to reflect the judgment of the readers of Galaxy and If. Principal 
reliance will be placed on a mail survey of a randomly selected group of 
subscribers to the magazines in making the awards. Questionnaires asking 
for preferences will be circulated to these subscribers approximately one 
month after the December issues appear. 
EUETZCi 
b/H.H. HOLLtQ 
To breathe water is a useful 
trick. But when you shake a J 
dolphin's hand — take if easy l m 
# 
Vn 
■ from Hawaii were the low, 
wliite buildings of the Caribbean 
Research Station, which housed 
five hundred workers, fifty million dollars worth' of computers, 
breeding tanks, centrifuges, blood 
exchangers, electron microscopes 
and spotless surgeries. Before 
him was the object of the whole 
installation, 
. .The porpoise stood half out 
of the water. “Greeting, Senator 
Junior!” it piped. The animal 
kept the startled politician in the 
full sight of one liquid eye. 
Squatting so that his eyes 
were on a level with that of the 
swimming animal, Senator Ramon Coatl said, “Can you answer questions?” 
“You smarter than you look!” 
the air breather shrilled. “Why 
no ask keeper?” 
“They tell me you’re intelligent. In my book, an intelligent 
. being . can answer questions. Will you answer mine?” 
TKe porpoise revolved in tEe 
water, “I answer questions if you 
answer too. Like jokes?” 
“What?” 
“Jokes, jokes!” Now the voice 
sounded more like barking. “You 
like funny stories?” TEe guide’s 
duck trousers moved back out 
of Coatl’s peripheral vision. 
“Yes,” tEe Senator said, Eumoring the fantastic animal in 
the water, “I like jokes.” 
Immediately, he was able to 
see the otKer side of tEe pool, 
under the torpedo form. TEe 
porpoise Ead levered itself six 
feet out of tEe water. When the 
long white belly flopped, Senator 
Coatl was almost rocked back 
off his Keels by tEe force of the 
unexpected sheet of water. 
From tEe center of tEe pool, an 
eerie whistle sounded. “I keep 
you laughing Eke that all day.” 
Coatl grinned, flung off Els 
sodden clothes, and dived cleanly into tEe pool beside the porpoise. With apparent deligHt, it 
wove rings around Kim. He could 
hear the High speed conversation under water, but understood 
none of it They surfaced, and 
Coatl cried, “I'm sorry! I can 
only understand English.” 
“Okay, Okay, no make a big 
thing of it,” hie animal grumbled. “Stick around six months. 
I teach you speak Dolphin out 
of every orifice you body. Here 
come keeper with trunks for you. 
You swim pretty good for animal with feet.” It turned and 
zipped out the pool entrance. 
>T'en minutes later, they were 
beyond the combers, nearly 
out of sight of the low lying 
land, floating gently with the 
swell. Ramon Coatl kicked gently and brought his eye a few 
inches from the other swimmer’s. 
“Why do you come in when they 
call you? Is it for the easy food, 
or for what?” 
“Food nothing. Learn to talk, 
to use Hands, that everything.” 
The porpoise stood up in the 
swell, belly toward Coatl, and 
the Senator could see a metal 
plate with two small holes set 
in the mid line of the muscular 
white belly. As nearly as possible, it gestured toward the plate 
with its fHppers. “This adaptor 
whole thing for me. I volunteer, 
you know. May be animal, but 
not starfish or flatworm. You animals too, no?” 
TKe Senator turned and began the long swim for shore. Behind him the porpoise spouted, 
strewing the redolent smell of its 
inside down the wind. When 
Coatl walked out on the shelving beach a mile below the station, He shook his Head, laughed, 
and walked up the beach toward 
the small group of Human figures 
running toward him. The guides 
found him smiling with pleasure 
from the swim with the joking 
porpoise, and he brusquely shook 
off their apologies. 
Slipping into the terry robe 
they Had brought him against 
the early evening chill, he fell into step with the young scientist 
who had moved back out of range 
and let him be drenched by the 
swimming animal’s humor. He 
ignored the senior research assistant, a handsome, distracted 
woman who seemed fearful of 
losing a Senator to the sea. 
“Doctor, how educated is that 
creature I was swimming with? 
Not how smart — I’ve seen all 
those charts — how educated? 
Can he understand why I’m 
here?” 
The research man kicked a 
gout of sand up with one sandal. “Oh yes, in a general way. 
He knows that there are many, 
many more people than we have 
here. And he’s been inland in a 
tank. He’s been told what government is; but the idea is so 
foreign to any experience He 
could ever have had that I don’t 
think He really understands what 
a shark to us minnows a Senator is. We got him to call you by 
title because we told him it was 
a gag. We wanted you to know 
porpoises really can talk.” 
“The splashing was Jus own 
idea?” 
“Yes, sir; but I admit it was 
not unexpected. He wanted to 
make bis own impression on you. 
If you don’t call him by name 
the next time you see him, he’ll 
splash you again. He expects to 
be treated as an individual, not 
just a specimen.” 
tCITThat do you call Him?” 
’ » “Andy, mostly; and He 
answers well enough to it. He 
was the first free porpoise on this 
station, you know. I’m sure he 
made the point about His being 
a volunteer. If you really want 
to please him, his name in their 
sounds is Eeeetz chi” 
“Eats chuck?” 
“No, no, Senator. A whistle 
to the back of the teeth and a 
glottal click. Eeeetz chi Look 
at the way I’m doing it You’ll 
never get it by sound alone.” 
“I’ll never get it at all.” 
“Sure, sure. The end sound is 
a hard, hard version of the Spanish J. He makes it with the top 
of his oral ' cavity and the very 
back of His tongue.” 
“I thought they made those 
Hard sounds with the air sacs by 
the blowhole.” 
“Yes, we Have learned that’s 
where the echo sounds are made: 
their organic sonar. The combination of the two sacs and the 
length of that upside-down nose 
gives them an infinite range of 
frequencies, and they use cycles 
EEEETZ CH 
up to k one fifty. His name is 
a formal sound, however, and 
it’s made entirely in the oral 
chamber: tongue and teeth'. We 
can speak that. We can’t hope 
to speak their echo sounds." 
“All right Eeeeeeeetz huktch? 
When you say one fifty k, you 
sound like a computer man. You 
did mean 150 thousand?" 
“That’s right For sustained 
conversation — well, no, I mean 
for sustained exchange of information — we have to use computers. The dolphins get bored 
pretty fast at ordinary human 
speech rates. Their brains are 
physically larger than ours, and 
the critical layers of the cortex 
are as numerous as ours, six levels; but they have at least twice 
the number of cortical convolutions, so they do mental acts faster than we can.” 
The Senator stopped short, 
ramming his Hands into the 
patch pockets of His terry robe. 
In a concentration reflex of which 
he was entirely unconscious, he 
began to pick up as much sand 
as he could grasp with His long, 
muscular toes. So he had stood 
on the beach at his far off island 
home and grappled with the “new 
ideas” His older brother had 
brought back from school. Now 
his toes kneaded wet sand as he 
wound His mind down to seizure of the measure of porpoise 
intelligence. 
“I’ve seen the charts. Does 
that mean they are, quote, twice 
as smart, unquote, as we are?" 
i 
'T'he scientist had stopped also. 
^ He unslung the jacket He 
was carrying over his left arm, 
and shrugged it around his Tshirted upper torso. “Senator, 
they are . they are . more 
than twice as, quote, smart, unquote. They scan the cortical 
wrinkles faster. With twice as 
many grooves in which to record 
bits of info, they are geometrically smarter.” 
Coatl continued to knead wet 
sand with’ his prehensile toes. 
“Really smarter? Or computer 
smarter?” 
The young scientist grimaced. 
“Eeeetz ch’ was right. You are 
smarter than you look. Yes, 
from a man-centered view of reality all that happens is that, 
like a computer, they have much 
faster access to stored information than we do, and much faster 
manipulation of it. But creative, 
intuitive use of it? Not in Human 
terms. If that is the measure of 
true intelligence, then these big, 
seagoing cats are not very intelligent. They’re just better equipped to Handle information.” 
“WHat do you say? Smarter? 
Or not so smart?” 
“Man isn’t the measure of all 
things, Senator. Creativity must 
exist in the dolphins, or a wise
acre like Eeeetz ch wouldn’t 
keep fooling with us. I’ll tell you 
one possible joint project we 
have in mind. What limits the 
LEM program is the monstrous 
load of calculations that gets 
the Module on and off the moon. 
I It isn’t sufficiently part of any 
Human experience yet for pilots 
to do it by the seat of the pants. 
“Dolphins deal with that kind 
of spatial reality every minute 
of their lives. And not by instinct, either. As one comes 
wriggling out Mama’s birth 
chamber tailfirst, Mama whistles; and another female, on some 
kind of rotary list that we have 
Inot been able to figure out, 
swims over and takes the new 
born to the surface for its first 
breath. The second one stays for 
a couple of months as nurse and 
baby sitter, and she and Mama 
teach baby How to relate to the 
environment, 
“At the end of that time, the 
young calf Has an ecKolocator 
Working that keeps it always oriented for the rest of its life. 
That one tool alone is so accurate that dolphins can distinguish between steel balls so nearly the same size that I need calipers to tell which is which. The 
process involves a very High 
number of echoes being examined 
by that super convoluted cortex* 
“Now, put that animated computer in space ... in your LEM 
... in command of the Module’s 
senses, and let it monitor the 
whole shebang. Such’ a dolphin 
could sense the need to fire a 
rocket for as little as a Hundredth 
of a second to correct course, and 
do it immediately; it could drop 
your Module and take it off 
like the kiss of a moth’s wing. 
You’d just need a liquid chamber for the dolphin’s comfort.” 
U nconscious of having paused, 
Senator Coatl began to 
Stride on up the beach. It was 
full night now. “But they can’t 
manipulate * . and you can’t 
monitor the LEM with your 
Snout.” 
“That’s the point of the prosthetic program. Tomorrow morning we’ll put Eeeetz ch into His 
vest and you will see.” 
Coatl dug his foot tentatively 
into the packed, resisting sand. 
“Yes, well, that’s wliat I’m Here 
to investigate. You station 
PH.D.’s are all really committed 
to prosthesis aren’t you?” 
The man and woman were both 
standing in front of him, and 
though there was no perceptible 
signal between them, they flipped their jackets back and down 
over their shoulders in unison. 
In the early moonlight, Ramon 
Coatl saw just below each sternum the same dull gleaming 
plate he Had seen in Eeeetz ch’s 
white belly. 
EEEETZ CH 
“All right, don’t try to tell me 
about it, then. You’ll show me 
in the morning.” Coatl cast 
away a footful of sand decisively, 
and stepping around th'e two scientists, h'e marched toward the 
station. The Hands clutching 
their open jackets were oddly like 
the gesturing flippers of Eeeetz 
ch far out at sea, showing 
the dedication of their flesh that, 
with dull metal plates, set them 
apart from all other living creatures. 
Fanatics, Coatl thought. They 
have bought a piece of the project with their own bodies. But 
don’t pass judgment, Ramon. 
OppenKeimer and Szilard and 
Fermi were all fanatics too. Who 
knows what friendly natives will 
greet the navigators in this new 
world? 
All night the dolphins swam in 
his sleeping mind. Each dolphin 
had a metal plate in His belly, 
and one of them had breasts that 
were like the senior research assistant’s ... she of them. 
II 
A fter breakfasting at four a.m. 
on turtle eggs and cafe con 
leche the Hawaiian Senator stood 
before the Station, facing down. 
“Am I to suit up with you?” He 
asked. 
Marguerite Hart, the senior research assistant, shook her head. 
“No, but we want you to watch, 
We Have to keep our prosthetic! 
gills in a kind of amniotic fluid 
when we’re not wearing them, 
and we have to grow into them 
to put them on. Takes about ad 
hour. Later on . you’ll see.” 
He watched through heavy, 
glass as the two scientists swam 
into the frilly, ugly vests, plugged the jacks from the artificial 
gills into their chest plate receptacles and hung there, letting the 
gills become animated as they 
began drawing from the fluid 
around them, which was gradually being replaced with sea water. Senator Coatl was revolted, 
though' he kept his poker face. 
As the gills became pinker and 
livelier, looking now more like 
ruffled bed jackets, and established the rhythm by which sea 
water was squeezed for its dissolved oxygen, the skins of the 
two human beings became deathly white. 
It was nearly a full Hour before either of them opened an 
eye, and several minutes more 
before the naked skin assumed a 
nearly normal hue. "That’s one 
line of research that Has to go,” 
Coatl told himself. “The damned 
things look like they’re digesting 
the user.” He was repelled again 
when the young man and woman in the tank raised and lowered their arms as bats do when 
awakening. 
Henry Racoglu swam to th'e 
side of the tank, and as his 
throat began to vibrate, the slurred vocalizing became audible 
from a loudspeaker in one corner of the observation room, 
“Senator, go suit up in your 
aqualung. We’ll meet you at the 
short pier around front.” The 
two converted Humans cocked 
their heads back and, with body 
shivers remarkably like fish, shot 
out the bottom of the tank where 
the gills had been stored. 
When Coatl had sunk in his 
Scuba gear, the two scientists, 
who now seemed streamlined and 
fully vital, were waiting, arms at 
their sides, legs together, rippling 
gently from time to time to stay 
in one place. Marguerite spoke, 
and He felt the throaty vocables 
in the bones of his skull. “Follow 
us, and we’ll go meet the dolphin. We have to dress him, 
too.” 
/"matl squeezed His throat as He 
V- 4 had been taught to do in 
the brief Washington indoctrination, and h'e felt His own throat 
sounds go out through the mike 
on the little collar He wore. 
“Take ... as long . for . 
Eeeetz di?” 
Marguerite answered. “No, 
dressing Him is not as long as 
for us, but it does take some 
time. Follow us around tKe island.” With a fish’s quickness, 
she streaked away, and in- an 
instant Racoglu followed her. 
Senator Coatl went after them at 
leisure, and when he arrived, 
Eeeetz cH was already upright 
just below the surface of the water, carefully sliding his flippers 
into a vestlike apparatus which 
had a skin as sleek as the porpoise’s own, but ridged and corded as if long muscles lay beneath its surface. 
As the Senator approached, he 
Heard the rapid clicks and chuckles of dolphin conversation. He 
was resigned to incomprehension, 
and wondered if Henry and Marguerite understood the cluttering syllables, when he was suddenly startled by a square box 
a few meters away. It burst into 
a mechanical kind of English. 
“Go away. Wait until I am 
Handed. I do not greet you. Go 
away away awayawayawayawayway.” TKe box repeated this 
very rapidly many times, and 
then he saw the human beings 
each place a Hand over one of 
the dolphin’s eyes and heard Marguerite say, “Be quiet, Number 
One. Coatl will wait to greet 
you. Don’t tense up or we have 
to start over.” TKe box thereupon burst into porpoise language, 
firing a short staccato burst of 
clicks. The porpoise wriggled out 
of the vest and the scientists’ 
Hands swam directly away from 
Coatl, making violent noises. 
EEEETZ CH 
The box roared, “All right! 
Don’t repeat.” It said this about 
forty times, and then Eeeetz 
ch hung motionless in the water 
fifty meters away with His tail 
pointed toward Coatl. The Senator, realizing that the box was a 
computerized translator, slowly 
vocalized, “I . do . not . 
watch. My back . to . you.” 
He turned and hung in the water 
facing away from Eeeetz cH. 
For a moment, there was no 
further sound, then He heard a 
short buzz from Eeeetz ch, and 
the box quickly said ten times, 
“He can watch tomorrow.” Then 
there was a period of cross talk, 
the box buzzing and cackling. 
Coatl could hear the throat vocals too, so he was getting both 
sides of the conversation, and 
soon felt that his head was in a 
bucket that was being struck with 
a broomstick, as Marguerite and 
Henry urged, “Come on, push, 
push,” and Eeeetz ch’s exasperated chatter was translated, “You 
are Hurting, you are hurting, 
you are torturing me.” 
Marguerite had said, “Now 
shrink it! Damn you, you’re 
growing.” 
Eeeetz ch snarled something 
that came out of the box with 
mechanical profundity, “Fascists! Vivisectionists!” 
Then there was a plop! as of 
a refrigerator door seating itself in its gasket, and two small 
metallic snaps. An instant later, 
Senator Coatl felt himself slapped stingingly on the buttocks, 
grasped on the shoulder and 
swung around by a rough hand 
to face a weirdly altered porpoise. 
nphe heavy muscled vest encir^ cled Eeetz ch at the level of 
his flippers, which were hidden 
in the vest. The plate in His belly 
was covered by two fleshy flaps 
of the vest. Where flippers should 
have been, two columns of dark 
flesh, each the size of a wrestler’s 
thigh', grew out into hands — 
golem-fingered, but unmistakable 
hands. 
“I greet you!” the box roared 
over and over as the dolphin extended his right hand. It was an 
obvious effort for him; the left 
appendage simply trailed in the 
water, unused. Coatl took the 
right hand, and in a moment 
grunted with pain as the bones 
in his Hand were ground together. He expected to faint as he 
Heard Eeeetz ch' clicking and 
the box endlessly repeating, “I 
can’t open it! Helpdamnhelpdamnhelpdamnhelp !” 
In a blaze of agony, the Senator saw Henry Racoglu appear 
behind the dolphin and strike 
repeatedly at the middle of his 
back. As the artificial hand relaxed its spastic grip, he shot to 
the surface where He could sob 
unrestrainedly without drowning. 
When he could flex the crushed 
hand enough to know nothing 
was broken, and the tears had 
ceased to flow, he became aware 
again of the thfree odd creatures 
about him. He realized that Henry and Marguerite were supporting him closely, their gills pulsing, their eyes above water, and 
Eeeetz ch was bobbing up and 
down. The dolphin caught his 
eye at last and shrilled, “Sorry I 
So sorry! Damn cheap muscles. 
I should have move them a few 
times before I try use them. I 
crazy for hands! Sorry! Sorry!” 
Coatl thrust out his throbbing 
hand. “Try again,” he said 
through gritted teeth'. To his 
surprise, the swimming mammal 
groaned, sounded and fled. 
Racoglu spoke, his lips awash. 
“He can’t use his hands at all in 
the air. And we can’t come out 
of the water with our gills on. 
You’re in a hell of a shape, Senator.” 
“Turn me loose. I can swim 
now. Man! that hurt,” the Senator said. “What happened? I 
thought that metal plate meant 
he had some kind of battery assist for that arm and hand.” 
“Yes, yes, he does. There’s a 
nickel cadmium battery behind 
that plate. The synthetic muscle and Its nerve supply take 
time to warm up and establish 
equilibrium in, the blood supply. 
Eeeetz ch is so impatient — 
dolphins do everything so blindingly fast — he just can’t wait. 
He wanted so badly to impress 
you, and then the muscle structure knotted up and he couldn’t 
will the hand open. He’s gone 
off like a cat that’s knocked over 
a vase, you know, so he can pretend it didn’t Happen. He’ll be 
back in a few minutes. Can you 
really swim, now? That hand’s 
going to be pretty sore.” Henry 
rose and fell, shipping a few 
mouthfuls of water as he spoke, 
but continuing, nonetheless, to 
support Coatl. 
“Sure, I can swim; but he’s 
disabled me from shaking Hands 
for a few days.” 
Marguerite and Henry sank 
fully into the water, pointed the 
direction, and began the swim 
back to the Station, as Ramon 
Coatl bit into his Scuba mouthpiece and swam rather slowly after them. Th’e gentle exercise 
worked the acute pain out of his 
crushed Hand after a few Hundred meters. He was not frightened when a dark torpedo with 
Heavily muscled arms held out 
from its sides as if they were 
vanes appeared beneath him. He 
could Hear the cricket-like conversation running up the scale 
into inaudibility. Curving himself down beside the swimming 
mammal, he pointed up to the 
surface. 
*Tphey broke into the air to* getHer. Eeeetz ch began at 
once to grumble. “Must learn 
some Dolphin. English clumsy 
enough in air, impossible under 
water.” 
“All right, you teach me. How 
do you say ‘I’m sorry’?" 
“You got a lot to learn besides words. We not live in that 
kind' of world, Senator. I no want 
to be civilized that way, only to 
be Handed. Control environment 
every way then. My motor 
warmed up now ... go back 
to practice range. Come tomorrow, I no squeeze hand.” 
“So long, Eeeetz ch,” the 
Senator said. “I’ll see you tomorrow.” 
In the come-close tank where 
he had first met Eeeetz ch, a 
muscle-weary Senator listened 
as his human guides told him 
where the dispensary was on 
land. “You’re not coming with 
me?” he strained his throat to 
ask. 
Marguerite shook her head. 
“It’s wearing to grow into these 
gills. Now that we have them on, 
we’ll stay under water for at 
least a couple of days. Hank will 
phone ahead to the dispensary, 
from that set over there on the 
bottom, and tomorrow morning 
we’ll wait for you here with the 
dolphin. Can you walk it, or 
shall we ask for some help?” 
Coatl swallowed a bitter re
tort. “I’ll walk,” he gurgled, and 
Staggered up out of the pool. The 
exact route He took and just who 
Helped him in the next two hours 
were things Ramon Coatl could 
never afterwards recall with any 
clarity; but white, shaking, slightly staggering swimmers in wet 
trunks were old hat to the personnel of the Station; and he 
was unobtrusively shunted into 
the dispensary and restored to 
sufficient health to eat two enormous bowls of the Station’s famous gumbo at dinner that night, 
accompanied by the hard, bright 
sherry of which Bela Hagedorn 
was so fond. 
Director Hagedorn, whose portly figure was as streamlined as 
some sea creature’s, apologized 
in a ponderously offhand sort 
of way which began to seem very 
porpoise-like to Senator Coatl 
for not having been able to meet 
the Senator when he first arrived and give him a personal, 
escorted two-doll ar tour. “Henry 
Racoglu and Maggie Hart are 
two of our finest young researchers, though,” the Director smilingly said, “and I’m only sorry 
that their fervor and speed in 
getting you under water, where 
you could see us at our best, 
should have resulted first off in 
your being hurt.” 
Coatl shrugged. “I grew up 
surfing, diving without a mask, 
and fighting octopus for fun and 
EEEETZ CH 
food. Being hurt underwater is 
no novelty for me. I was just 
glad I had on air. I didn’t the 
summer I was fifteen and netted 
a ray as wide across as I was 
tall. Finally T Had to let Kim take 
the net and go. Being dragged 
eight or ten miles out to sea did 
not Hurt so much — my uncles 
came after me in an outrigger, 
so I only Had to swim about half 
way Home — as the razzing they 
gave me all the way to shore for 
losing that net.” 
“Well, we won’t razz you. 
Eeeetz ch is an odd creature 
anyway. He’s very emotional for 
a dolphin; and He can be quite 
terrifying when he panics.” 
“Are they all like that?” 
“OH no. No, for the most part 
— have some more gumbo — 
they’re phlegmatic. I suppose I 
don’t mean that. Stable emotionally is what I mean, happy and 
self-confident. And of course, 
why shouldn’t they be? They’re 
perfectly adapted to the life 
they live. Not an enemy in the 
ocean really frightens them. It’s 
Hard not to envy the aboriginal 
dolphin sometimes.” 
CCfTThy is Eeeetz ch so 
’ ’ moody?” 
“I’m not sure. I think It has to 
do in part with his being the 
first. Most of them are smart; 
but he has imagination as well as 
ability to learn, and he has 
enough imagination to frighten 
himself. 
"The day I talked to Him 
about his surgery, he swam up 
and down that come-close pool 
like a man pacing over a decision, and even when He was 
hanging in the water, he was 
shivering. You could see the pool 
surface responding to it, they 
tell me. Finally he swam away 
and left me sitting on the bottom; and he was gone a good 
long time, too. Three days.” 
Ramon Coatl looked at the 
somewhat pompous Director hesitantly. After a moment he said, 
“Excuse me, Director Hagedom. 
May I ask . you said you 
were in the water with Him. I 
got the impression you waited in 
the sea those three days. Do you 
have one of those metal plates 
in your chest, too?” 
The Director finished a mouthful of gumbo reflectively, with 
one eye cocked fishily at Coatl. 
He rescued the leg of a crab 
which was protruding from the 
other comer of His mouth, sucked out its content and then, 
having made some decision, unzipped his poplin windbreaker 
and pulled down with both Hands 
on the bosun’s undershirt He was 
wearing. Below His breastbone 
was* the dull colored plate with 
the two adaptor receptacles. For 
a moment, in that posture, with 
his chin raised and his shoulders 
drawn back, He seemed oddly defenseless. In tfie cut-and-tKrust 
world of politics wKere tHe Senator lived, defenselessness was 
not an impression lie often received, and Be Hardly knew How 
to react. For tHe moment, tHe 
attitude of Director Hagedom 
disarmed Coatl. THe scientific administrator continued to sit witH 
His cHest bared, unmoving, blinking slowly. 
“My dear fellow 1” said Ramon 
Coatl. “No doubt I sHould Have 
seen tEat tfie first time we went 
in tfie water togetfier, and my curiosity would Have been satisfied 
witfiout any breacfi of manners 
on my part. Forgive me.” He applied Himself again to tfie gumbo. “I sfiould Have asked about 
tfie Handed flippers. WKat exactly is all tliat protoplasm, Doctor?” 
Hagedom turned and looked 
around tfie mess Hall. Ten meters away, a totally bald man 
sat, facing away from tfiem. He 
was carrying on a conversation 
witfi a girl wHose back was partly turned. Her arm and forearm 
lay along Jus upper arm and 
sfioulder. Hagedom said, “I Hate 
to interrupt a lovers’ conversation, but Nickleby is tfie best 
man to explain it to you.” 
To CoatTs surprise, tfie Director raised one massive foot and 
Slammed it down on tfie vinyl 
floor. Like everyone else on tfie 
project, Hagedom wore sneakers, so tfie impact made little 
noise, but Coatl could feel tfie 
floor quiver. 
Ill 
*T'fie bald man turned at once, 
A grinned, spoke to tfie girl, 
and got up and came over, still 
s milin g. Hagedom casually covered His moutli, raising a sfierry 
glass, and said, “He’s deaf as a 
post Look straigfit at Him when 
you speak.” 
Nickleby scarcely gave tfie 
Senator a cfiance to open His 
moutfi. THe voice was quacking 
but clear and only medium loud. 
“I knew you’d be ready for me 
soon, Senator. I don’t know wfiat 
Hagedom Has told you besides 
tHat I’m deaf. If He’d just keep 
quiet, nobody would know it I 
compensate so expertly. Well, I 
am tfie greatest communications 
engineer since Wiener and Shannon tHougfit of tfie Hearing glove. 
Matter of fact, I was working on 
Hearing gloves at NASA wfien 
Hagedom and Old Scotty sfiangfiaied me into tfie Caribbean 
Station. A bellyful of tHat damned sfierry makes you think you 
can do things you ougfit not even 
to want to do in tfie first place. 
You want to know How the 
Handed prosthetic flipper works, 
don’t you?” 
Coatl nodded yes. 
EEEETZ CH 
“Oh, you can speak. Just look 
at me. I'm sure Hagedom told 
you that. You know what a hearing glove is?" 
“Yes, it translates sound into 
taps or electnc buzzes on the 
Unger tips.” 
“Right. We use them now to 
communicate with astronauts because they don’t have to fight 
static to get the message and 
because even while they’re pulling levers and turning wheels, 
we can still be sending to the 
balls of their fingers. Great step 
forward, but simple, really.” 
“Yes, I’ve worn a hearing 
glove. It’s very distracting." 
“Stop nodding and smiling 
Senator. I can read anything you 
say, if you just look in my direction.” 
Hagedom slapped the table 
and laughed. Both the other men 
looked at him, then involuntarily nodded and smiled at each 
other; after which' they both 
burst into laughter. 
Nickleby went on, in His rather monotonous voice, “Okay, 
Senator. Easy to learn the glove, 
easy to make it. They stole me 
to deal with a problem which required the synthesis of a nearly 
organic prosthetic muscle. That 
little brunette I was talking to 
over there was the team leader 
on that, and we got so entangled 
on the project I guess we’ll never get untangled. My job was to 
work out the converters that 
take a dolphin’s weaker finger 
motions and step them up into 
powerful muscular ones in the 
prosthetic attachments. Just 
muscles and gristle, thank god. 
No bone, you see? Because dolphins are always supported by 
their medium of life.” 
“Wait a minute. Dolphin Ungers? They just have flippers.” 
“Yeah’, yeah, but the skeletal 
structure of the flippers is that 
they’re grown-together fingers, or 
toes, if calling them toes makes 
you more comfortable. See, if we 
were going to alter the animal 
permanently, we could do it a 
lot easier. We’d slit each’ finger 
out separate from its fellows, 
graft skin on the cut sides, beef 
up the muscle connections, and 
we’d have a functioning organic 
hand we could use to manipulate, a powerful, simple, mechanical hand.” 
“Why not do it that way?” 
CtTf you had some little Handi-*• cap like deafness or a withered hand, you’d understand. Man, 
we respect the bodily integrity 
of other species. If Andy wants 
to quit the project tomorrow 
and swim off into the sunset, 
he’s still a functional dolphin. 
He may be a crazy dolphin, but 
physically, he can still do all 
the things he could always do. 
That wouldn’t be true if we had 
altered his flippers surgically. 
Make sense?” 
“All rigfit.” 
“Well, to get back to tfie practical problem, I really didn’t 
Have mucE to work with. Eons of 
evolution Have altered tfie wfiole 
function of tfie dolpfiin Band, 
you see?” 
“I never would Kave tfiougfit 
of tfiat if you Kadn’t pointed it 
out to me.” 
“Don’t put me on, Senator. I 
Kave to make this speecH to all 
kinds of cretins Hagedorn drags 
in Here. And if I sound like I 
believe tfie project couldn’t succeed without me, tfiafs rigfit. I 
do believe it. Anyway, I see you 
see there’s very little individual 
movement of th'e bones in a 
dolphin’s flipper. Very little musculature to support individual 
movement, either. Tfie whole 
thing is tfiere to operate as a 
unit, to swim; not to grasp, 
point, or toucli.” 
“I see.” 
“So my little converters Gave 
to translate very small movements of a dolphin’s finger bones 
along an exponential curve to 
operate a very powerful arm and 
hand. You’d be surprised to see 
the grapfi of what less tfian a 
millimeter of movement in tfie 
flipper translates to in terms of 
grasping and turning power.” 
“I’ve shaken Bands with Eeeetz 
cfi. I would neither be surprised 
EEEETZ CH 
nor impressed by graphs after 
that. I am impressed by your 
work, Doctor Nickleby.” 
“Just call me Nick. I never 
finished my doctorate. Couldn’t 
get along with my alleged mentor, and fie wouldn’t pass my dissertation for publication unless 
I rewrote it to suit his experiments instead of mine. I Eave 
done well, Haven’t I? ; ’ 
Coatl nodded. Nickleby was 
telling me the truth. Men were 
not falsely modest in the village 
where the Senator Had been born, 
either; though they were usually 
a little more aware of the comic 
figure self-satisfaction cuts. 
Roman Coatl smiled, and turned to Hagedorn again. “Now let’s 
talk about wfiat might get you 
shut down — those ugly, stomacH-turning gills. In Washington, we Have been under tfie impression tfiat this was a kind of 
super-Scuba, a macfiine for delivering air efficiently to the 
lungs of a person swimming underwater. But it turns out to be 
an alternative way of getting oxygen from tfie water. Marguerite 
spoke of growing Into fier gills. 
Tfie device really is organic, 
isn’t it?” 
T fie Director fiuncfied forward, 
Bis tfiick forearms on tfie table. “It’s very perceptive of you 
to recognize the Half-live nature 
of tfie gill tissue and to realize 
it isn’t just a sophisticated mechanical filter. Do you understand what real gills are? Fish 
gills? True fish don’t Have lungs, 
you know. A fisH that Has is a 
left over transitional form between true fish and amphibian, 
an evolutionary experiment that 
Has stayed on nature’s work 
bench after its usefulness was 
ended. 
“But real fish need oxygen, 
like all life on earth, except some 
of the lowest, single-cell forms 
and some of the viruses. There’s 
plenty of oxygen dissolved in 
sea water, and always Has been. 
Certain experiments lead us now 
to believe that the chemical composition of sea water was always 
about what it is today. 
“Different kinds of sea life 
solve the problem of extracting 
oxygen from sea water in different ways; but true fish do it 
with a biological apparatus that 
extracts the oxygen, still in solution, in effect, through a sort of 
osmotic membrane directly into 
the blood stream on the other 
side of the membrane. There it’s 
carried the same as in our blood. 
Not* much chemical difference 
between fish blood and human.” 
Director Hagedom peered up 
from under his brows into Senator Coati’s eyes. At this distance, 
Coatyl could see heavy white 
Hairs thick in the Director’s 
brows and raised His estimate of 
the other man’s age. Sun tan — 
He thought complacently of his 
own dark skin — does make a 
man look younger. The administrator spoke again. “Do you 
understand this is all oversimplified and underexpiained?” 
“Go right ahead. Director. 
This is a kindergarten class you 
are lecturing.” 
“All right. There are lots of 
problems to putting men into 
the sea profitably; and the oxygen supply is the first and, so 
far, the most difficult. As long 
as you want your sea-man to 
breathe air, most of your effort 
has to go to supplying the air 
and keeping it from killing him. 
You can compress it and release 
it to him in such fashion that the 
pressure inside him is the same 
as the pressure outside, and in 
shallow water this works pretty 
well.” 
“Self-Contained Underwater 
Breathing Apparatus.” 
“Right. You had scuba on 
when your flipper was nearly 
crushed today. You’re familiar 
with it, so you’re familiar with 
its shortcomings as well. Ypu 
can’t go really deep; but as shallow as you stay, compressed air 
can still be deadly. If you have 
to come up in a hurry, the nitrogen dissolved in your blood — 
nearly seventy percent of ordinary air by volume — can cripple, craze, or kill you, depend
ing on where it bubbles, if the 
pressure comes off too fast.” 
“The Bends.” 
iCT'Von’t try to sound like an 
old-time, Bard-Bat diver. 
‘Decompression sickness' may 
not Be as picturesque, But it’s 
accurate . and it suggests the 
treatment of cKoice.” 
“Tfie compression chamber.” 
“RigEt, Senator. You snatcK 
your unlucky or footisB diver out 
of tEe water. He may be blind or 
deaf or dying. Lug Him into the 
compression chamber, dog down 
the Batch, and pop tEe compressed air to him. TEe nitrogen goes 
back into blood solution, and 
then, by reducing tEe pressure 
slowly and in tEe steps which experience Eas sEown tEe human 
organism can tolerate, you may 
— or you may not — save your 
diver. It’s costly, slow, and erratic. 
“So you use Helium instead of 
nitrogen to make up your air. 
Doesn’t matter which relatively 
inert gas it is. Straight oxygen’s 
too flammable. Helium doesn’t 
dissolve and bubble the way nitrogen does. It doesn’t narcotize 
you at depth as nitrogen does, 
either.” 
The Director glared tolerantly under his eyebrows. His elbows slid farther out on the table, and he was almost leaning 
his head on his forearms now. 
“All right, you’ve been through 
all this before. The helium problem is the Helium voice. The 
pitch of all the sounds human 
voices make is raised very high 
by the presence of helium around 
the vocal cords. Some sounds 
just disappear, and it’s easier for 
a person experiencing Eelium 
breathing for the first time to 
write out and get written all Eis 
communications tKan it is to understand and be understood.” 
“Is the throat-speech' microphone any better?” 
“Yes!” The Director clapped 
his hands against his elbows. 
“Yes, it is better! At least you 
are gargling a complete language, with its overtones and 
nuances. Anyway, it makes no 
sense to be always an intruder 
in the sea, to Have to carry apparatus with you which has your 
life in its parts all the time, so 
that a hre’-en air tube or a faulty 
gauge c ■ mean death to tEe 
most gifted researcher. To be at 
the mercy of your air wlien you 
are in the water is too cruel a 
burden.” 
He sat back, unclasped His 
hands from his elbows, and 
srr.i'icr.. "So — gills. Fish gills 
are not efficient enough for our 
purposes. They are rather passive organs, even with the pretty 
opening and closing in the water. 
Just grafting a big grouper’s 
gills onto a man would not 
EEEETZ CH 
give you a man who was as 
efficient as a grouper. No, it is 
no accident the smartest animals in the water are those who 
went ashore, acquired lungs, and 
then returned to the sea. A lot 
of oxygen, more than any fish’s 
gills can deliver, is required to 
fuel those big brains with all 
their convolutions.” 
“So why Haven’t you found it 
possible for men to breathe and 
sound and rise to breathe again, 
like dolphins?” 
“Ah-hahl like dolphins! Well, 
we haven’t because we’re not up 
to the surgery required. It would 
effectively involve reworking everything from the nasal passages to the anus. Heart, lung, 
blood vessels, autonomic nerve 
structure, the whole internal machinery of a man would have to 
be rebuilt.” 
( ( 1V/T an can’t go back to the 
sea, then, like his cousins, the whales and porpoises?” 
The Director seemed momentarily abashed. He picked at His 
bottom lip as if a flake of tobacco Hung there, although He was 
not smoking. “No — well, the 
fact of the matter is, the artificial gill is here. You’ve seen it in 
operation.” 
“Yes, but now we’re full circle to where we were,” said 
Coatl. “Those things don’t look 
artificial to me. I mean, they’re 
really not made of plastic ...” 
“Oh no.” 
"... or of metal ...” 
“Great Heavens, no! Well, the 
connections are.” 
“ . and to tell the truth, 
they look remarkably like being 
the sort of experimentation with 
Human beings that was condemned a generation ago.” 
Director Hagedom sat bolt 
upright and stared with Horror 
across the table. “No, sir, I 
cannot permit that to stand. No 
one is compelled to undergo 
these operations. To be allowed 
to undergo one is an Honor. We 
are all volunteers, and no one 
has been hurt or harmed by being fitted with our gill adaptors. 
Do you think we are sterilizing 
Gypsies Here? We are simply 
helping people to become better 
equipped to deal with what is 
otherwise an extremely hostile 
environment.” 
The Director made as if to 
rise in his agitation, but the Senator’s Hand restrained Him. “Relax, Hagedom. I’m putting you 
on, man, that's all. They are ugly 
looking propositions . and 
there’s no denying they are Human experimentation, right?" 
Hagedom looked Hard at Him. 
“You’re crueller than you look. 
It’s shocking to charge — well 
you haven’t charged — it’s 
shocking even to suggest that 
this project is some sort of Hu
man vivisection center. It isn’t!” 
Hagedom made as if to go on, 
but the Senator stood, bringing 
^th'e evening to an end. “Think 
about that again, Director,” He 
said, and strode off to a good 
night’s rest. He knew a Half 
dozen people on tKe Station were 
tossing and fuming because of 
his presence with its unpredictable implications and possibilities, and that knowledge enabled 
him to sleep with the pleasure 
of a man who has created a small 
tropical storm and is borne 
peacefully in its eye. WHat His 
storm might bring to the surface 
or destroy remained to be seen. 
Meanwhile, as the winds rose 
around him, he slept. 
IV 
tT’he next day found Coatl fine* ly tuned to his surroundings. The pain, exhaustion, arguing, and drinking of the night 
before had been wiped out by his 
night’s sleep; but their residue 
remained in a feeling that one 
layer of his skin had been removed. The droning tradewind 
reached into the central core of 
his personality. 
Under the water, away from 
the wind, he felt as free as a fish. 
Hank, Maggie, and Eeeetz ch 
met him in the come-close pool, 
and the four of them swam to 
an area where the water-dwelling 
mammal was being taught to 
handle machinery. He had a 
vast Rube Goldberg of interrelated valves, levers, sliding 
plates, toggle switches and worm 
gears to operate. Hank posted a 
foil strip with printed directions and operating sequences a 
meter long on the side of the 
learning machine and reset 
many of the internal operating 
connections. 
Eeeetz ch swam to the instructions in a smooth curve and began clicking and snapping as he 
studied it The black box at one 
side repeated, over and over, 
such comments as, “Damn I 
it’s counterclockwise instead of 
clockwise again. Oh, oh’, six meters to swim in a tenth of a second? And right back again? 
Pfui!” 
Marguerite, who was looking 
at a large wrist watch which she 
wore on Her ankle, suddenly 
cried, V A11 right, fishmouth, go!” 
and pushed the timing stud. 
The gleaming black and gray 
body began to whirl about, 
through, and over the complicated learning toy, and to Eeeetz 
ch’s snicks and clacks were added the cacophony of machine 
parts slamming and grinding. 
After about twenty minutes of 
this, Eeeetz ch suddenly gave a 
despairing whistle which the box 
translated as, “Crab cakes 1 I 
missed that inky worm gear by 
EEEETZ CH 
one turn again. Duck, white 
skins I” A silvery sphere at the 
machine’s center sprouted tubes 
in every direction and a cloud oi 
octopus ink enveloped the four 
persons swimming about the 
framework. 
“Okay, clumsy,” Ha nk shouted, as the box rendered his voice 
into squeaks and clutters, “the 
rule today is you’ve got to reset the whole sequence while the 
cloud’s still in the water. Get 
going!” 
Ramon swam into a column 
of the machine and felt the torpedo shape of the student Hand 
user zip past him in the impenetrable murk. He knew Eeeetz 
cli was operating on his sonar 
and that he had better get out 
of the way. Gingerly touching 
the machine’s working column, 
Ke kicked off from it and swam 
ten or twelve meters away. Here 
it was lighter. Looking back He 
could tell from the convulsions 
of the cloud that the student 
was churning about the machine* 
reversing the settings of its parts 
as easily as if the filtered Caribbean sun were fully available. 
Tt took Eeeetz ch a shorter time 
to reverse the sequence than 
it had to go through it, and id 
fifteen minutes he was hanging 
in the water with an expectant 
eye on Marguerite. The current 
had dissipated the octopus ink, 
EEEETZ CH 
and all was as it had been, except for Hank, who was lazily 
suspended with his arms crossed 
and an. unforgiving look. 
“Don’t start him up again yet, 
Maggie,” Ee gargled, the box 
snapping out the sense in dolphin. “There’s no point in us all 
just having a little vacation here. 
If Andy can’t analyze what he 
did to abort the sequence, there’s 
no point in his trying to repeat 
it. He’ll abort at the same point. 
Now, fishmouth, what happened?” 
The animal snapped his teeth 
in a grimace of rage or chagrin. 
“Look out, easy bleeder. What 
went wrong is that your rotten 
machine is manufactured to a 
less grade of precision than what 
you expect to be done with it. 
You can’t open an oyster with 
a sledge hammer.” 
“Yes you can, if you know how 
lightly to tap it I know what 
you did wrong, and you know 
what you did wrong, so let’s have 
St out in the oped, or we’ll never 
get lunch today.” 
“What's that mean?” thr 
Senator asked Marguerite. 
“Means he earns our lunch. 
He's got to run the sequence right 
twice.” 
Eeeetz ch snorted something 
the machine translated as random sounds. “Ugh! A-a-a-a-gh!” 
At the same rime He rose to the 
•surface above them, blew might
ily and returned witK a fresh 
supply of oxygen. “All right Its 
that nicked worm gear. There’s 
a Half-moon chip out of the 
twenty-fourth turn. When I feel 
that chip clear the surface of the 
seat, I know one more full turn 
brings the gear exactly Half way 
out. It’s a fifty thread pin. Twenty-five turns is wh'at the instruction sheet called for, and twenty-five turns is what I gave it.” 
“So How come your spaceship 
blew up? If that was a simulated 
moon landing, you’re scattered 
over a thousand kilometer globe 
of space by now.” 
“I don’t know. I brought that 
gear out twenty-five turns to the 
micron.” 
“Are you sure? Want to bet 
you didn’t just bring it out one 
full turn past that chip?” 
“Well, that’s twenty-five turns. 
Wait a minute 1” He flew to the 
face of the machine where He 
had made the mistake and carefully extracted the chipped worm 
gear. ”... twenty-four, twentyfive, twenty-six 1” Eeeetz cH 
swam angrily to Hank. “You 
sneaked out Here and reversed 
that gear ... so one turn past 
the nick was twenty-seven instead of twenty-five. Ak, Ak, Akt” 
H ank swam back a little further out of reach of those 
teeth. “Sure I did. I wonder if 
you can guess why?” 
“Ak Ak! Make fool of me, 
your only friend in the water. 
Dirty Human trick.” 
“OH, Andy, stop steaming. You 
felt that nick come around 
through your lingers, didn’t you? 
And you were using that tiny 
jar when it cleared the surface 
of the plate as a short cut, 
weren’t you?” 
“So what if I was? Intelligence 
is laziness. Creatures that do 
things the long way every time 
are just clock works. Why do I 
have to count the turns?” 
“I could say just because of 
what happened. Human mechanics are intelligent, too, and that 
does mean lazy. One pulls that 
threaded post out to inspect it 
and has to lay it down for a minute. If he picks it up by the 
other end, he’s going to insert 
it with the thread reversed. It’s 
identical to his senses, so why 
shouldn’t He?” 
“Good point. I forget human 
beings can hardly see or feel.” 
“The teal point, though', is 
that by relying on the ieel 
through your hands you’re choosing the wrong sensory feedback 
as a guide. Those artificial Hands 
are always going to be prosthetic 
aids, for you. To rely on their 
sensing elements is grossly 
wrong for a dolphin. We don’t 
want a less efficient man, which 
is what you’ll make of yourself 
by relying on our devices. We 
want an improved dolphin. Otherwise, we could not, in good 
conscience, let you sell the others of your people on accepting 
the Eelping-Hand program and 
the surgery that makes it possible.” 
“I don’t see tEat” 
“Yes you do. You’re just so 
smart you don’t want to admit 
it. We want your senses and 
your brain to dominate the Handed dolphin project The Hands 
are just tools, organic tools yes, 
but just machines to extend your 
muscular control over your environment 
“Now quit kidding around. 
You don’t Have to count those 
threads one two three four, and 
you wouldn’t, if you weren’t 
trying to act like a man. You 
can scan it with your echolocator in less time and with greater accuracy. Stop fooling with 
me, baby, or I’ll swim out Here 
some night and wire that thing 
up so a wrong move shocks you.” 
E eeetz cH grunted; but he 
swam back in position to 
begin the sequence again. “Senator, you are a witness to Human 
cruelty on a well meaning animal. Only men enjoy cruelty.” 
Coatl gargled. “Right. And 
only men learn anything more 
than to feed, frolic, and fornicate. Why don’t you quit and 
just stay a fish?” 
Eeeetz ch circled tightly away 
from the machine and around 
Coatl. His dark eye sparkled 
with mischief. “Okay, vivisectionist. I thought you were different, a Senator, some kind of 
super human. You’re just another knife and test-tube man. 
Okay. Just remember, when 
some three meter shark chases 
you, don’t call Eeeetz ch.” 
Cheerfully, He swam back to 
Start on his three dimensional 
maze and plunged into activity 
on Marguerite’s signal. 
This time He was remarkably 
silent as He flashed up and down 
inside the weird framework. In 
less than an Hour, He Had completed the meter long instruction sheet, and exuberantly flung 
himself up through the surface 
of the sea where he plopped and 
splashed and cut circles for five 
minutes before He zoomed down 
with a fresH supply of air. 
The dolphin swam to Hank. 
“Let’s go, spear man. Eat early 
today, when I run this second 
sequence. You want to reset it, 
or shall I?” 
Hank grinned. “I do it exactly 
Halfway. You finish it, huh?” 
“Wheeeeeee-ewl You really 
want to impress this Senator. 
Okay!” He flipped about the 
teaching device, turning knobs 
and snapping switches. In a few 
minutes, He whistled, "Okay, 
Maggie. Ready wKen you are.” 
EEEETZ CH 
Just at that moment, Hank 
swam leisurely by the machine 
and ripped out the middle third 
of the instructions. Eeeetz ch’s 
whistles and clacks rilled the 
sea, and the mechanical voice of 
the translator repeated many 
times, “What in the crab-eating 
hell is this? I’m supposed to be 
told when you want me to memorize the sequence. No games No 
games No games damnit!” 
Hank shrugged. “Life has no 
rules. Put Him to work, Maggie.” 
V 
nphis time the porpoise worked 
more purposefully. As he 
approached the missing portion 
of the instructions, his motions 
became as deliberate as those of 
a chess player, lapping pieces on 
th'e board in a planned combination. A high, thin whistle began 
to escape from him. As Ramon 
Heard it from Eeeetz ch, the 
sound was an undifferentiated 
whine like a jeweler’s saw, but 
the translator modulated it into 
an intricate music close to the 
skirling of bagpipes. 
Abruptly, the sound died and 
Eeeetz ch swam to Hank with 
a hang-dog air. “I’ve lost it. 
Give me a little help.” 
Hank pointed to what was left 
cf the sequence sheet. “Go read 
it, you lazy devil, you’re past 
the missing instructions already.” 
Eeeetz ch gave a mighty 
“Clack 1” of chagrin and glanced 
at the remainder of the sheet. 
Two minutes later, a roiling 
cloud of octopus ink enveloped 
them all. “Crab cakes!” the 
swimming mammal cried. "Crab 
the crab crab crab cakes!” 
Coatl could Hear the choking 
sounds from Hank and Maggie 
that were laughter in the throat 
language. As the water cleared, 
he could see Marguerite twined 
about Eeeetz ch’s back, while 
Hank Hung on to one arm as 
they laughed. 
“God!” cried Hank. “You’re 
as funny as a man sometimes.” 
Marguerite held on as the porpoise thrashed distractedly. “Oh, 
oh!” she laughed. “Just when I 
think I’m looking at man’s replacement, you blow it, baby. 
Wow!” 
At length, the wild, whirling 
mass of legs and flukes came to 
rest and separated. “Early 
lunch? asked Hank.' “Not likely.” 
“I can go catch myself something to eat. This is my world. 
I’m self sufficient.” 
“Sure. Self sufficient but not 
very smart. You can reset the 
whole sequence and take it from, 
the top.” 
This time the dolphin maintained his air control, almost of 
slow motion, through the whole 
procedure. He was deliberately 
not looking at even the portion 
of the instructions still posted. 
Despite his air of slow care, 
Coatl was able to see, when Marguerite swam to Him and' cocked 
her ankle to show him the stop 
watch, that Eeeetz ch was actually several minutes ahead of 
the time He Had made when he 
first ran the set correctly. 
Ramon was developing a distinct anticipation of lunch', when 
Eeeetz ch suddenly cursed and 
again the inky cloud exploded 
around them. “Sorry,” said the 
armed dolphin. “I’m a little 
tired. And I was almost through.” 
Hank stretched the dolphin’s 
artificial extremities, testing them 
for tone. He let them snap back, 
“Yes, you’re tired; but not too 
much to finish. This is the kind 
of world men live in all the time, 
Andy. Jobs have to be finished. 
Draw on your reserves a little. 
You’re all getting hungry, too.” 
The dolphin quietly went 
about resetting the teaching machine. There was no badinage 
this time, but when Marguerite 
said, “Qo,” she added in an intense tone, “You can do it!” and 
Hank called, “Watch that 
last step I” 
C oatl became apprehensive. It 
was as if a relative, a 
younger brother or a cousin 
were perfor ming some difficult 
task. Ramon’s muscles ached, 
trying to help the porpoise with 
body English. He began to worry 
about what another failure would 
do to the volatile psyche of the 
student. In one way, the careful 
manner in which' the black torpedo shot in and out of the machine could be regarded as bored 
competence. In another way, it 
looked very like an adolescent 
strung up to the point where 
failure would cripple him. Coat 
realized he was holding each’ 
breath, letting it escape in the 
perceptible jerks and pauses 
known as “ratchet breath” — a 
telltale sign of anxiety since its 
recognition two generations before. He made him self breathe 
easy, made himself hang quiet 
in the water, made himself not 
be hungry, and waited. 
Suddenly, Eeeetz ch let out 
a wild whistle of achievement. 
“LuncKI” the translator repeated. “LunchluncblunchluncKlunch!” From a receptacle deep 
in the machine a school of silvery mullet swam in all directions, as the porpoise and his 
teachers lunged after them, snapping and grasping. 
Startled, Coatl was caught at 
full rest. He snared one medium 
mullet, and that was all. He 
kicked lazily to the surface, 
{where he could take off his 
brea thing mask, unshipped his 
knife, and gutted the mullet. By 
EEEETZ CH 
the time he had filleted it, dipped the slices in sea water, and 
chewed them leisurely down, the 
trailing entrails below Him had 
attracted several small fish. He 
was agile enough to take two 
of these and was completing his 
lunch when Hank swam up holding a forty centimeter mullet by 
the tail. "No thanks, I’ve eaten” Coatl said, as He sank back 
into the water. They turned the 
mullet loose, circled to pick up 
Marguerite and Eeeetz ch, and 
gamboled through the water 
back to the come-close pool. 
When they were arrived, Coatl 
was the only one to leave the 
watch. As h’e walked up the steps, 
he felt an irrational stab of jealousy. When he turned to. make 
his good-byes, he was shocked to 
realize that Hank and Marguerite Had begun to look natural to 
him. The farewell was awkward, 
and Coatl knew why. He was 
not really ready to go. 
Eeetz cH stood Half out of the 
water, as on the first day. THe 
dolphin spoke His thin, accented 
English’. “Remember me, Ramon! I remember you. Come 
back to us.” Before Coatl could 
speak the great body flashed out 
of the water and splashed mightily. When the Senator Had wiped 
the water from his eyes. Eeeetz 
ch Had disappeared into the sea. 
^T'hree days later, the Senator 
was eating bean soup with 
three of His fellow committee 
members. He blew a little through 
His nose, which now seemed always a Httle dry, and thought, 
How am I going to get the reality across to these Senators? 
They’re all too old to get in the 
water; but at least they’re on 
committees that are future oriented, and that means reality 
oriented. I don’t want to lie and 
pretend that the Caribbean Station can contribute to military 
research. It represents research 
into life, so much more important and so much Harder to get 
money for. 
You just Have to try, Ramon, 
He repeated to himself as his 
mother had said when he went 
away to school, you just have to 
try. Nobody will hold it against 
you if you don’t succeed. 
He blew a little more through 
his nose to wet the inside of it, 
and started to speak. Behind his 
eyeballs, he remembered the 
blinding stab of the Caribbean 
sun. His chest itched, and he 
scratched it gently. Senator Ramon Coatl knew wHat his chest 
itched for: he wanted one of 
those brass adaptor plates set in 
it, so He could wear gills. 
— H. H. HOLLIS 
GALAXY’S STARS 
T fie author wfio appears in Galaxy and If as “H. H. Hollis” 
Has another name in real life, but 
He doesn’t let us use it He’s an attorney in a large Southwest city, 
and the nature of his specialty 
in the law is such that his practice 
might be affected if his real name 
were used. Eeeetz Ch is the first 
of a series exploring the mandolphin interface. We think it’s 
going to be a good one. 
Incidentally, we discourage the 
use of pen-names as much as we 
can. There was a time in science 
fiction, not too long ago, when 
many writers played a sort of 
game with pen-names for every 
sort of story; often the editors 
encouraged them in it, or even required it, when they felt that one 
writer was appearing too often. 
We’ve never had that feeling — 
can’t get too much of a good 
thing, is how we feel — and we 
Have a general opinion that the 
reader is entitled to know which 
writer he is reading. (Time was 
when some magazines had “house 
names” and writers might sell 
them a story and find it credited 
to some made-up pseudonym. 
Sometimes that was annoying 
to the writer. Once in a while it 
turned out funny — as when Ray 
Bradbury once had a story under 
a house name. The readers’ letters 
almost unanimously condemned 
it and begged the editor to quit 
printing stories by people like the 
house name and get more of 
Bradbury.) 
There are, of course, a few writers who are only known by their 
pen-names. The late Cordwainer 
Smith, for instance, would have 
been unrecognizable to sf readers by his real name of Paul Linebarger — although Dr. Lincbarger was a world leader in his own 
field of political science, being 
among other tilings a professor at 
Jofins Hopkins, a consultant to 
the State Department and a godson of Sun Yat-sen. In Linebarger’s case it was important to 
him to keep Kis identity confidential; in the case of two or three 
other writers there are similar 
persuasive reasons for a penname . but generally speaking 
we try to avoid them. 
Gordon R. Dickson is no penname; lie’s a big and cheerful 
Minnesotan who has been writing 
science fiction for some twenty 
years now, which is about half 
his life. A long-time Galaxy regular, Dickson has put in most of 
his recent time on books; we’re 
glad to see Him back with Building on the Line. 
Senior lady science-fiction writer of the present era may well be 
Miriam Allen de Ford, a charming San Franciscan who keeps 
two careers going. The other field 
of writing she graces is crime detection; she turns from her researches into some gory killing of 
the past to the exploration of 
some grisly aspect of the future. 
Brian W. Aldiss Has a shelf 
full of awards for science-fiction 
writing, beginning with what was 
called either The Hothouse World 
or The Long Afternoon of Earth, 
depending on whether you think 
of it as a series of novelettes or a 
book. He is literary editor for the 
Oxford Mail in England, where 
He lives in a small village near the 
university town. Although the 
bulk of His writing has been science fiction, He is also the author 
of a travel guide to Jugoslavia 
and a number of other works. 
Aldiss is, of course, one of the 
leading practitioners of what is 
sometimes called “The New 
Wave” in science fiction; almost 
at the other end of the spectrum 
is Mack Reynolds, one of the few 
science-fiction writers whose interest in the social and economic 
problems of the future Has anticipated the thought of actual 
economists. Reynolds is an American who Has spent little enough 
time in the U.S.A. in the past 
couple of decades; his travels 
Have taken him to almost all the 
countries of Europe, to the Near 
East, to Ceylon and other Asian 
countries and just about everywhere else this side of the moon. 
He is at present living in Mexico. 
Robert Silverb’erg, who is a frequent contributor to these pages, 
is a New Yorker and one of the 
most prolific writers of modern 
times. His books Have included 
such disparate subjects as a biography of the Pharaoh IkHnaton, 
art archeological study of the 
mound-builders of the midwest, a 
collection of essays on picaresque 
figures called Scientists and 
Scoundrels and a number of juveniles. 
The BEMs in your neighborhood 
won't run off with your books 
if you put inside the front cover 
of each book ... a gummed bookplate 
with your name printed on it! 
YOUR NAME HERE 
No Cf-614 by Emsh 
YOUR NAME HERE 
No. GF-612 by Emsh 
0our Xamr Ijrrr 
No. CM-12 by Cullen Rapp No GX-57 by Lynd Wart! 
FINAGLE SAYS — 
The umpteenth corollary 
of Finagle's General Law of 
Dynamic Negatives says: 
"No books are ever lost 
by loaning except ones you 
particularly want to keep." 
100 lor $5. 200, $7.50, 300, $t0 
with owner's name imprinted 
All Postpaid. 
Add slate sales tax. it »ny. 
ACTUAI S|2P, all designs, 3 * A ins 
The derig ns shown abos e arc the only ones we otler! 
Order from GALAXY 421 Hudson St., New York, N.Y. 10014 
STAR TREK ENTERPRISES 
Dept. G 
P. O. Box 38429 
Hollywood, California 
Send to: 
S7/41R 7 nSX 
Send for FREE Catalog listing items never before available from a TV show! Exciting photos, actual scripts, 
film clips, fun bumper stickers, and MORE! 
★ 
STAR TREK WRITER'S GUIDE $2.00 
The show’s “bible," used by all 
5TAR TREK writers and directors!!! 
. ( STAR TREK FORMAT Si 00 
l/r' 
The original television FORMAT which sold 
STAR TREK! Gene Roddenberry’s original de 
scriptions of the series format- — -all the things 
which ultimately became television's STAR 
TREK! 
★ 
Please send me: 
Free STAR TREK CATALOG Only 
STAR TREK WRITER'S GUIDE 52.00 
STAR TREK FORMAT $1 .00 
California residents add 5% Sales Tax TOTAL ENCLOSED 
(cash, check or money order accepted) 
Name ... 
Address .. 
City . 
State 
ZIP CODE