WORLDS OF 
Special Supplement! Extract 
From a Forthcoming SF Novel 
November 1968 
SCIENCE FICTION 604 
CREATURES OF LIGHT 
57 /^^ 7 JZSX 
Send for FREE Catalog listing items never before available from a TV show! Exciting photos, actual scripts, 
film clips, fun bumper stickers, and MORE! 
★ 
STAR TREK WRITER’S GUIDE $2.00 
The show's “bible," used by all 
STAR TREK writers and directors!!! 
( STAR TREK FORMAT $1.00 
The original television FORMAT which sold 
STAR TREK! Gene Roddenberry's original descriptions of the series format — all the things 
which ultimately became television's STAR 
TREK! 
STAR TREK ENTERPRISES 
Dept. G 
P.O.Box 38429 
Hollywood, California 
Please send me: 
Free STAR TREK CATALOG Only 
STAR TREK WRITER’S GUIDE $2.00 
STAR TREK FORMAT $1.00 
California residents add 5% Sales Tax TOTAL ENCLOSED 
(cash, check or money order accepted) 
Send to: Name. 
Address . 
City Stal<? 7IP CODE 
November, 1968 
Vol. 18, No. 11 
ISSUE 132 
WORLDS OF 
□3 
SCIENCE 
FICTION 
ALL NEW 
STORIES 
Frederik Pohl, Editor Lester del Rey, Managing Editor 
Robert M. Guinn , Publisher 
Judy-Lynn Benjamin, Associate Editor Mavis Fisher, Circulation Director 
NOVELETTE 
THE PERFECT SECRETARY 133 
by Mike Kirsch 
SERIAL 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 6 
by Mack Reynolds 
COMPLETE SHORT NOVEL ... 
Creatures of Light 
by Roger Zelazny 
SHORT STORIES 
WHERE THE TIME WENT 99 
by James H. Schmitz 
NOW THAT MAN IS GONE 108 
by James Blish 
WIZARD SHIP 113 
by F. Hafnes Price 
BOOKMOBILE 124 
by Charles L. Harness 
FEATURES 
EDITORIAL 4 
by Frederik Pohl 
IF - and WHEN 62 
by Lester del Rey 
HUE AND CRY 158 
SF CALENDAR 161 
Cover by BODE from NOW THAT MAN IS GONE 
IF published monthly by Galaxy Publishing Corporation. Robert M. Guinn, 
president, Vol. 18, No. 11, Main Office: 421 Hudson Street, New York, 10014. 
60c per copy. Subscription 12 Issues 56.00 in the United States, Canada, Mexico, 
South America and Central America and U.S. Possessions, elsewhere $7.00. 
Second-class postage paid at New York, New York, and at additional mailing 
offices. Copyright by Galaxy Publishing Corporation, 1968. All rights, including translation reserved. All material must be accompanied by self-addressed 
stamped envelope. The Publisher assumes no responsibility for unsolicited 
material. All stories are fiction, and any similarity between characters and 
actual persons is coincidental. 
Printed In the U.S.A. by the Guinn Company, New York, N.Y. 10014 
IF • Editorial 
MORE 
I n June the asteroid Icarus made 
one of its fairly frequent close 
approaches to Earth. Icarus can come 
quite close indeed, closer than the 
moon; this time it missed by several 
hundred thousand miles, But a California guru had a vision that it would 
hit head-on, preached the word to his 
flock, and a number of them spent 
that day on the tops of various mountains, waiting in vain to enjoy the 
promised tidal waves. 
More recently two ministers (both 
also Californians, as it happens) have 
been granted the revelation that the 
whole of southern California is to be 
destroyed by earthquakes about the 
time you read these words, and as 
we are writing them some of their 
parishioners are busy packing to move 
to Tennessee, which is alleged to be 
out of the immediate danger zone. 
To be sure there have been prophecies of doom of one kind or another for a good many centuries. The 
doctrine of “millennarian-ism” terrified whole medieval populations, who 
had been led to expect that the one 
thousandth anniversary of the birth 
of Christ would be the end of the 
world on New Year’s Day of the year 
1000; early in this century, many 
were frightened at predictions that 
the Earth was about to pass through 
the tail of a comet, whose poison 
gases would kill mankind off completely. 
DOOMS 
What’s interesting about this century’s Cassandra cries is that, one 
way or another, they are based not 
only on scientific facts, but very 
likely even on science-fiction stories. 
Wells’s The Days of the Comet told 
of events very like the comet fear 
of a few decades ago; the idea of the 
San Andreas fault opening up and 
dumping California into the Pacific, 
or of an asteroid striking the Earth, 
are covered m any number of sf 
stories. So we have a proposition. 
Any religious leaders who wish to 
have an apocalyptic vision and announce it to their followers are offer— 
ed a selection of other dooms culled 
from recent science fiction. No 
charge. No obligation. Just a public 
service: 
1. The Sun goes nova and incinerates us all. 
2. The Earth’s magnetic field reverses and charged particles from 
space kill us by ionization while it is 
getting re-established. 
3. The frozen centrifugal hump at 
the Earth’s equator, left over from 
eras when our planet spun half an 
hour faster than it does now, slumps 
back to where it belongs and the released heat boils every ocean. 
Enough? More on request, fellows. 
Just say you saw them first in //.... 
—THE EDITOR 
Why were these men great? 
How does anyone — man or woman — achieve 
greatness? Is it not by mastery of the powers 
within ourselves ? 
Knowthe mysterious world within you ! Attune 
yourself to the wisdom of the ages! Grasp the 
inner power of your mind ! Learn the secrets of a 
full and peaceful life! 
Benjamin Franklin, statesman and inventor. * 
Isaac Newton, discoverer of the Law of Gravitation . Francis Bacon, philosopher and scientist 
. like many other learned and great men and 
women . were Rosicrucians. The Rosicrucians 
(NOT a religious organization) have been in 
existence for centuries. Today, headquarters of 
the Rosicrucians send over seven million pieces 
of mail annually to all parts of the world. 
Wie ROSICRUCIANS 
San Jose (AMORC) California 95114, U.S.A. 
CONSPIRACY 
FIRST OF TWO PARTS 
THE 
COMPUTER 
MACK REYNOLDS 
if &3SS 
Illustrated by GAUGHAN 
The computer was tapped, and 
every man if picked to save 
itself was murdered. So if 
fingered Kosloff as the next. 
I Paul Kosloff the Second looked 
up at the sweeping second hand 
' I 'lie lone technician in the con- on the studio clod:, then rearrangtrol booth said into his inter- ed his papers and props on the 
com, "One minute to go, Pro- desk at which he sat. He deared 
fessor Kosloff.” his throat, put a hand to his By
ronic-revival cravat for a final 
touching up. 
The second hand hit the hour, 
and the technician touched controls. A red light below the clock 
flashed on, showing that the studio was hot. 
The technician activated the 
canned standard introduction. 
"... National Tri-Vision brings 
you the University of the Air and 
Professor Paul Kosloff with the 
latest lecture in his Slavic Languages Series . Professor Kosloff. 
Paul Kosloff looked up from the 
desk where he had been pretending to study the papers before him 
and smiled into the baleful triple 
eye of one of the Tri-Vision cameras. 
He was a well built man of 
possibly thirty, undistinguished of 
face, other than its Slavic qualities 
of blond hair and blue eyes. 
"Our subject today, and for several lectures to follow will be the 
Cyrillic alphabet.” He twisted his 
mouth in a rueful smile. "And I 
am afraid this is one of the crosses 
the student of Slavic languages 
must bear since, as you undoubtedly already know, the Russians, 
Bulgarians, Serbs and various 
others do not utilize the more nearly universal Latin alphabets, but 
one that is quite different and, according to its adhereants, possibly older. The Cyrillic alphabet is 
traditionally ascribed to Saint Cyril but was probably the result of 
the efforts of his followers, based 
possibly by Cyril himself upon the 
glagolithic alphabet which is still 
used somewhat in that area of 
Common Eur-Asia once known as 
Yugoslavia ...” 
The technician in the control 
booth yawned mightily, scratched 
himself in boredom. 
An hour later, Paul Kosloff was 
winding it up. Once again his tone 
took on a rueful quality. "I am 
afraid there is no alternative. The 
serious student is simply going to 
have to memorize it.” 
He smiled into the Tri-Vision 
camera and touched a button with 
his foot. 
The red light beneath the dock 
flickered off, indicating the studio 
was no longer hot. Paul could see 
the technician going through the 
motions of running through the 
canned standard routine of station 
and program identification. Paul 
Kosloff leaned back in his chair 
and shifted his shoulders in an 
elaborate stretch. He had a tendency to tense up on lens toward 
the end of any of his hour-long 
classes. 
The technician gestured to him 
in a professional’s indication that 
all was through and this studio 
completely off the air, and Paul 
nodded. 
He came to his feet and fumbled 
with his papers, gathered them up 
and stuffed them into his briefcase. 
nphe technician came in smoking 
a cigarette. Paul’s eyebrows 
went up a little, but he said nothing. He wondered where the other 
procured the illegal narcotic. Not 
that it was any of his business. It 
was up to Central Planning Production and their enforcement arm 
to keep tabs on the illegal use of 
farmland. However, he was mildly 
disapproving. Tobacco demanded 
the best of tillable land; it wasn’t 
like, for instance, cannabis , which 
would grow just about anywhere. 
For every acre put into tobacco, 
somebody, somewhere, was going 
without cereal grain or some other 
agricultural necessity. 
The technician said, “Well, 
that’s it for the week, Professor. 
You know, you teachers have it 
easy.” 
“How’s that?” Paul fingered the 
invisible automatic zipper on his 
briefcase, closing it. 
“Well, this job comes under the 
head of hard labor for me. I put 
in a full four-hour day, on a fourday-a-week basis. And I’ll probably be stuck with it for a full 
five years before retirement. But 
here you turn up one lousy hour 
a week.” 
Paul Kosloff grunted deprecation. “How long do you think it 
takes me to prepare one of these 
lectures, Jerry?” He took up the 
briefcase and stuck it under his 
arm. 
The other was only slightly im
pressed. “Well, I know it isn’t exactly off the cuff. But it seems to 
come out easy enough.” 
Paul smiled faintly. “That’s 
showmanship. Teaching nowadays 
has its shortcomings, Jerry. In 
the old days, a professor would 
work out a basic lecture and give 
it over and over again, year in and 
year out, as his new classes came 
along. Today, you give a lecture 
exactly once, particularly in a field 
such as language which doesn’t do 
much in the way of changing. Science would be different, of course, 
or such subjects as modern history. 
So you give your lecture once 
and it’s canned, and for the rest 
of time, for all practical purposes, 
it’s available to any student interested in the subject.” 
“I guess that’s right,” the technician said, yawning again. “But 
you’ve still got it made. Twenty 
years from now, maybe, you’ll still 
be dragging your royalties. When’s 
your next book going to be put 
in the data banks, Professor?” 
“This one on Bulgarian, probably in a month or so,” Paul said, 
preparatory to leaving. And don’t 
be too envious about my royalties. 
When twenty years are up, a book 
goes in the public domain, and 
anybody can dial it in the library 
computer data banks for free. And 
there are an awful lot of books on 
the subject, for the student to 
pick and choose from, and a penny per reading takes a long time to 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
mount up to much in the way of 
dollars.” 
“ Penny per reading,” the other 
said, indignantly. Are you kidding, 
hombre? I pay twenty-five cents 
to read a thriller.” 
P aul was rueful again. “That’s 
fiction. You read it once, keeping it on your library teevee screen 
booster for probably a few hours, 
then it’s unlikely you’d ever dial 
it again. But with a textbook, the 
student needs it over and over, 
sometimes only for minutes at a 
time. You couldn’t expect him to 
have to pay twenty-five cents each 
time he dialed the book.” 
Jerry said, “When I was still in 
school, we used to buy the kind of 
book you wanted to refer to over 
and over.” 
Paul nodded, even as he toned 
to go. “Time marches on. Every 
year that goes by, the mini-apartments get smaller. Who can afford 
the room to have bookshelves these 
days? Every square foot counts.” 
“Yeah,” Jerry said. “You oughta 
see mine. If I stretch my arms out, 
I can touch both walls.” 
Paul winced. “Thank the holy 
living Zoroaster I have one of the 
older ones. That’s the advantage 
of staying put.” He started for the 
sound proof door that led to the 
corridor beyond. 
“Yeh,” Jerry said cynically. 
“One of these days the housing 
people will come surveying around 
and figure out some way of making 
two apartments out of yours. Especially since you’re not married.” 
Paul grinned over his shoulder 
at him, even as he activated the 
door. “That’s as good a reason 
as I’ve ever heard of for getting 
married. When are you going to 
come mountain climbing with me 
again, Jerry?” 
“Ha,” the other called after 
him. “Fat chance. You’ll never get 
me up in those overgrown hills 
again. When I fell off that cliff, 
I thought I’d had it. If it hadn’t 
been for you, Professor, I wouldn’t 
be here now.” Paul Kosloff had 
passed beyond the sound of Jerry’s voice, so the Tri-Vision technician finished in a lower tone. 
“And don’t think I’ll ever forget 
it, chum-pal. Any time, any time 
at all, my right arm; ’cause you 
could have fallen off just as easy 
as not, coming down to get me 
that way.” 
T)aul Kosloff made his way down 
the studio corridor and out into the office area of the University 
of the Air proper. He found it 
necessary to murmur greetings to 
others as they passed, and several 
times gave a brief wave to someone 
at a distance. However, he was 
through for the day and for the 
week, as the studio technician had 
pointed out, and had no desire to 
linger for shop talk with colleagues. 
In actuality, he had his next week’s 
lecture all ready to go and he 
planned to take several days off for 
hiking in the New England National Park. It was autumn and 
there were still enough trees up in 
that area to appreciate the changing in leaves. 
He went to the nearest vacuumtube entry in the building and 
dialed a two-seater. When the light 
indicated it had arrived, he activated the closet-like door and 
wedged himself into the small vehicle, putting his briefcase on the 
seat beside him. 
Automatically, without need for 
thought, as automatically as once 
men drove cars, he brought down 
the canopy, put his Universal 
Credit Card in the slot, dropped 
the pressurizer and dialed the central vacuum-tube terminal. The 
Tri-Vision studios in which he 
worked were located in Greater 
Washington, but he lived in the 
pseudo-city of Princeton in the 
area once known as New Jersey. 
He felt the sinking sensation of 
the two-seater dropping to tube 
level, and then the robot controls 
took over and he shuttled back and 
forth, preparatory to the shot. The 
car hesitated briefly, that brief 
hesitation before the shot proper, 
and Paul Kosloff took the involuntary breath from which only heroes 
could refrain. The pressure drove 
him back into his seat; only seconds passed, and then the direction 
of the pressure was reversed. 
The shuttling began again, but 
lasted only briefly. The green destination light flickered on the dash, 
and he released the pressure and 
pushed back the canopy to step 
forth into the central terminal. 
He took a twenty-seater to the 
terminal in Princeton and there 
transferred to another two-seater 
and dialed the nearest local terminal to his home. 
He could have taken his first 
two-seater all the way from the 
studio in Greater Washington to 
his own apartment house, but it 
was a matter of economy. Like 
practically all others who were not 
in possession of a considerable 
number of shares of Variable Basic, Paul Kosloff made a habit 
and hobby of watching expenditures. When he finally retired, he 
looked forward to having accumulated enough Variable Basic to 
add to his ten shares of government-provided Inalienable Basic 
to live comfortably and to indulge 
his hobbies, which consisted largely of outdoor sports. Hiking and 
hunting, skin diving, and mountain climbing are not of themselves 
expensive, but getting to the Yukon, the Caribbean, or perhaps the 
Peruvian Andes can be. 
He could have dialed his second 
local two-seater into the apartment 
house in which he lived, but it 
was his practice to relax after a 
broadcast by having a quiet drink 
in one of the local auto-bars. 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
TTe left the tube and sauntered 
* into Jerry’s Joynt, looking forward to his relaxant. 
A chap he had known vaguely 
for some years as a neighbor waved 
to him. "Hi, professor!” He was 
seated at a table across the room 
where there was an unimpeded 
view of the large screen Tri-Vision 
set built into the wall. 
Paul waved a hand negligently. 
“Hello, Perry. How goes it, hombre?” 
The man’s name, as Paul recalled, was Perry Altshuler and 
he was seated with his chum-pal, 
an equal number named Jack Simon. Paul knew them as labor 
draft dodgers and slackers, of 
working age but satisfied to live in 
complete idleness on the proceeds 
of the ten shares of Inalienable 
Basic issued by the government to 
each citizen at birth. It wasn’t 
easy to do, Paul knew, but one 
could survive on a subsistence level 
and get through life without turning a hand. The idea didn’t appeal 
to him. 
Perry called over, "Guess who I 
just saw on the Tri-Vision.” 
"Who?” 
"You.” 
Paul Kosloff looked over at him 
with an air of deprecation. "I 
didn’t know that you were a student of the Slavic languages.” 
"I’m not, hombre, but it’s kind 
of interesting to see somebody you 
know.” 
Paul Kosloff dialed a pseudowhiskey. What Perry Altshuler and 
Jack Simon would have called seabooze, the somewhat tasteless and 
anemic fermented product of the 
ocean, would have been cheaper, 
but he made a practice of indulging himself on this one day of the 
week. 
Someone else entered the autobar and quietly took a table off 
in a corner nearest to the door. 
Paul Kosloff frowned. He had 
a good memory and knew that he 
had seen this newcomer just recently. But where? Had he been 
introduced to the man? Should he 
say hello? But no, it wasn’t that. 
He didn’t know the other, had 
merely come in contact with him, 
somewhere recently. 
And then it came to him. The 
stranger had been in the same 
twenty-seater that Paul had arrived 
in from Greater Washington. It 
was undoubtedly simply a coincidence that now he had drifted into 
the same auto-bar. Paul Kosloff 
forgot about him and returned to 
his pseudo-whiskey and soda. He 
kept his eyes studiously from the 
Tri-Vision screen which Altshuler 
and Simon were watching. 
Although he was not fanatical 
about the matter, Paul Kosloff was inclined to deplore the violence of nine Tri-Vision shows out 
of ten. The degree seemed to be 
a progression, at least arithmetical 
but almost to the point of geometric. He remembered reading of the 
progression of the Roman games. 
They had started off as rather 
simple fights between trained and 
accomplished, swordsmen, and those 
who watched were largdy the soldiers of a warrior people themselves, knowledgeable and critical 
about what they witnessed. But 
each year that went by saw the 
spectacle grow and the need for 
the current games to intensify, if 
the watchers were to be satisfied. 
And the crowds became less and 
less trained soldiers and became 
the whole population, men, women 
and children. Toward the last, the 
emperors were providing hundreds 
of thousands of animals and men 
to satisfy the bloodlust of their 
people. Nor were simple fights sufficient. Battles, including naval 
engagements, were fought in the 
arena, sometimes between such exotic warriors as pigmies from Africa’s interior and seven-foot-tall 
northmen from far Scandinavia. 
Criminals were crucified, tied face 
to face with a rotting corpse until 
over a period of days, they smothered to death; baboons were trained to rape virgins; living slaves 
were dipped in tar and strung up 
to be used as torches. 
He shook his head and finished 
his drink. 
What was there about vicarious 
violence that seemed to serve a 
need in so many? Some of their 
own frustrations seemed to be more 
bearable if they could watch others being done to death. 
Paul Kosloff pushed his glass 
back to the center of the table 
where it could sink away into the 
automated kitchen-bar in the cellar, and considered briefly another 
drink. He shook his head. Watch 
the pennies and the dollars take 
care of themselves. He came to his 
feet and started for the door. In 
the Tri-Vision screen, two sets of 
knights were battling, it out. The 
details of the color show were 
shockingly realistic. Paul involuntarily winced when a hero with a 
mace slugged another full in the 
mouth, nose and chin. The victim’s 
features shattered. 
He grunted self-deprecation, 
even as he left the place. Who was 
he to talk? Since youth he had 
made a hobby of karate, kenpo, 
hoppa ken and nanpa ken and 
even held a Kodakan Judo Black 
Belt. Perhaps that was one device 
for getting rid of his own frustrations, although he wasn’t particularly aware of any. 
He sauntered easily in the direction of the building which 
housed his mini-apartment and let 
his mind dwell with pleasure on his 
coming jaunt to New England. 
His building was of advanced 
enough nature that he had to identify himself for entrance. He stood 
before the identity screen, put his 
thumb against it on the small spot 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
in the lower right hand corner and 
murmured, "Paul Kosloff.” 
The door opened, and he stepped 
through into the main lobby. 
It was then that they jumped 
him, and from the beginning Paul 
Kosloff knew he was in for it. 
These were pros. 
'T'here is a sizeable difference in 
^ karate and its related methods 
of defense and offense in the gym, 
where you work out with friends, 
instructors and opponents who are 
no more anxious to hurt you than 
they are for you to hurt them, and 
being attacked with serious intent. 
It is not just that the participant 
pulls his punches in the first case, 
it is the spirit of the thing. The 
aura of deadly intent, the smell 
of hurt or be hurt. 
There were two of them and they 
came in quickly, silently, the one 
before Paul Kosloff starting the 
attack with an attempted high 
kick to the face. It was purely instinctively that Paul reacted in a 
classic manner that would have 
brought plaudits from his current 
old hand instructor. 
He swung back with his own left 
foot — forcing himself, for the moment, to ignore the other stranger 
he could see moving from the rear 
— grabbed the attacker’s foot with 
his left hand just under the ankle 
and applied pressure to his knee 
joint by putting his right hand to 
the knee and pressing. As the 
other went down, he lashed out 
with a kick of his own in an attempt to get the man’s groin, but 
a shattering blow hit him on the 
left shoulder from behind. 
He was driven off balance and 
down and immediately rolled fast 
to get away from the other’s driving attack. 
He was able to get free, but 
considered only momentarily trying to achieve the time to work 
clear of his jerkin. The second assailant was too close upon him, 
even as the first was rolling out, 
preparatory to returning to his 
feet. 
Paul knew he had to get one or 
the other from the running quickly 
or he was sunk. He knew, instinctively, that these two were knowledgeable about hand to hand combat as he was, and they were at 
least his size and weight. 
He decided to risk the 21st 
Kata and drew himself into fighting stance. The one who had just 
slugged him from behind came in 
fast, throwing a left punch with 
pointed hand, Nishi ken style. 
Paul bent his body slightly to the 
right in downward motion and 
threw a left edge-of-hand block 
hard against the other’s wrist. He 
grabbed the inside of the wrist with 
his left, forcing his arm up high 
and pulled his opponent’s arm upward as he pivoted on his left foot 
to the left. His body was now completely backwards against the at
tacker’s stomach. He held the 
other’s arm high and with his right 
elbow came back hard with an elbow blow to the stranger’s stomach. With his right foot, he then 
tried to follow through with a rear 
kick to his opponent’s groin. 
He flunked it and his chance to 
eliminate the man, due to the attack of his other assailant. And inwardly he groaned. One man does 
not defeat two, if all three are 
equally competent. 
He tried to go into the Kokut su-dachi defensive layout position, 
his favorite, but the other was on 
him before he could get set. 
And then a new element entered the fray. A third stranger materialized, and for the moment complete despair washed Paul Kosloff. 
Two had been bad enough and, 
even though thus far he had been 
moderately successful in fighting 
them off, a third was beyond him. 
However, it was not exactly a 
stranger. Even as Paul tried to spin 
to meet this fresh attack, he placed 
the newcomer. It was the man he 
had wondered about in Jerry’s 
Joynt a few minutes earlier, the 
one who had ridden into the 
pseudo-city of Princeton with Paul 
in the vacuum-tube twenty-seater. 
B ut the situation altered even as 
amazement hit him. For the 
newcomer took his stand on Paul 
Kosloff’s side and was as knowledgeable, evidently, as anyone else. 
"Sut!” Screaming the Kiai yell, 
Paul’s new-found ally launched 
himself into the fight with an 11th 
Kata attack. 
For a moment, the two assailants stood and fought it eut, and 
all was a hash of confusion; then, 
evidently fearing still further outside interference, they managed to 
disengage themselves and beat their 
way through the front door and 
out into the street. 
Paul Kosloff, his fighting blood 
up, was all for heading out after 
them, but his newfound friend, 
who had wound up the spree on 
the floor, shook his head and panted. "No. Hold it, Kosloff. They’re 
probably heeled.” He came to his 
feet, dusted the knees of his trousers and felt of his ribs unhappily. 
Paul said, in indignant wonder, 
“Heeled! Do you mean those two 
cheap mugs might actually run the 
risk of a murder romp, on top of 
being footpads?” 
The other looked at him strangely and then bent and picked up a 
combat knife that thus far Paul 
Kosloff had failed to notice on the 
floor. The newcomer tested the 
point appreciatively with the tip 
of his right index finger. 
"You’ve got it a bit wrong. They 
weren’t cheap thugs. They’re well 
trained professionals. And they 
weren’t attempting to roll you, 
Kosloff — they were attempting to 
kill you.” 
Paul Kosloff blinked. 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
He took the other in more thoroughly. His rescuer was about 
Paul’s age, and a bit shorter, a bit 
stockier. His eyes were on the narrow side, and there was a quizzical quality about them. He was 
dark of complexion, but possibly 
it was sun, rather than racial heritage. However, Paul got the impression that the other was not an 
American; his clothes, for one 
thing, had a European cut. 
Paul said, “You know my name 
and evidently some of my business. 
I think you have some explaining 
to do, Mr. ...” 
“Castriota. Zack Castriota. All 
right, shall we go up to your apartment?” 
Paul led the way to the elevator, feeling his left leg in the vicinity of his knee gingerly. He 
hadn’t remembered taking a blow 
there, but evidently one of the 
others had landed a kick. It wasn’t 
broken, he knew, but it gave him 
a limp. 
In the elevator, he said, 
“Fourth floor,” and the robot voice 
said, “Fourth floor, sir.” 
Even as they ascended, Paul 
looked at the other from the side 
of his eyes. He said, “Where did 
you learn karate?” 
“Okinawa.” 
“I know you fight Okinawa 
style, but where did you learn it?” 
“Okinawa,” the other said laconically. “When I was a prisoner there.” 
“Prisoner!” Paul said. “For 
what?” 
“Espionage,” Zack Castriota 
said dryly. “And I’m afraid that’ll 
have to hold your curiosity for the 
nonce. Maybe I’ll tell you about it 
sometime.” 
/^vn the fourth floor, Paul led 
^ the way to his mini-apartment. 
He said, “How in the name of 
Zoroaster did you manage to get 
through that front door? It’s supposed to be guarded against strangers.” 
The other chuckled, but didn’t 
even bother to answer. He followed 
Paul into the small living-cum-bedroom of the mini-apartment. He 
looked around and nodded appreciately. “Very nice. Must be at 
least twenty years old. They don’t 
come this size any more.” 
“That’s right,” Paul said, “and 
I’m as scared as a funker that some 
slick will come along and decide to 
tear it down so they can erect a 
place on the site that will house 
twice the number.” 
The one who had named himself 
Zack Castriota sank down into 
Paul’s sole comfort chair and looked at his host contemplatively. 
Paul went over to a built-in 
drawer, opened it and fished around 
inside. He emerged with a sealed 
bottle and began twisting the cap. 
“Holy jumping Zoroaster,” the 
other said. “What’s that?” 
“Scotch.” 
"Scotch!” 
"Scotch.” Paul put the bottle 
down on the small servo-table next 
to the other and went to his autobar for glasses. He dialed soda and 
ice. "So far as I know,” he said 
seriously, "it’s the last bottle in 
the world.” 
The other was staring at it, highly impressed. "I’ve tasted Scotch 
once or twice, over in Common 
Europe, but I’ve never seen a full 
bottle before. Since the ultra-powers have banned cereals for the 
manufacture of beverages, it’s 
worth its weight in . well, in . .” 
“In Scotch,” Paul Kosloff said 
definitely. "There isn’t anything 
worth more. My father left me this. 
One of his few legacies. I’ve had it 
for years. Waiting for a suitable 
occasion to open it. Like my marriage, or the birth of my first child, 
or something like some complete 
stranger saving my life, out of a 
clear sky, for no apparent reason.” 
He had taken up the bottle and 
now reached for a glass. 
“Oh, there was reason enough,” 
Castriota said. "And I’m not as 
complete a stranger as all that. Remember, I knew your name, Paul 
Kosloff.” 
“That’s right,” Paul said, scowling at him, even as he made the 
drinks. “You did. You also evidently followed me from Greater 
Washington. And you also evidently are acquainted with who 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
those two men were. But, anyway, 
thanks.” He lifted his glass ift a 
toast, after handing one to Ike 
other. "You came in the nidi of 
time.” 
The other hoisted his own drink, 
"Don’t mention it,” he said. 
'TPhey both drank deeply and op** preciatively. 
And then Paul dipped his hand 
into the drawer again and caste 
out with a medium-sized but vicious looking automatic. 
He said mildly, “Another legacy 
of my father’s. This shooter’s from 
the days of his being over in Common Eur-Asia and elsewhere as an 
agent.” 
Castriota nodded. "I’ve heard 
about your father. What was it 
they used to call him? The Cdd 
War’s Lawrence of Arabia.” 
Paul nodded, and the gun was 
directed steadily at the other’s stomach. “And now, Zack Castriota, I 
want some questions answered. An 
attempt has been just made on my 
life, and you seem to know ah 
about it, which is more than I do. 
You know my name. You know 
who those men were. You followed 
me from Greater Washington. You 
are a highly experienced hand combat man. And you admit to having 
a background in espionage. So now 
talk, Mr. Castriota.” 
The other chortled sourly. " Come 
now, don’t make threats unless you 
are willing to see them through. 
Would you really shoot me? 
There’s gratitude for you.” 
Paul gave an embarrassed snort 
and put the gun down. "No, I suppose not. Don’t misunderstand. I 
am grateful for that part of it, that 
you helped me get away from 
them.” 
Zack Castriota chortled again. 
"Oh, but you’re the one who misunderstands. You see, I wasn’t primarily interested in your getting 
away from them.” 
Paul looked at him blankly. 
Castriota took another sip of his 
whiskey. I wanted to be sure they 
got away.” 
II 
P aul Kosloff was goggling the 
man as though the other had 
gone suddenly demented. He could 
not think of anything to say. 
His guest laughed. He said, "Oh, 
I didn’t want anything to happen 
to you either, but I did want them 
to get away.” 
Paul poured more whiskey, suddenly needing it. 
"You had better keep talking,” 
he said. "The more you say thus 
far, the less any of this makes 
sense. Who are those men? Whom 
do they represent? Above all, why 
in the name of Zoroaster should 
they want to kill me? I’m nothing 
but a professor of Slavic languages.” 
"We’re not sure,” Castriota said 
reasonably. He chopped out a 
laugh. "That’s why I wanted them 
to get away.” 
Paul simply stared at him. 
The other laughed once more. 
"If we’d finished them off, and 
possibly between us we could have, 
then we never would have found 
out who they were.” 
"Well . damn it, we could 
have tried to knock them out, capture them, overpower them. With 
the two of us, we had them on the 
run. I’m not saying they weren’t 
good men; they were. But they 
were in a more exposed position 
than we. They were vulnerable. If 
police, or anybody else had come 
along, they were breaking laws, 
not us.” 
"The police did come along,” 
Zack Castriota said reasonably. 
Paul stared at him. "The police?” 
"Me.” 
Paul Kosloff had a dangerous 
tone in his voice now. He said, 
"Look, hombre, stop roaching me 
and start making sense. So far, you 
sound as though you’re having the 
time of your life with this doubletalk you’ve been giving me. All 
right, damn it, put your Universal 
Credit Card on my teevee phone 
screen there.” His face had gone 
cold. 
Zack Castriota shrugged in resignation, fished a plastic card 
from his inner jerkin pocket and 
stuck it on the screen. 
Paul snapped, " Identity check, 
please.” He looked at his strange 
guest. "Thumbprint.” 
Castriota shrugged again and 
stuck his thumb on the screen. 
A robot voice said, "Identity established, as indicated.” 
Castriota put his hand out for 
his card, but Paul beat him to it. 
Castriota said mildly, “Don’t 
you know that it’s illegal to dispossess a man of his Universal 
Credit Card?” 
He read the card thoroughly 
then tossed it back to the other in 
disgust. “Inter-American Bureau 
of Investigation,” he grunted. 
Zack Castriota grinned at him. 
"That’s right,” he said. 
Paul said in disgust, "Listen, 
Castriota, I have no interest in 
anything pertaining to the IABI. 
I’m a teacher. I don’t like cloak 
and dagger fun and games.” 
"Who does? But it’s beside the 
point.” Castriota tilted his head 
to one side. “To get back to our 
chum-pals. You’re sure you’ve never seen them before, eh?” 
"No,” Paul said, still in disgust. 
."But at least one of them is a 
Rumanian.” 
"Rumanian I How do you 
know?” 
P aul Kosloff took up his glass 
again and walked over to the 
couch, which became a bed during 
the night, but now doubled as the 
only other seating facility besides 
the comfort chair in the room. 
He said, "Because when a man 
is at the height of excitement, or 
danger — when he calls out, it is 
in the language of his birth. He 
might be a superlative linguist, but 
when he’s in the dill he uses the 
language of his birth. When our 
friends there took off, one of them 
called to the other the equivalent 
of Let’s go! Only he used the Rumanian verb a pleca.” 
"I thought you were a specialist 
in Slavic languages.” 
"I am, but I also have both 
Rumanian and Hungarian. When 
you have three or four languages, 
adding another becomes easy. Besides, Rumanian is supposedly a 
Romance language but in actuality the country is completely surrounded by Slavs, and a lot of 
their words have worked in.” 
Zack Castriota thought about it 
brought his wrist teevee phone up, 
for a long moment. Finally, he 
said, “Priority One, Code A-12.” 
Paul Kosloff couldn’t see the face 
that appeared in the tiny screen. 
Castriota said, “All right, 
Hank. I placed it. Undetected, 
I’m pretty sure. But we can’t tell 
how soon he might get near a mop. 
These fellows aren’t cloddies. By 
the way, Kosloff says they’re Rumanians. That fits. You better 
pass it on to Myers. I’ll check back 
with you later. I’m taking Kosloff, 
out to see the big shot in Denver.” 
Paul Kosloff looked at him. 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
Castriota deactivated his phone 
and came to his feet. He finished 
his drink with a sigh of regret and 
put the glass down. 
Paul said, "Who was that?” 
"Department of Dirty Tricks, 
in the Octagon,” the other said with 
a grin. 
“What’s all that talk about Denver?” 
"There’s somebody there you 
have to see.” 
"To put it crudely, get goosed.” 
Castriota shook his head. "I 
can’t tell you any more at this 
stage, Kosloff, but whether or not 
you like it, you’re coming to Denver to talk to my ultimate superior on this assignment.” 
"I thought the Inter- American 
Bureau of Investigation had its 
main offices in the Octagon, in 
Greater Washington.” 
The agent nodded. "But this assignment is bigger than the IABI, 
Kosloff. Now, if I have to, I can 
call some help and you’ll wind up 
in Denver anyway. But it’d make 
more sense if you came on your 
own. Zoroaster, hombre! It can’t 
hurt you to come and hear the 
fling.” 
"All right, damn it,” Paul Kosloff said. Wait until I take a quick 
shower and change my clothes. 
Those two dirtied me up.” 
"Go ahead. Take your time. I 
have some reports to make while 
you’re at it.” The IABI man lifted 
his wrist teevee phone to his face. 
/^vn the way to Denver, Zack 
^ Castriota would say nothing 
more dealing with their destination, 
the attack on Paul Kosloff, the 
identity of the assailants, nor anything else not pertaining to the trip 
itself, or off-the-cuff chatter. Evidently he had revealed as much as 
he believed he was allowed to reveal and, until further developments, was to be mum. 
They didn’t leave the building 
to summon a vacuum-tube vehicle. 
The IABI agent was playing it 
carefully. Instead, he dialed an official IABI car, and they entered 
it from the lobby entry. 
It seemed as though they were 
important enough to rate a priority 
shot and after a minimum of 
shuttling were hurtled on through 
to Denver. At the terminal there, 
matters slowed sligthly while they 
were shuttled around and went 
through some minor shots about the 
pseudo-city. 
Castriota growled, "It’s like the 
old days. It took you longer to get 
from and to the airport than it did 
to fly half way across the country.” 
Paul Kosloff didn’t answer. He 
was still miffed at the cavalier 
treatment he was receiving. Theoretically, of course, he could have 
dragged his heels and refused to 
go. Theoretically, a man still had 
his Constitutional rights in the Ultra-welfare State, the United States 
of the Americas. But he knew 
very well that if the IABI 
wanted him to talk to somebody 
in Denver, he might as well forget 
about it and go to Denver. Because, sooner or god-damned later, he’d wind up on this mysterious mission to Denver. 
The vehicle came to a halt eventually and Zack Castriota dropped 
its pressure and slid back the canopy. They emerged into an extensive office — so extensive that 
Paul Kosloff hissed in surprise between his teeth. The vacuum-tube 
terminal from which they had just 
emerged had a bank of at least 
twenty-five entries, and Paul got 
the feeling that this was but one 
terminal of many in this building. 
On top of that, literally scores of 
persons were either riding one or 
two-seater inter-office floaters or 
striding quickly up and down halls 
anywhere in these days of ultramation? 
"Where are we?” he said of his 
undesired guide, half expecting not 
to get an answer. 
"Denver, Denver,” Castriota 
said, summoning a two-seated corridor floater. 
"I knew that. I meant, this building.” 
"Denver, Denver,” Castriota 
said. "What is there in Denver besides your National Data Center?” 
"Oh,” Paul Kosloff said. He 
climbed onto the floater seat next 
to the other. Now he could understand the utter magnitude of this 
building, which dwarfed anything 
he had ever seen before, even the 
Octagon in Greater Washington. 
"What in the name of the holy 
Zoroaster have I got to do with 
the National Data Center?” 
Zack Castriota was dialing the 
floater. He chuckled and said, 
"Hombre, if there’s anything you 
have got to do with, it’s the National Data Center — along with 
every other man, woman, child, 
dog and parakeet in these, the 
United States of the Americas.” 
"Very funny,” Paul said. However, he decided to hold his peace 
and await developments. 
nphe floater took them possibly 
half a mile in all. Up ramps, 
down corridors, through lobbies. 
Toward the end, the surroundings 
became less grim and efficient and 
more — perhaps ostenacious would 
be the term. 
They approached, finally, a massive door of the type that would 
have seemed more appropriate to 
a cathedral. In fact, there was even 
an effect, obviously nonsense, of 
hand carving. 
The floater came to a halt and 
Zack Castriota said something into 
his wrist teevee phone. His tone 
had lost its characteristic bantering element. They waited a few 
moments, then the door swung 
open, and the floater proceeded. 
Beyond was an enormous reception 
room. Zack swung himself off the 
seat of the floater, and Paul fol
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
lowed him. The floater reversed itself and left, the monstrous door 
closing behind it. 
Paul growled, Whats this, the 
ante-room to St. Peter’s office?” 
"Kind of,” Zack told him. He 
headed toward a desk. 
To Paul Kosloff’s surprise, there 
was even a live receptionist. How 
ostentatious could you get? 
The girl was in trim uniform, a 
uniform that Paul didn’t place, and 
she was spectacularly efficient in 
appearance. The fact that she could 
have won any beauty contest going was beside the point and obviously not particularly important. 
Every hair was in place; every 
pore, for that matter. The hair 
was red and spectacular, the mouth 
wide and generous, but very sincere. Her figure matched her face, 
and no uniform ever designed 
could have disguised the fact. 
She said, most briskly, "Professor Kosloff, Generate Castriota, 
the director will see you immediately.” Her voice matched face and 
figure, and it came to Paul Kosloff that he would have given a 
great deal to hear it, early in the 
morning, still slurring with sleep. 
She looked at Zack in gentle reproof. "You are several minutes 
late, Generate” 
Zack said, Sorry, mio caro. Professor Kosloff, meet Secretary Lisa 
Stebbins, the prettiest girl in the 
world, but on the snippish side.” 
She snorted and went back to her 
screens, her papers and her intercom. Paul Kosloff tore his eyes 
away from purely staring at her 
and fell into step with his companion, looking at the other from 
the side of his eyes. 
"Generale?” he said. 
"That’s right.” 
"Common Europe?” 
"Thats right.” 
"You don’t look old enough to 
be a general.” 
"Intelligence, not army.” 
"I thought you said you were 
IABI.” 
"On temporary assignment from 
our government to yours.” 
Paul cleared his throat. 
Zack Castriota chortled characteristically and said, "What did 
you think of our Lisa Stebbins?” 
"One of the most beautiful 
women I’ve ever seen,” Paul said. 
"Ah ha, a common observation, 
chum-pal, but she’s not for such 
as you and me. Look, along with 
the rest of us, if you will, but don’t 
think in terms of touching. Our 
Miss Stebbins is most ambitions 
and that beautious exterior covers a will of iron when it comes to 
her long range planning.” 
A nother door, not as monstrous 
as the one before the entrance, 
but still imposing, opened before 
them, and they passed through. 
The room beyond had obviously 
been designed by, or at least decorated by, an individual who had very 
clear cut ideas about the type office in which he wished to work. 
Paul Kosloff was taken aback by 
the presence of a fireplace which 
obviously worked. He couldn’t imagine what efforts must have been 
gone into by the architects to pipe 
the smoke out of a building such as 
this. 
There was no desk in the ordinary sense. 
In fact, the whole suite, of which 
this immediate room was a part, 
seemed more like the habitat of a 
very wealthy bachelor than a place 
of business. And this room into 
which they now passed would have 
been the escape room. A man’s escape room. A man who evidently 
liked books, but had other interests as well, signified by two or 
three rifles up on the wall, a 
mounted tuna of impressive size, a 
rhino head, slightly motheaten, so 
that it must have been taken quite 
a few years before. A bar, a real 
bar, not an auto-bar, in one corner. Paintings of various schools 
were on the walls; not the way a 
decorator hangs paintings — no 
attempt to blend or to fit into a 
school, odds and ends of paintings ranging from those of the ashcan school of the early 1930’s to the 
current Representational-Abstract. 
Not that they weren’t good paintings — and expensive. Paul Kosloff could recognize a Degas, one 
of his own favorite masters. 
The occupant sat in an old-fash
ioned overstuffed chair, not a comfort chair. It came to Paul Kosloff that there was no auto-table, 
no vacuum delivery box, no — of 
all impossible things — teevee 
screen, in the room. It was an escape room indeed. 
The room was absolutely primitive, even in the eyes of Paul Kosloff, who was on the revolt-againstthe-ultra-modern side himself. 
The most important man in the 
United States of the Americas — 
if not the world — looked up and 
said, "Good evening, Professor 
Kosloff.” He put his book down. 
He evidently actually read his 
books, Paul realized. They weren’t 
just collector’s items. 
Paul said, "Good evening, Mr. 
Harrison.” 
The Director of the National 
Data Center nodded to Paul’s companion. "Hello, Zack.” 
General Zack Castriota flicked 
a hand to him in greeting, "Good 
evening, sir.” He made his way 
to the bar, saying, "My second 
ppportunity today to have real 
Scotch. But Paul beats you. He 
had a full bottle, unopened. Gelcannon.” 
The director of the NDC was 
evidently a guy as well as being 
one of the most important men on 
earth, or, at least, went through 
the motions of pretending to be.' 
He said, “Gelcarinon! I had a bottle 
given to me some years ago; however, the bottle was right and the 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
label was right — but the contents 
were not.” 
paul Kosloff was out of his depth. 
Within the past few hours there 
had been an attempt on his life. 
His first impression of the man who 
had saved it had been that of a 
competent, but low-ranking plainclothesman of the national police, 
now turned into a general of Common Europe. He had brought him 
into the presence of Dempsey Harrison — not in title, but in actuality 
of more importance than the President of the United States of the 
Americas. Or, for that matter of 
The Gaulle of Common Europe, or 
the Chairman of the Presidium of 
Common Eur-Asia. They, too, were 
figureheads. 
Dempsey Harrison was a man in 
his early sixties, but with that projection of fitness maintained by 
those who have perfect diet, the 
best of medical care, suitable exercise, the ministrations of masseurs 
and all else that ultimate wealth 
can buy to extend the active life 
span. 
Zack Castriota evidently was fully at home. He made three drinks 
and handed the other two theirs 
before sinking into a chair. 
Dempsey Harrison looked at him 
questioningly. 
Zack said, “They jumped Paul 
here, today. I was in the vicinity, 
of course, and intervened. In time 
— this time.” The Common Europe 
operative made a rather wry face. 
“This timel” Paul said. 
Harrison looked at him. “Your 
two predecessors were less fortunate. 
Take a seat, Professor Kosloff. 
That one there is a favorite.” 
He settled himself into his armchair and waited until Zack and 
Paul Kosloff were comfortable before saying, “You must be mystified by all this. It’s time for a few 
explanations.” 
“I wouldn’t protest,” Paul said. 
“Very well. Professor Kosloff, 
what do you know about the computer data banks of this country?” 
“Why, I don’t know. I suppose 
what the average citizen knows.” 
“Which actually isn’t very much. 
Let me give you some background. 
You’ll need it for what’s to come.” 
Paul Kosloff sipped at his whiskey and soda and waited. 
Dempsey Harrison looked off into far distances. “It came quickly, 
once it started,” he said musingly. 
“And could easily enough have been 
predicted, given the computer and 
the ability to store almost literally 
an infinite amount of information in 
a comparatively small area. Oh, the 
first simple beginnings, the use of 
punched cards and later magnetic 
tape, were comparatively primitive, 
but they lasted only a few years. 
Today, the National Data Center 
holds an utterly unbelievable 
amount of information, Professor 
Kosloff, and it increases daily.” 
“Well, I knew that, of course.” 
H arrison ignored him. “I suppose 
it really began back in the late 
1960’s when New Haven consolidated all the city’s files on the individual into a single data pool 
open to all city agencies. Santa 
Clara County in California wasn’t 
far behind, putting all county residents into a computer bank, listing 
age, address, birth record, driver’s 
license, voting and jury status, 
property holdings, occupation, 
health, welfare and police records. 
“The Federal government wasn’t 
far behind either, although there 
was an initial dragging of heels in 
Congress due to the feared invasion 
of privacy. However, in 1968 the 
Internal Revenue Service began the 
utilization of computers in collecting income tax. There is, of course, 
a good deal more information on 
income tax forms than pertains to 
income alone. Adding Social Security information to these data obviously made sense, and material 
from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, 
and the U.S. Civil Service Commission, which already held dossiers on 
nearly everyone who had ever applied for Federal employment since 
1939. Then, of course, the Census 
Bureau, the Defense Department 
for military records, and finally 
the F.B.I. records went into the 
data banks, they were soon followed by those of the House Un-American Activities Committee and by 
the C.I.A. Thus far, all these records were Federal but the addition 
of the F.B.I. and other police files 
made so much sense that the local 
police of every state, every city, 
every town, cooperated, and there 
came to be a national criminal record of practically everybody in the 
country, even though your individual record might consist of no 
more than a traffic violation.” 
Dempsey Harrison took a sip of 
his drink. “It was just the beginning. 
Medical information was soon added. It was one of the most productive of the steps. A man from New 
York could find himself in an accident in Oregon. Within moments, 
at a local hospital, the doctor treating him could get a complete medical record on the patient. Very well, 
let us stick a pin at this point. 
“All this was Federal, but at the 
same time another element was 
utilizing the capabilities of the computer data banks. I refer to the 
universities, the libraries, the newspapers — such depositories of human knowledge. Early in the game 
they began cooperating in storing 
information. Soon there was a gigantic data bank of books, encyclopedias, newspaper morgues, 
everything from Escoffier’s Cook 
Book and that of Fanny Farmer 
to bartenders’ guides and volumes 
on how to raise canaries. The big 
step was taken when it was decided to include the Library of Congress and, a few years later, 
through a special exchange arrangement with his Majesty’s gov
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
ernment, the British Museum Library. 
“Ultimately, of course, this educational data was combined with 
the .Federal government’s information on the individual citizen, and 
all placed under the National Data 
Center. And then we really began 
in earnest. Every newspaper, every 
magazine, every book published in 
the world, in every written language, is computer translated and 
placed in the files, in both its 
original and translated form. But 
stick another pin there. 
“Neck and neck with these developments were those in the field 
of credit and banking, the trend 
to the cashless-checkless society and 
the universal credit card. The computer, plus the teevee phone, made 
possible a national credit system 
eliminating money in the old sense 
of the word. A person’s income, 
from whatever source, is placed to 
his account. By placing his UniCredit Card on the payment screen 
in any store, restaurant, public 
transporation vehicle, or where 
ever, he is debited to whatever extent. If he is overdrawn, of course, 
the computers immediately reject 
the purchase of object or service. 
“But the coming of the teevee 
phone added still another element 
to our new society. It made possible immediate communication between everyone, and of communication with the authorities with every 
individual, or with every citizen in 
the nation, simultaneously. There 
was some protest, at first, as was 
to be expected, but eventually what 
was once our Social Security number became out identity number, 
period, which we carry from womb 
to tomb. 
This one number combines 
what amounts to our names, our 
telephone numbers, our driver’s 
license, our labor draft number, 
military identification, our license 
plate number if we own a private 
floater or car. In short, everything. 
The step was finally taken to make 
it illegal not to wear one’s wrist 
teevee phone. Thus, at any given 
time, the authorities can locate any 
given citizen.” 
D empsey Harrison raised his 
eyebrows at Zack, who came 
to his feet and refreshed their 
glasses. 
The operative from Common 
Europe said gently, “The same applies, of course, to my own country. 
Possibly we haven’t gotten quite 
to the point you people have, but 
it’s coming, it’s coming.” He 
tongued his lower lip and added, 
“God dammit.” 
Harrison nodded, and there was 
a weary aspect in his voice now. 
“We didn’t ask for it, exactly. 
Something like Topsy, it just grew; 
but now, Professor Kosloff, we are 
what Vance Packard, some decades 
ago, called The Naked Society . We 
are the computerized society. The 
Ill 
privacy which we once demanded 
is no more. Perhaps that is the only 
way it could have been. To insist 
that an American of this period is 
entitled to the same privacy as they 
who lived in the agrarian America 
of 1790 is like insisting on the right 
to drive a horse and buggy along 
an ultra-expressway.” 
Paul shifted in his chair and said 
uncomfortably, “Of course, very 
little of this is unknown to me, Mr. 
Harrison.” 
The Director of the National 
Data Center nodded. “I was merely 
summing up to give you background 
for what is to come. Our whole 
world is now dependent upon our 
computer system. Our whole economy, our whole way of life. We 
can no more go back than today’s 
Greeks could go back to the Golden 
Age of Pericles.” 
“I still don’t see what all this 
has got to do with me.” 
“Professor Kosloff, suppose someone whose interests were not those 
of the United States of the Americas 
discovered a method of tapping our 
data banks?” 
Paul Kosloff looked at him, some 
of the ramifications coming through. 
“Worse yet,” Zach Castriota said 
gently, “Suppose they figured out 
a method of wiping them clean, 
electronically, from a distance.” 
“Zo-ro-as-ter,” Paul Kosloff 
breathed. 
The data-center head nodded. 
“Indeed.” 
aul Kosloff waited for more. 
“As you know,” Dempsey Harrison went on, “although most information filed away in the data 
banks is open to all citizens to call 
upon as they will, some is classified 
on various levels and a priority is 
required to release it. Such information as military, for instance. 
Every detail of our military machine 
and its planning is stored in our 
data banks, Professor Kosloff. Besides that, we have scientific information pertaining to weapons 
and defense, but to other subjects 
as well.” 
Harrison thought about it for a 
moment. “Theoretically, of course, 
the Cold War is no longer with us, 
but in actuality the battle for men’s 
minds goes on, and the relationship 
we have with Common Eur-Asia has 
some attributes of an armed truce. 
Then too, there are the neutrals.” 
The National Data Bank head looked at Zack Castriota. “Including 
the strongest of all, Common 
Europe. Both our country and 
Common Eur-Asia are no longer 
quite so avid to have the neutrals 
fall into our laps. We are more 
nearly self-sufficient, less in need 
of markets and sources of raw 
material, than we were in the old 
days. However, we still both desire 
the balance of power to incline 
slightly at least in our own direction.” 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
Dempsey Harrison shook his head 
and left that trend of thought. “But 
the point is that although we are 
at peace with Common Eur-Asia, we 
would not like to see them in a position to drain our data banks of 
their information.” 
“Nor to wipe them clear,” Zack 
Castriota added dryly. 
Paul Kosloff scowled. “How do 
you know this can be done, or, if 
it can, who is doing it?” 
“Rumors have been coming 
through for some time,” Harrison 
told him. “In fact, we are near 
some breakthroughs in the same 
field ourselves.” 
“Oh, ho,” Paul said sourly. “So 
we’re guilty of the same attempt.” 
The older man shook his head, 
sadly. “I would not deny it. If you 
fall behind in the race of progress, 
sometimes you wind up falling flat 
on your face, Professor Kosloff.” 
“But how do you know this is 
being done?” 
Zack Castriota laughed abruptly. “One bit of evidence is the fact 
that your two Rumanian friends 
jumped you. In fact, you were being used in the way of bait, Kosloff. 
When these rumors first started 
coming through, we decided to send 
a man or so into what was once 
called the Balkans to check around 
a bit. So we put the problem into 
the labor draft files and brought 
forth a name. A man of about 
thirty, intelligent, multi-lingual, experienced in combat and other trou
ble, but with no espionage record. 
He even had relatives in Common 
Eur-Asia that he could be expected 
reasonably to visit. Wizard. But before we could even interview the 
man, he was killed. Murder is uncommon these days, Kosloff, and 
obviously we were surprised. So we 
turned back to the data banks and 
located another person with the 
same qualifications. And he too was 
cut down before we even got to see 
him. The next time, we slapped an 
immediate guard on our prospective 
agent, with the results that you 
know.” 
6 CWou mean me, of course,” Paul 
* Kosloff said, taken aback. 
“Of course,” Zack said. “Even as 
it was, they nearly got to you. Kosloff, there’s only one way they 
could have known that you had been 
chosen to go into Common EurAsia on an information-gathering 
assignment. They tapped the computers. You don’t easily tap computers connected with the InterAmerican Bureau of Investigation.” 
Paul Kosloff shook his head 
negatively. “All right,” he said, “but 
the answer is no.” 
Dempsey Harrison looked at him 
in question. “The answer to what?” 
“I’m not going into Common EurAsia as an espionage agent.” Paul 
pointed at Zack Castriota. “He’s a 
pro, this is his field; let him or his 
fellow pros in the field do it. I’m a 
teacher of language. No thanks.” 
The data banks official 
leaned forward. a The labor draft 
computers say you are the most 
suitable man in the whole United 
States of the Americas for the assignment.” 
“Then the computers have sprung 
a leak,” Paul Kosloff said. He came 
to his feet. “I’m sorry.” 
Dempsey Harrison looked up at 
him, then at Zack Castriota. 
Castriota shrugged. “If you’re 
thinking he’s a funker, he’s not. 
I’ve seen him in action. And I still 
think the computers were right. He’s 
the best man for the job.” 
Harrison sighed. “This is a task 
for a volunteer. We’ll find someone 
else, General Castfiota.” 
For the next several days, Paul 
Kosloff stewed. He could have taken 
his projected hiking trip into the 
New England National Park, but 
didn’t. But, for that matter, neither 
could he find it in him to work on 
future lectures. 
He was irritated with Zack Castriota and with Dempsey Harrison. 
A man of Harrison’s stature 
doesn’t ordinarily personally call 
upon a citizen of no more prominence than Paul Kosloff. He had a 
hundred thousand underlings and 
more at his beck and call, surely 
many of them experienced troubleshooters. Why tap a bookish bachelor who knew no more of the world 
of cloak and dagger than he knew 
of the latest laboratory work go
ing on in Satellite City or the tiny 
moon colony? 
Why? Because the computers had 
fingered him from the millions. He 
couldn’t imagine why. 
Well, as Harrison had said, it 
was a job for a volunteer. They 
couldn’t make him take it. And what 
was the age-old army maxim? Never 
volunteer. 
T T e didn’t consider himself a 
-*■ patriot. He had no desire to 
die for the United States of the 
Americas. Patriotism was a sentiment of yesteryear, a victim of the 
new trends of society, along with 
organized religion. Vaguely, he was 
pleased that he was an American 
rather than a citizen of Common 
Eur-Asia, Common Europe, or any 
other land. But it wasn’t that important to him. He made the usual 
contributions to the society of which 
he was a part, worked at least as 
hard as the next man, in his chosen 
profession and, had there been war 
or other national emergency — 
Zoroaster forbid — would undoubtedly have gone when drafted, but 
not before. 
Let Harrison and his people, and 
Castriota and his, worry about the 
National Data Center and whether 
or not it was being tapped by potential foes. His job was doing lectures for the University of the Air 
and eventually combining them into 
a series of books for the nation’s 
library banks. 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
He moped around, disgruntled 
for reasons he knew not, unable to 
get into his Bulgarian work which 
he was trying to get ready both for 
book form and as canned Tri-Vision 
lectures. 
So it was that when Zack Castriota turned up four days later, he 
was inwardly glad to see the Common Europe agent — not that he 
let the other detect that fact. Paul 
Kosloff was seated in his comfort 
chair when the door screen was activated and Castriota’s face was 
there. He touched the switch that 
opened the door, but didn’t come 
to his feet when the other entered. 
“Don’t roach me,” he said. “The 
answer is still no.” 
Zack Castriota laughed and 
went over to the auto-bar and dialed. 
“Hey,” Paul growled, “stick your 
own credit card in there. I don’t 
want it on my account.” 
The other grinned at him and 
put his Universal Credit Card in the 
auto-bar’s slot as ordered. “Pleasure,” he said. “Unlimited expense 
account. We cloak-and-dagger men 
don’t have to worry about such 
mundane matters, Kosloff.” 
“Oh, wizard. I’ll join right up. 
What do you want, Castriota?” 
The other, glass in hand, sat 
down on the couch. “I’ve been going through your dossier in the data 
banks. Very interesting.” 
“Going through my dossier! 
What right have you to get into 
my dossier? Why, you’re not even 
a citizen of this country. A man’s 
dossier is private. Only authorized 
governmental personnel connected 
with whatever field is involved can 
inspect a man’s dossier.” 
Castriota grinned at him mockingly. “You’d be surprised how very 
authorized I am, Kosloff. You know 
what I found?” 
“What? By the holy jumping 
Zoroaster, I’m going to recheck my 
dossier myself and challenge anything I don’t like there.” 
'T'he Common Europe agent 
knocked back half of his drink. 
“That’s your right, of course. But 
I doubt if you’ll challenge this. I 
found that you have a knack for 
excitement, Kosloff. Supposedly, 
you’re a stogy university professor, 
but in the way of hobbies you certainly swing out. I already knew 
that you’ve got a flair for karate and 
have a black belt in Kodakan Judo. 
But what else do I learn? That you 
were both rifle and pistol runnerup in the selection of the last Olympics team run-offs. That you spend 
a good many of your vacations up 
in such places as the Yukon, hunting and fishing — alone. That 
you’ve been in some sticky spots in 
skin-diving and mountain climbing. 
Oh, you’re quite a professor, you 
are, Kosloff. No wonder the computers pulled you for the Common 
Eur-Asian assignment.” 
Paul Kosloff said, “Look here, 
Castriota, I heard your fling the 
other day. The answer is still no. 
What did you come here for?” 
Castriota finished his drink. “I 
thought you might like to be in on 
the kill.” 
Paul looked at him. 
Castriota said complacently, 
“What did you think I meant the 
other day when I told you I was primarily interested in seeing that 
those two assailants of yours got 
away?” 
“I thought you meant you were 
off your rocker,” Paul said sourly. 
The other shook his head, and 
brought from his pocket a tiny object that looked like nothing so 
much as a brown bean. He leaned 
forward and put it in Paul’s hand. 
Paul Kosloff scowled down at it. 
It was of plastic so far as he could 
see and smaller than a tiny pea. 
“What’s this supposed to be?” 
“It’s a miniaturized bug, old 
chum-pal.” 
“Bug?” 
“A radio transmitter, old chumpal.” 
“This small?” Paul Kosloff was 
surprised. “But what of it?” 
“Its equal number is at present 
residing in the side pocket of the 
jerkin of your Rumanian friend. 
It’s beginning to move about again, 
so we assume he is currently wearing the jerkin in question. We’ve 
been stymied for several days, because it was remaining in one spot, 
probably hanging in some closet, 
or some such. We daren’t zero-in on 
it, because they might not have 
been in the immediate vicinity, 
might have spotted us and taken 
off.” 
“Wait a minute, now. You mean 
you planted one of these on that 
Rumanian bastard the other day?” 
“That’s what I’ve been telling 
you. While we were scuffling around 
down in your lobby. Want to be in 
on the kill? Maybe I’ll need a 
Rumanian translater.” 
“Where is he?” 
“Manhattan.” 
4 4 A /T anhattan! Manhattan’s been 
deserted for years.” 
“Not exactly. There’s a few hundred or so of what they call baboons. Possibly a few thousand. 
They don’t exactly admit to a census. Fugitives, left overs from the 
riots who are afraid to come over 
to the mainland, mental cases, 
foreigners without papers who 
aren’t eligible for being issued Inalienable Basic and hence have no 
way of maintaining themselves on 
the mainland. Then there are the 
looters who scrounge through the 
ruins trying to find art objects, jewelry, saleable things they can take 
to the mainland and sell to antique 
and art dealers. And there are always a certain number of scholars 
going through the rubble of the 
museums and libraries, trying to 
find this or that, and sometimes 
investigators prowling through the 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
Wall Street section, trying to locate some lost record or whatever. 
There’s even a small contingent of 
police at the vacuum-tube terminal 
at what used to be called Grand 
Central/’ 
“What in the name of Zoroaster 
do they live on?” Paul Kosloff said. 
Castriota shifted his shoulders in 
a European shrug. “A city as big 
as New York had one hell of a lot 
of canned and bottled food and 
water around, even after the riots 
and looting. They’ll never find it 
all.” 
“And there’s nobody there except these baboons and the few 
others you mentioned?” 
The Common Europe agent said 
wryly, “Evidently, there’s also at 
least two of the espionage boys 
there as well.” 
“But no, well, legitimate citizens?” 
The other shrugged again. “Possibly a few. Non-conformists who 
reject the Ultra-welfare State. Refuse to settle down to a life based 
on what amounts to a government 
dole, your Inalienable Basic stock 
issued to every citizen at birth. You 
know: artists, poets and what not. 
A few of them evidently still live 
in the Greenwich Village area. They 
move into abandoned apartments, 
some of them pretty swank, and 
make out by getting food, clothing 
and whatever else they need from 
the ruins of department stores, private homes, so forth and so on.” 
“Good grief, what a life,” Paul 
said. He got up and went over to 
the auto-bar and dialed beverages. 
“What are you drinking?” 
“Pseudo-whiskey and soda. You 
know, it’s not as bad as all that,” 
“Like hell it isn’t,” Paul said. He 
dialed two more of the same. “The 
more ultramated we become the 
lousier the quality of just about 
everything. Have you ever seen an 
Irish Donegal tweed sport jacket?” 
“Yes,” Castriota said. 
X)aul ignored his answer. “I wore 
one when I was younger. My 
father left it to me. That’s how 
clothes were in the old days, they 
lasted so well you handed them 
down, father to son. Hand-woven 
tweed, then hand-tailored. Look at 
this goddamned junk we wear today. And look at this lush we drink, 
and the food we eat.” 
The other said, “Well, frankly, 
your food over here is a cross any 
European has to bear. It’s getting 
worse in Common Europe as well, 
but in this regard you are far, far 
ahead of us — If you can call it 
ahead.” 
Paul said, “Look, to get back to 
this Manhattan thing. You think 
that those two who jumped me the 
other day are over there, eh?” 
“We know they are. We’ve got a 
fix on them. They obviously don’t 
know they’re carrying a bug around. 
It wasn’t easy to plant in the midst 
of all that jam-banging around we 
were going through. You see, the 
idea was, we wanted to know where 
they were holed-up, how many of 
them there might be, what kind 
of equipment they were using to 
dip into the data banks. If we can 
locate them, we might make a clean 
sweep of it. Killing or capturing 
the two professional assassins is 
nothing. We want the works.” 
“So where do I come in?” 
“A preliminary look-see. We’re 
not ready for the big operation yet. 
When we are, a hundred operatives 
will drop in like a swarm of locusts from floaters and helio-jets. 
But right now, we want a preliminary reconnaisance deal. Nothing 
to scare them. They might have 
some way of destroying their equipment but quick, even a mini-nuclear device, or some such.” 
Paul Kosloff winced. “Mini-nuclear device?” 
Castriota grinned at him. “You 
aren’t up on the latest, Kosloff. The 
miniaturization of everything and 
its cousin progresses. I understand 
that the first A-Bombs dropped on 
Japan weighed tons. I saw a mini-Hbomb, there in the Department of 
Dirty Tricks in the Octagon the 
other day, that was no bigger than 
a baseball. I leave to your imagination what could be done in the way 
of extortion with such a little plaything in the hands of a gang of 
criminals.” 
Paul Kosloff said suddenly, 
“Look here, Castriota, how is it 
that you’re so prominent hi this 
thing? You’re not even an Asiorican and here you seem to be hi full 
charge.” 
“Well, I’m not. I’m just up here 
on the firing line. I have one big advantage over the IABI agents I’m 
assigned to be helping. You see, I’m 
not in your data banks.” 
“Oh, yes. That would be right. 
If they’re tapping the American 
data banks, they could find information pertaining to the men who 
were looking for them. But not you. 
Your dossier would be in the Common Europe computer data banhs.” 
“Right.” The other came to his 
feet. “Well, what do you say, Kosloff? Want to take a look around 
Manhattan with me?” 
npo his own surprise, Paul Kosloff 
stood erect and said, “All 
right.” The next split second he 
told himself he would have liked to 
retract his words but it was too 
late by then. 
Zack Castriota chuckled. 
Paul went over to the buih-in 
drawers of his mini-apartment, 
opened the top one and pulled forth 
his .38 noiseless and its harness. He 
shucked out of his jerkin, shrugged 
into the harness, buckled it and 
checked its tightness. He pulled the 
gun to check its looseness in its holster, then returned it. 
Castriota said gently, “Let’s hope 
we don’t need that. What was it the 
old timer said? Violence is the re
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
sort of the incompetent? Agree?” 
“Ummm,” Paul said sourly. “But 
from what you say about those baboons that occupy the ruins, I’d 
just as well have this shooter along. 
I have a sneaking suspicion that 
everybody on that island goes 
around heeled.” 
“You couldn’t prove it by me,” 
the other said, heading for the door. 
“I’ve ridden over the place in a 
helio-jet, but I’ve never landed.” He 
opened the door, and made a mock 
gentlemanly gesture for Paul to 
precede him. 
As they took the elevator down 
to the lobby, Paul said, “If you’ve 
never been on Manhattan, how in 
the name of Zoroaster are your ever 
going to find these cloddies?” 
“We’ve got a full-time contact 
man under cover there. Hombre 
named Mark Martino. And, of 
course, we have the bug to zero-in 
on.” 
In the lobby, Castriota dialed a 
two-seater, vacuum-tube vehicle. 
When the light indicated it had arrived, he opened the closet-like 
door. 
Paul said, “No special IABI vehicle this time?” 
“We’re incognito,” the other said. 
“We don’t know what facilities they 
might have in the way of defense. 
Very possibly they keep a check on 
the terminal at Grand Central. 
Wouldn’t be too difficult. It’s the 
only terminal on Manhattan and 
largely the other means of ingress 
to the city are clogged up, blown 
up, burned down, or whatever.” 
He went through the motions of 
dialing them through to Manhattan, 
and shortly the preliminary shuttling began. They had no priority 
this time and were shipped back 
and forth for a seemingly endless 
time before the shot. 
Zack Castriota said conversationally, “I’ve always wanted to see 
one of your ruined cities. Read 
about it in school, the riots and 
all.” 
“You had no equivalent in Common Europe, I understand.” 
“No. Same situation didn’t apply. Oh, we had our slums, especially in the Latin countries, but, you 
know, I don’t believe quite what 
you had here. You Americans used 
to be so proud of your number of 
cars, refrigerators, color-television 
sets and so forth, that you never 
seemed to quite comprehend that 
not only did you have a good many 
people living at the world’s highest 
standards, but also a good many 
living at some of the lowest in the 
West. In whole countries, such as 
the Scandinavian, Switzerland, 
Benelux, there were no such things 
as slums at all.” 
T)aul looked over at him. “Do I 
detect a slight anti-Americanism, chum-pal?” 
Castriota laughed. “No, not 
really. I’ve always been fascinated 
by the so-called American dream. 
That’s one of the reasons they 
picked me for this assignment. It’s 
not my first trip over, of course.” 
“I wouldn’t think so; you’re at 
least as far up in your American 
idiom as I am.” 
The shuttling of the vacuumtube vehicle in which they sat 
stepped and both sucked in air in 
anticipation. 
Paul said, “To what extent do 
you have these infernal machines in 
Common Europe?” 
“Not as much as here. Your 
distances are greater. You had to 
have something that would take 
you a thousand miles in nothing 
flat. But you take some nation 
such as Belgium. If you climb onto 
a bicycle, by the time you’ve got 
up speed, you’re in another country 
if you don’t look out.” 
The pressure pressed them back 
into their acceleration seats. 
Castriota said, “Talking about 
the cities, whatever happened to 
Boswash?” 
The pressure fell off, then reversed. 
“Boswash?” Paul said. 
Castriota chuckled. “The idea 
was that your cities would continue to grow until there was just 
one big city along the Atlantic seaboard from Boston to Washington. 
Boswash. It would have a population of about 80 million people. 
Then there’d be another gargantuan 
megalopolis called Chipitts which 
would run from Chicago to Pitts
burgh and north to Canada thus 
taking in Detroit, Toledo, Cleveland, Akron, Buffalo and Rochester. And a third, Sansan, which 
would run from San Francisco down 
to San Diego on the Mexican border. Chipitts was to have a population of about 40 million and Sansan 
one of 20 million or more.” 
Paul Kosloff winced at the picture, even as their vehicle’s shuttling 
began all over again. 
“One more of the predictions of 
disaster that didn’t come off,” he 
said. “Like oil giving out and 
leaving us without fuel by this 
period. Instead, of course, we’re 
using other power sources. And nuclear war, which was going to wipe 
out the race. It didn’t come. It 
didn’t make sense to anybody . And 
the Russians trying to conquer the 
world and impose their type of communism on it. That didn’t happen 
either; they were too busy minding 
their own business. And the pollution of the air that was going 
to be so bad that the climate would 
be changed. Of course, discontinuing the use of fossil fuels to such 
an extent stopped that trend. The 
thing is that the existence of a 
trend is no guarantee that it will 
continue.” 
C astriota looked over at him. 
“But what happened to Boswash, Sansan and Chipitts?” 
“The population explosion and 
the urbanization of ninety percent 
of the population failed to materialize for reasons that seem obvious 
now, but were evidently too much 
for the extrapolaters back during 
the middle of the century. The population simply didn’t explode the 
way they predicted. Not in America and the other advanced countries. The birth rate began to fall 
off dramatically even in the 1950’s 
and 1960’s. And for obvious reasons. 
To maintain any kind of standard 
of living both a man and wife had 
to work, so raising a sizeable family was difficult. Homes got smaller 
and smaller, so that it was difficult to find one large enough for 
a family of five or ten or more, 
such as our grandparents used to 
raise. Many apartment owners 
wouldn’t rent to people with children. Then the cost of living skyrocketed, and feeding and clothing 
a large family became prohibitive, 
not to speak of sending them 
through school, and by this time, if 
you didn’t have a college education you were out of the running. 
The pill came along, and then even 
more efficient and economical methods of preventing conception. And 
religious organizations, once opposed to birth control, first began 
to hedge about such restrictions 
and later withdrew them entirely. 
Even the government got in the act 
by passing such legislation as 
legalized abortion, and free sterilization of any consenting adult.” 
Paul Kosloff thought about it. 
“Other things were happening at 
the same time! The family as we 
knew it, began to fall apart. People 
became more, well, hedonistic, I 
suppose. A girl no longer wanted 
the home, family and responsibilities of her mother. She wanted primarily a good time. She wanted 
luxuries, to travel, to live it up. She 
revolted against being tied down to 
children. There were other angles, 
too. Immigration once helped to 
boom the population of the United 
States. Millions of persons swarmed 
over from Europe and elsewhere. 
But that fell off; in fact, laws prevented it, even if Europeans had 
been as keen to come to America 
as they had been in the past. In 
fact, the flood began to ebb in the 
other direction. As far back as the 
1960’s over two million Americans 
lived abroad. A lot of these were 
military, or held down some job 
that kept them overseas, but the 
number of expatriates was zooming. 
Why live in the most expensive 
country in the world, when you can 
pick such spots as Mexico, Spain, 
Greece, Morocco and a score of 
other countries where the cost of 
living is a fraction? On their Social 
Security income, oldsters in California or Florida could live only on 
a poverty level. In Mexico they 
could live in luxury, complete with 
servants.” 
“But what happened to your 
formerly booming large cities?” 
Castriota said. Their vacuum-tube 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
vehicle was shuttling again. Evidently, it took another shot to get to 
Manhattan; the terminal there was 
undoubtedly a smallish one. 
“Various things, including the 
riots that hit so many of them, 
and over and over again. But simultaneously, something more important. You’ve got to realize that big 
cities are not attractive places in 
which to live, and especially American big cities. It got to the point 
that the air was unbreathable, the 
water undrinkable, the smog a real 
threat to health. It also got to the 
point that traffic could hardly move, 
that educational facilities, garbage 
disposal, police and fire fighting 
facilities became more and more inadequate and under financed.” 
4 4 T f they were that bad, why did 
^ people come to them?” 
“Largely because they had to. No 
person in his right mind would prefer to live in Harlem as opposed to 
Puerto Rico or most of the American South. But as the automation 
and then ultramation of agriculture 
progressed, millions of underprivileged, under-educated citizens 
moved to the large cities in hopes 
of finding work, or, at least, getting 
on relief. And the more of them that 
moved into cities like New York, 
the more of those people who could 
afford it moved out. City after city 
became populated predominately by 
Negroes, .Puerto Ricans and others 
in the lower income bracket. 
“But there were other things developing simultaneously. Originally, 
the purpose of a city was for defense 
and trade and to be a manufacturing center. But in the modern age, 
a city is no defense; in fact, it’s a 
death trap in case of war. So far as 
trade is concerned, in the old days 
the streets were lined with thousands upon thousands of small 
shops and businesses, hundreds and 
hundreds peddling identical objects. 
The coming of the super-market 
was an indication of the eventual 
ending of that. The small shop, the 
small business, largely became anachronisms. Ultra-markets, ultradepartment stores, took over, and 
there is no particular reason for 
such being located in a large city. 
In fact, it’s much handier to locate such distribution centers out 
in the wide-open spaces, particularly after the emerging of ultramation 
into distribution and the delivery 
to the home by vacuum-tube 
method of most purchases. 
“At the same time, came the 
teevee phone, satellite relays, international integration of communications. A businessman no longer 
had to see his business contacts 
personally. He could be sitting in 
his home in Hawaii and dial 
through immediately to a factory 
manager in, say, Kansas. There 
was no particular reason for him 
to have an office on Wall Street, or 
anywhere else except his own home. 
“But the real blow to the city 
came when the federal government 
integrated what amounted to all 
charity and a good many pensions, 
such things as Social Security, relief, 
and unemployment insurance. With 
the issuing of ten shares of Inalienable Basic stock to every man, 
woman and child in the country, the 
need for the unemployed, the aged, 
the crippled, or whoever, to move 
to such cities as New York, Los 
Angeles or Chicago, in order to get 
on relief, was ended. 
“A poverty striken Puerto Rican 
who had fled his island because he 
couldn’t make a living there could 
now return. A Negro who had possibly been born in Harlem was 
free to move to Colorado, if he 
liked mountains, or possibly the 
west coast of Mexico, if he liked 
tropical beach. He didn’t have to 
stay in the riot and hate racked 
cities, any more than did a middleclass white man who had moved 
out to suburbia so that he could 
breathe.” 
>Tphe vehicle in which they rode 
had come to a halt, and the 
green light indicating arrival at 
their destination was flashing. Zack 
dropped pressurization and activated the canopy. They stepped forth 
into a comparatively small terminal 
and full into the view of a stocky 
police officer. 
He looked at them both coldly, 
even as they stretched to relieve 
muscles after the cramped quarters. 
The policeman said, “You’ve 
made a mistake. This is Grand 
Central terminal. Manhattan.” 
“No mistake,” Zack told him. 
He fished into an inner pocket and 
brought forth a document. 
There was a buzzing in the 
background. For the moment, the 
cop ignored the proffered paper. 
He said, “That’s a metal detector. You’re carrying a shooter, Mister, and they aren’t allowed on this 
island.” 
Zack said patiently, “If you’ll 
look at this authorization, you’ll 
see that we both have permission 
to be armed. We’ve heard of the 
... the baboons.” 
The police guard took the paper 
and looked down at it. “My name’s 
Williams,” he said. “One of my 
jobs is to warn you that you have 
no police protection on Manhattan. 
Or any other kind of protection, for 
that matter. And there’re no restaurants, no hotel facilities, no 
stores, no nothing. The city has 
been abandoned. If you get into any 
trouble, you’re on your own.” 
“We knew that before we came,” 
Zack said reasonably. 
The cop looked him full in the 
face. “You aren’t a couple of 
damned hunters, are you?” 
IV 
LLT Tunters?” Paul Kosloff said 
“ blankly. “On a ruined island 
like Manhattan?” 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
Williams was on the elderly side 
to be on active duty as a police 
guard and inclined to a certain slowness of movement; however, there 
was a confidence and a dignity and 
he looked levelly into the younger 
man’s eyes. “You don’t appear to 
be,” he said, “but you never know.” 
He looked back and forth between the two newcomers. “There 
isn’t any law in the ruins of Manhattan. No police, no courts, no 
prisons. If somebody shoots you, 
you’re on your own. If you shoot 
somebody, it’s too bad for them. 
So far as you’re concerned, it’s self 
defense. This is possibly the only 
place in the world where a man 
who wants the thrill of killing another man, or woman or child, for 
that matter, can come, do it and 
get away with it” 
“Holy Zoroaster,” Paul Kosloff 
said. 
The cop nodded wearily. “So 
some come. All done up in bulletproofs and with fancy guns. We 
call them hunters. They’re usually 
bigwigs, wealthy thrill seekers. 
Maybe they’re the type that like 
to go to Africa, or up to Northern 
Alaska, or wherever game still exists, and get their jollies shooting 
up deer or elephants for the sake 
of getting heads to hang on their 
walls. When you’ve got all the other 
heads, maybe you start thinking 
in terms of adding a . baboon 
to your collection.” 
Zack Castriota snorted. “Do we 
look like a couple of trophy hunters?” 
“Like I say, you never know. 
Not that I could stop you if you 
were. You have the authorization to 
prowl around in the ruins. What is 
it you do want?” He added grudgingly, “J u st possibly I can help out.” 
Zack went into his prepared 
story. “We’re looking for a lost 
Rembrandt. It was first thought 
that during the looting somebody 
swiped it and got it over to the 
mainland. But it hasn’t turned up, 
and we’re beginning to suspect that 
it never left the island. In fact, 
we have reason to believe that some 
down-and-out pseudo-artist, down 
in Greenwich Village, stole it and 
then was either killed or burned out 
of his apartment house himself. We 
think it might still be in that house 
and possibly recoverable.” 
“Rembrandt?” 
“A Dutch painter whose works go 
as high as a million a throw,” Paul 
said, fitting into the story. 
Williams whistled. “Well, I don’t 
know how I could help you in this 
case.” 
Zack said, “Could we get a 
floater around here?” 
The police guard said unhappily, 
“It’s possible, but I wouldn’t recommend it. Make you too conspicuous.” 
“Why not? We’ve got to get all 
the way down to Washington 
Square.” 
“Because I can’t let you have an 
armored police vehicle, and the ordinary civilian ones weren’t meant 
for shedding bullets.” 
ack and Paul looked at him. 
He said patiently, “Some of 
the baboons carry high-powered 
sport rifles. I’ve known a few to 
carry elephant guns. They’ll punch 
a hole right through a floater.” 
Zack said plaintively, “Why 
should they want to bother someone 
like us?” 
“Various reasons. On the offchance you might be in possession 
of something worth plundering — 
even a box lunch, for instance. Or 
possibly just because they’re goosedoff at the type of citizen who can 
afford to rent a floater.” 
Zack sighed. “Well, we’ll just 
have to risk it,” he said. “We can’t 
walk all the way down to what was 
once Greenwich Village.” 
“It’s your neck, hombre,” the 
policeman said. “Here, follow me. 
Sorry I can’t let you have a police 
vehicle.” 
As they progressed down the ruins 
of Fifth Avenue toward Madison 
Square, Zack Castriota manually 
controlling the air cushion vehicle, 
Paul Kosloff looked at the other 
from the side of his eyes. 
“Wasn’t that a pretty complicated fling to give that cop? We 
didn’t have to tell him anything, 
did we?” 
Zack chuckled, steering expertly 
around a jammed up group of crash
ed and abandoned cars and trucks. 
“You babe in the woods,” he 
said. “When Dempsey Harrison told 
you we were now the Naked Society, he wasn’t just whistlin’ Dixie. 
I’ll bet you didn’t even know that 
if the IABI wants to they can, 
without coming within a thousand 
miles of you, put a bug in your 
wrist teevee phone without you 
knowing anything about it. They 
can monitor not only everything 
you say or receive in your phone 
conversations, but all the talk and 
other sounds that goes on in your 
vicinity. They can do this to everybody in the United States of the 
Americas who wears a teevee wrist 
phone, if and when they wish.” 
Paul Kosloff stared down at his 
in consternation. “They can?” 
“Yes. And, of course, it is illegal 
not to wear your teevee phone. But 
that’s just the beginning. We can 
bug rooms right through a wall. We 
can read conversations going on in 
a room by the vibrations on the 
windows. We can listen in on a conversation going on in the open, half 
a mile away. Oh, you’d be amazed 
how we snoopers can snoop these 
days, hombre.” 
“Well, what’s that got to do with 
you giving that cop a complicated 
fling about looking for a Rembrandt?” 
“Suppose the bad guys were 
stationed at some window, a couple 
of blocks or so from the vacuumtube terminal, monitoring the con
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
versation of everybody who came 
out? It could be done. That many 
persons don’t come to Manhattan. 
Suppose I had flashed my buzzer 
and requisitioned an armored police 
floater from that Williams fellow. 
Can you see how their defenses would have gone up?” 
F)aul growled, “You seem to get 
^ awfully romantic. All we’re 
looking for is two men, one of whom 
at least seems to be a Rumanian. 
To hear you talk, you’d think they 
had an apparatus on this island big 
enough to invade the country.” 
“Not that big,” Zack said, again 
avoiding a pile of rubble in the 
street. “However, those two are not 
alone. They’re hatchetmen, triggermen, taking their orders from someone else.” 
They rode in silence for a time, 
at Madison Square Park turning 
down to Union Square. 
Paul made a gesture of disgust 
at the ruins of the city, as they 
progressed. “There’s an example of 
what I was telling you about. The 
cities of the old days. Look at those 
buildings. A restaurant where you 
could buy inadequate food at inflated prices. A clothing store, next 
to another clothing store, where you 
could buy the same things. A liquor 
store. Another restaurant, a movie 
house where you could sit with thousands of others, exchanging colds 
and other contagion, a food st©re, 
a stationery store, another clothing 
store, women’s hats, a drugstore, a 
newsstand. Cross the street and start 
all over again. A clothing store, a 
restaurant . .” 
“All right, all right,” Zack said. 
“I get it. The means of distribution 
in the old days were antiquated.” 
“And there was another thing, I 
didn’t mention before. These supercities you brought up. Boswash, 
Sansan and Chipitts and so forth. 
They were to be located in parts of 
the country we couldn’t afford to 
turn over to urbanization. We needed the land. Back during the middle 
of the century, literally millions of 
acres of land were yearly being converted into suburbs or expressways 
to serve them. Land that we needed 
for grain, fruit, graze. Obviously, it 
makes more sense to build your 
homes on land that is impractical 
for agriculture. Up in the mountains, out on the deserts, along the 
seashore of Baja California, along 
the Keys of Florida, up in Canada 
for those who like that climate, 
all over New Mexico and Arizona 
for those who like that. With transportation what it is now, why not? 
Even that far back there were 
many New York businessmen who 
lived in Florida and commuted. Now 
it makes sense to live on a Caribbean island, or in South America, 
and either handle your business by 
teevee phone, or, when necessary, 
you can be lobbed up to any place 
in the nation in a matter of minutes.” 
Something went ping and caroomed off the front of their floater. 
Zack blinked and speeded up. 
“Zoraster,” he complained. “That 
guy Williams wasn’t kidding. They 
take a shot at you here for just 
no reason at all. Happily, that 
wasn’t much of a caliber.” 
“I heard the shot,” Paul said, 
looking back over his shoulder. 
“Sounded like a twenty-two.” 
TT'rom Union Square, they turned 
^ down Broadway. These wider 
streets weren’t impossibly bad, 
though it would have been difficult to have proceeded in a wheeled 
vehicle. As it was, they could easily 
go over much of the rubble, or, if 
the blockage was bad, up on the 
sidewalk. 
Zack Castriota shook his head. 
“It must have been something,” he 
said. “It’s difficult to imagine.” 
Paul Kosloff nodded agreement. 
“Everything seemed to culminate 
at once, so I understand. City government fell apart, overnight; 
police, fire fighting, garbage disposal 
— everything. At the same time the, 
slum element took to the streets en 
masse . And, suddenly, everybody 
who could leave decided to leave. 
Everybody, finally even the looters 
and criminal element.” 
Zack said, “I understand they’re 
cleaning up some of the outlying 
areas.” 
“That’s right. But not Manhat- r 
tan. Too big a project. They can 
come down the river, far into what 
they used to call the Bronx. And 
they can come in from Long Island. 
But it’s one hell of a job and I 
doubt that the land being reclaimed 
for parks, for agriculture, for new 
pseudo-cities, is really worth the 
fantastic price and effort.” 
A spiderweb suddenly appeared 
on one of the side windows and both 
of them involuntarily ducked. 
Neither heard the sound of the shot. 
“That one must have been a 
Noiseless,” Zack growled as he zigzagged a little. 
Paul said, “You know what’s happening?” 
Zack looked at him. “Damn right 
I know what’s happening, hombre. 
We’re getting shot at.” 
“Yes, but you know why? They 
think we’re hunters. Everybody 
armed takes a shot at us, just for 
luck.” 
“Oh, wizard. We should be flying 
a white flag, or something.” 
At West Third Street they turned 
right. 
Paul said, “Do you know where 
we’re going?”
“More or less.” Zack pulled a 
street map from an inner pocket 
and handed it to his companion. 
“This is the area that used to be an 
art colony and hangout of crackpots in general. Something like the 
Via Margutta in Rome or the Left 
Bank of Paris. We’re looking for 
McDougal street.” He avoided a 
jumble of crashed automobiles, then 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
jabbed at the map with an index 
finger. “We’re coming down here. 
Try to locate us.” 
Paul studied the map in some 
despair. “The appearance of this 
town has somewhat altered.” 
“From what I understand, four 
streets out of five can’t even be 
found.” 
“It looks as though it’s been 
bombed.” 
Zack looked over at him. “Have 
you ever seen a bombed city?” 
“No,” Paul grumbled, trying to 
decipher the map. “But it still looks 
as though it’s been bombed. I guess 
there was some bombing at that, 
particularly toward the end when 
the troops and National Guard 
were brought in.” 
“It ought to be in here some 
where.” 
P aul said suddenly, “Turn left 
here — I think.” 
“Yeah, there’s an old sign. McDougal street. Now all we have to 
do if find the house where this 
hombre lives.” 
“You know him?” • 
“No. His name is Mark Martino. He’s been in here for years. 
His cover is being an off-beat musical composer. He’s supposed to be 
in revolt against People’s Capitalism 
and the Ultra-welfare State.” 
“What number house?” 
Zack told him. 
Paul said, “There’s a building 
in comparatively good shape, up 
ahead. That might be it. Most of 
this street is sheer rubble.” 
They decided it was the former 
apartment house for which they 
were looking and left the floater at 
the curb. 
As they headed for the entry, 
which was partially caved in, Paul 
looked back at their means of transporation apprehensively. “Can we 
just leave it there?” 
Zack laughed at him. “We can’t 
take it with us.” 
“What chance is there that it’ll 
still be here when we come back?” 
“Damned if I know, but it 
sounds remote. From here on in, 
we’re in the hands of Mark Martino. Maybe he’ll have some ideas 
of how we get back to the mainland.” 
“I’m beginning to wonder if it’s 
a matter of if we get back to the 
mainland.” 
“I hate a pessimist.” 
They moved into the building and 
stared about. It was about halfway 
in ruin. There had been some fire 
and there had' obviously been a lot 
of purely senseless vandalism. There 
had been a good deal of pilferage, 
even for such items as fire wood. 
There had evidently been some combat as well, evidence of bullet holes, 
including those of rapidfire weapons 
of fairly high caliber and indications of the explosion of at least 
two or three demolition grenades. 
Zack grunted. “And this is one 
of the better preserved buildings.” 
Paul said, “They hushed it up 
somewhat, but evidently toward the 
end the fighting was pretty bad. 
I don’t know what they had in mind, 
but the government sent National 
Guard and regular troops in with 
tanks and so forth. Everybody was 
shooting at everybody indiscriminately. It stopped making any sense 
at all, but there was simply no way 
of turning it off, for, oh' a couple 
of weeks.” 
Zack looked at him sarcastically. 
“You Americans are quite a people, 
especially in view of all the talking 
you do about being peace loving.” 
Paul looked about, trying to find 
a staircase. “I still think you’ve 
got a touch of anti-Americanism.” 
A voice called dangerously, “All 
right, chum-pals, put your 
arms out to the sides.” 
They put their arms out to the 
sides and looked up. 
Above them, leaning nonchalantly on a broken bannister, was a 
character who could have passed 
amazingly for the movie idol of 
yesteryear, Robert Taylor. Possibly 
Robert Taylor in that part he once 
played, Billy the Kid , since right 
now he was cradling a sawed-off 
shotgun in his hands, as though affectionately. 
He said, gently as gently could 
be, “You were looking for someone 
undoubtedly?” 
Zack said, “Are you Mark Martino?” 
“Now one of us knows who the 
other is. Let’s keep going.” 
“My name is Castriota. I am of 
the Amsterdam Museum of Fine 
Arts. This is my colleague, Doctor 
Paul.” 
“So far, chum-pal, you have told 
me nothing. Make your fling a bit 
more informative. This toy has a 
hair trigger.” 
“You are very touchy, Herr Martino.” 
“I am still alive, chum-pal. Start 
talking faster. You’ve invaded my 
home. You know the old bit, my 
castle. Start telling me why.” 
“We have a mutual friend . .” 
“It seems unlikely, but keep going and keep your arms further out 
from your sides.” 
“Ben MacFarlane suggested I see 
you.” 
The man above nodded. “I know 
MacFarlane.” 
“And I am an old friend of 
Charles Bellows.” 
Something passed over the other’s 
face. “That’s too bad, then.” 
“How do you mean? We studied 
together in Paris in the old days.” 
The gun was suddenly lowered 
to half mast. 
“Come on up,” the other said. “A 
baboon, or hunter, or somebody got 
to Chuck a few weeks ago. He’s 
dead. Come on up. Excuse the hospitality.” 
They mounted the stairs, continuing up until the sixth floor, the 
highest floor where there were still 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
intact apartments. The building evidently went quite a ways back in 
time and had never been modernized; there was no identity screen 
on the door. Their host pushed it 
open and gestured for them to enter. 
They went on through into a 
large and lavishly furnished living 
room. There was even wall-to-wall 
carpeting. 
Mark Martino closed the door behind them and said, “Sorry to put 
you through all that gobblygook out 
there. But I have to maintain my 
cover. I assume you’re Generale 
Castriota.” 
Zack nodded and held out his 
hand to shake. “That’s right,” he 
said. 
nphe other shook and leaned his 
sawed-off shotgun up against 
the wall. He took in Paul Kosloff. 
“I thought you were coming 
alone. Who’s this?” 
“Professor Kosloff,” Zack said. 
“ Professor ? You mean he’s not 
even a pro? You want to blow my 
cover here bringing around every 
Tom, Dick and . .” 
“The name’s Paul,” Paul said 
mildly. “And I didn’t particularly 
want to come. I was drafted.” 
Zack said, " I might need him for 
this operation. He speaks Rumanian — and practically every other 
Eastern European language.” He 
was looking around the apartment, 
peeking through various doors. "No 
chance of this place being bugged?” 
Mark Martino, still scowling, 
went over to an old-fashioned bar.. 
“If it is, they’ve got some new developments the IABI doesn’t know 
about. I’ve got every type of mop 
known and every day I double 
check. You can talk openly now 
that we’re inside. Just what is this 
mysterious operation? What’ll you 
have to drink?” 
Paul said, “What’re you pushing?” 
Zack Castriota said, looking 
around at the furnishings, “You 
don’t seem to do so badly.” 
Mark Martino said, “How about 
•some Twenty Year Old Metaxa? 
That is, twenty years old when 
it was bottled. Brandy doesn’t age 
in the bottle.” 
“Wizard!” Castriota said, sinking 
into a comfort chair. 
Paul Kosloff had never even 
heard of the Greek brandy, but he 
nodded. 
As Mark poured the drinks, he 
gestured at the room’s fancy furnishings and answered Zack’s earlier 
comment. “Part of the protective 
coloring. Everybody on the island 
loots. If you didn’t, the others 
would think something was wrong. 
We spend a considerable portion of 
our time scrabbling around the 
wreckage. It gives me an excuse 
for prying all over the island. From 
time to time, I bring home a load 
of lush, or books, or groceries; 
makes it look authentic.” 
He handed the drinks around and 
settled into what was obviously his 
own favorite comfort chair, though 
obviously, too, it couldn’t have been 
hooked up with an auto-bar built 
into the arm rest and such facilities as were featured on the mainland. He had to adjust the holster 
that swung on his right hip. 
Paul said, in the way of making 
conversation, “That looks like an 
old-fashioned six-shooter.” 
The other still evidently wasn’t 
any too pleased at Paul Kosloff being brought to his hide-away. He 
patted the butt of the gun and 
said sourly, “It is, and possibly one 
of the most practical handguns ever 
devised. The trouble with your 
modern automatics, recoilless, noiseless, and all' the rest of it, is that 
the more complicated a weapon gets 
the more things can go wrong with 
' it when you’re in action. And when 
a thing can go wrong, it usually 
manages to. There’s practically 
nothing that can go wrong with a 
single action six-shooter, but if it 
does I can repair it myself with my 
penknife and possibly a little baling 
wire. Held by the barrel, it also 
makes a good club or hammer. And 
it’s the fastest draw ever devised. 
But, of course, you wouldn’t know 
about such things, Professor” 
P aul Kosloff ’s .38 Noiseless was 
magically in his hand. It coughed quietly, and he flicked it slightly, 
and it was back beneath his left 
shoulder again. It had been in sight 
only long enough to have appeared a 
blur. 
“Hey!” Mark Martino blurted. 
Zack Castriota chortled softly. “I 
didn’t know your Olympic pistol 
teams practiced the quick draw,” 
he said. 
The underground agent was looking blankly in the direction Paul 
had fired. 
“Hey!” he said again, in indignation. “That’s my old Marilyn 
Monroe calendar, a collector’s item. 
You’ve ruined the tip of her left 
breast.” He glared at his unwelcome guest. “Don’t try to tell me 
you aimed at that!” 
Zack laughed aloud. “This is a 
professor with a difference. Wanta 
see him ruin the right one?” 
“No r dammit!” However, Martino looked at Paul with new respect. 
He said, “All right, all right. 
What’s this all about?” He turned 
his eyes to Castriota. “Why 
wouldn’t they tell me on the sealed 
beam phone why you were coming? 
And why’d they send a foreign 
agent, and, above all, why a language professor?” 
Zack finished his drink and leaned forward. “They didn’t tell you 
on the teevee phone because somewhere along the line it might have 
been tapped. They sent me because 
there’s no material on me in your 
computer data banks. I brought 
Professor Kosloff on my own without reporting, so there’s nothing in 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
the data banks suggesting that he’s 
involved.” 
He got up, went over to the bar 
and poured himself another heavy 
slug. “This stuff is priceless.” He 
turned back and made a motion of 
toast to Mark Martino. He said, 
“It looks as though someone has 
figured out a method of tapping 
your National Data Center, even 
the highest priority files.” 
Mark Martino stared. “Tap it? 
Are you completely around the 
bend? How?” 
“Nobody knows.” 
“But, how do you mean? 
They’ve infiltrated the center at 
Denver?” 
The Common Europe man shook 
his head. “They didn’t have to. 
From a distance. Electronically. At 
least, so we suspect. But that’s not 
the worst part of it, Martino. If 
they can read the data, evidently 
it’s just a matter of time before 
they figure out a way of wiping it. 
I leave it to your imagination what 
would happen to this country if 
your computer data banks were 
wiped clean.” 
The IABI agent didn’t have to 
dwell on it very long. “Wow,” he 
said. And then, “Where do I come 
in?” 
Zack Castriota nodded and returned to his chair with his fresh 
drink. “Mr. Martino, in this modern world of our there’re precious 
few places for a group of criminals, 
espionage agents, saboteurs and 
such to hide out. Individuals, yes. 
A single criminal can sometimes 
figure out some method of beating 
the rap, covering his tracks, going 
to ground. But when you get a 
sizeable operation there are prime 
difficulties. With computer control 
of crime, everybody in the country 
is on tap in an instant. The occupant of every home, every apartment, every hotel or motel room, is 
known by the computers. A foreign 
agent can have some advantage in 
not wearing an American teevee 
phone, but it also puts him at considerable disadvantage since survival in the Ultra-welfare State becomes practically inpossible without a standard Universal Credit 
Card, complete with your registered thumbprint and all the information involved that must be on record in the computer files.” 
AyTark Martino nodded. “I see 
•*-*-*■ what you’ve built up to. You 
suspect that your data bank saboteurs have a base of operations 
here on Manhattan.” 
Zack nodded. “More than suspect. We know that at least one of 
them is here, or was this morning. 
You see, I managed to plant a bug 
on him.” 
“Wizard! Where is he?” 
“Let me have that map, Paul,” 
Castriota said, coming to his feet. 
He spread the map out on the 
arm of Martino’s comfort chair and 
indicated a tiny mark. “He moves 
about a bit, but this is the vicinity. 
Near Union Square.” 
“He moves about a bit? How 
much?” 
“Not very much. He sticks within a fairly small area.” 
The darkly handsome IABI 
agent thought about it. “That area’s 
in rubble. Practically nothing left 
standing in any shape at all. It 
used to be one of the main shopping 
sections and it was looted and relooted and fought over as long as 
the fighting went on. How many 
of them are there?” 
“We don’t know. We know of at 
least two, but they’re heavies, not 
the type of agent that would be up 
on the sophisticated equipment that 
must be involved. So there’s at least 
three. For all we know, there may 
be thirty.” 
Martino scowled down at the map 
and shook his head. “If there was 
anything like that number, I’d know 
about it. In fact, I should know 
about it if there were three real 
strangers on the island.” 
Paul said. “What do you mean 
by real strangers?” 
Mark Martino said, still scowling 
in thought, “There’s a grapevine. 
We seldom get new recruits here in 
our happy little community. When 
we do, we like to know about them 
soonest. They’re usually bad news.” 
“How’s that?” Zack said. 
“We old hands are shrinking in 
number, not increasing. The originals, left over from the riot days, 
die off or go back to the mainland. 
The only newcomers are usnaBy 
fugitives from justice, tough chasaeters on the run, that type.” 
Paul snorted. “The impression I 
got was that everybody on this 
island was a tough character.” 
The other shook his head impatiently. “Don’t read into the baboons more than is there. Most of 
them wouldn’t be here if they could 
avoid it. And the only way to survive is to maintain a certain unwritten law respecting each other’s 
rights. If they were all as tough 
and bloodthirsty as some outsiders 
think, there’d be no one at aB left 
on the island alive. So, if somebody 
comes along that’s a little too 
rugged for the rest of us, we combine and eliminate him for the sake 
of the community as a whole.” 
Paul Kosloff shook his bead. 
“What a place to live.” 
“Well, don’t think I chose 
it, hombre,” Martino said defensively. “The IABI had to have 
somebody present, and I got the 
damned short straw. Besides, there’s 
a bonus connected with serving 
here.” 
TTe stood up and paced the room, 
* in thought. Finally he turned 
to Zack Castriota and said, “Why 
not bring in a sizeable force and 
bomb the area?” 
The Common Europe operative 
shook his head. “They might have 
time to destroy their equipment 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
m 
Our technicians are sweating blood 
wanting a look at that equipment. 
That’s why I’m here, to find out 
definitely where they are and how 
to get to them before they get 
their wind up. Very delicate operation. Then we’ll land on them like 
an avalanche.” 
“Yeah, that obviously makes 
sense,” Martino said lowly. “Just 
a minute.” 
He went to a back window and 
pulled free a piece of heavy cardboard that was making do as a replacement of a broken window pane. 
He picked up an object the others 
couldn’t make out from a nearby 
table and made a flowing motion. 
He stuck his head to the broken 
window and yelled, “Hey, Pete! 
Repeat!” 
Paul and Zack exchanged glances, 
blankly. 
Mark Martino was replacing the 
cardboard. He then began to toss 
the object he held back to the 
table. 
“What’s that?” Zack said. 
“Slingshot.” 
“A what?” 
“I think you call them catapults 
over on the Continent,” the other 
said, holding it up. He grinned and 
said, “Le plus change , le plus 
meme chose , or however you say 
it.” 
Both Kosloff and Castriota 
winced at the accent and the mutilated quotation. 
“It makes a handy signalling de
vice when you don’t have a teevee 
phone,” Martino explained. 
“Signal who?” Zack said. 
But already there was a scampering of feet on the stairs outside. 
“My McDougal Street Irregulars,” Mark said laconically. 
rr^he door burst open, and two 
filthy pre-teenagers were there. 
Filthy, that is, so far as body cleanliness was concerned. Their clothing 
was of the finest and newest quality, 
albeit on the colorful side. It came 
to Paul Kosloff that on this island 
probably every resident made a 
practice of ignoring the need to do 
laundry, and simply looted new 
clothing when it was required. 
“Yessir, Senor Martino,” one of 
the two blurted. 
Mark Martino made a gesture of 
vague introduction. “Mister Castriota, Mr. Kosloff, these are Pete 
and Repeat — don’t ask me which 
is which — my men Friday and 
Saturday. So far as I know, probably the only native-born citizens 
of the Commonwealth of Manhattan since its inception and two close 
friends.” 
He had clapped one of them on 
the shoulder as he spoke. They were 
obviously twins, and obviously adored him. 
Zack Castriota was scowling unhappily. 
Mark Martino turned back to 
him. “They’re uneducated, at least 
in the manner in which we think 
of education, so if you watch yourself you can say just about anything in full, ah, security. You see, 
occasionally I can do little chores 
for the community here. Like bringing some special medicine from the 
mainland on my trips to sell my 
songs and so forth. The boys are 
grateful for my helping their mother 
a few. months ago. I suppose I’m 
the nearest thing to a doctor we 
have on this end of the island now.” 
He turned to the two youngsters 
who were staring up at him worshipfully. 
He said, “Boys, there are some 
strangers around that I want to 
know more about. Now what I want 
you to do is pass the word. Each 
of you will tell two others to look 
out for these strangers, or, if they’ve 
already seen them, to report to me. 
And each person you tell will tell 
two others to look out for these 
strangers, and so on. I want the 
word to go all around the island 
as soon as possible. The strangers 
will probably dress a little differently than we do, they might speak 
some strange language . 
“What’s a strange language?” 
the first lad said apologetically. 
“They might talk differently than 
we do, so you can’t understand 
them. And . .” Mark Martino 
cleared his throat. “They might be 
cleaner than most of us are. Now 
do you know where the big movie 
theatre was, there on Broadway and 
14th?” 
“The one with the girl on the 
poster with the big ass?” the second one said earnestly. 
“That’s the one. Now, most likely, these strangers are somewhere 
in that vicinity.” He clapped them 
both on the shoulders again. “I 
want to know how many of them 
there are, and just where they’re 
staying. Now get going, boys.” He 
hesitated, then added, “And remember, these men are probably very 
dangerous . .” 
“Nothing can happen to them,” 
Zack said quickly. 
“Yes,” Martino said very emphatically. “Pass the word that 
nothing must happen to them.” He 
added, “Not yet.” 
“Yessir, Senor Martino,” they 
blurted in unison. They spun and 
were gone in a clatter. 
“Right out of Conan Doyle,” 
Paul Kosloff grunted. “McDougal 
Street Irregulars, yet.” 
Mark Martino grinned at him, 
and the corners of his mouth turned down. “Bet you dollars to doughnuts we get results,” he said. 
“The same old game,” Zack 
Castriota said, “down through the 
ages. The john-fuzz of today depends on stool pigeons as it has 
since the days of Caesar.” 
Mark Martino said, “We’ll have 
a wait. Let’s have another drink 
and . .” He had started for his 
little bar, but he came to a sudden 
halt, and his face went empty. 
“What’s the matter?” Paul said. 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
Mark Martino said very slowly, 
“I know where they’re holed up.” 
“Where, in the name of the holy 
jumping Zoroaster?” Zack said, 
leaning forward. 
“In GimbePs basement.” 
V 
4t\T7here?” Castriota scowled. 
* *“In the former bombshelter 
in the big Macy-Gimbel department 
store, just off Union Square. And I 
know how they’ve been getting in 
and out, too.” Martino, excited, 
slugged his right fist into the palm 
of his left hand. “And why nobody’s 
seen them, so far.” 
Paul and Zack leaned forward. 
But their host took time out to 
mix fresh drinks and hand them 
around. 
Then he said, “You can see their 
problem. They need space for their 
equipment and for themselves, but 
they can’t afford to be spotted, not 
even by baboons. Too much of a 
risk that the word would get to the 
police. They probably know I’m 
here, too, if they can tap the computer data banks pertaining to the 
Inter-American Bureau of Investigation. So they want to avoid my 
learning about them.” 
“I’m surprised they haven’t finished you off, if they know you’re 
here,” Paul said. 
The undercover man shook his 
head. “That would just result in 
more IABI agents being sent, and 
they’d start snooping around trying to find the killer. No, it’s better 
for them to just avoid me.” 
“This Gimbel’s basement bit,” 
Zack said urgently. 
Mark turned his eyes to the Common Europe man. “When Gimbels 
and Macy’s amalgamated, they became the single biggest privately 
owned store in the world. The new 
building had a gigantic bombshelter 
in the deepest basement. Actually, 
two bombshelters, one for the public and suited for mass occupancy 
and one for the executives of the 
store. It was said to be one of the 
most swank in the country, completely equipped. Even portable generators for electricity.” 
“How did you learn about it?” 
“Ran into an article, quite by 
accident, in a magazine in the 
ruins of the public library. So I 
thought I’d try and find it, in the 
belief that there might be a lot of 
lootable food and so forth. But I 
went about it the wrong way, trying 
to get through the rubble up above. 
I never did make it.” 
“You said you knew how they 
were getting in,” Zack said. 
“I think I do. Somehow, they’ve 
tunneled in from the subway.” He 
was excited again and pointed a 
finger at Zack Castriota. “Don’t 
you see? The subway tubes are 
empty. The baboons seldom go 
down into them. No reason to, 
except sometimes for water. In some 
places springs or underground 
streams have broken through the 
subway walls and some of the baboons use them for water. At any 
rate, somehow they tunneled in 
and found the abandoned bombshelter. Beds, food, water, lots of 
space and snug as a bug. And nobody in the vicinity, baboons, hunters, research people such as you 
pretend to be, ever see them. They 
probably enter the subway from 
as much as a mile away and, using 
flashlights, walk down to the 
Union Square area and enter 
there.” 
“Sounds possible,” Zack nodded. 
\ voice shouted up from below. 
Mark Martino scooped up his 
shotgun and made his way to the 
door. “Just a minute,” he said over 
his shoulder, and left. 
Zack said to Paul, “What do you 
think?” 
“Darned if I know.” 
Mark re-entered with a stranger, 
a small shifty-eyed little wretch, 
dirty of face and hands but attired 
in impeccable sport tweeds, the effect of which were somewhat spoiled by twin bandoliers of cartridges 
he had criss-crossed on his chest, 
Pancho Villa style. He carried a 
beautiful carbine. 
Mark Martino went through very 
formal introductions and then offered the newcomer a drink. Evidently, 
in baboon society the niceties were 
observed. 
The newcomer, Joe by name, re
fused a seat. He said, “That kid 
you call Repeat. He told me you 
was interested in knowing like if 
any strangers was around.” His 
eyes shifted to the bar. “You 
wouldn’t have a spare bottle of 
guzzle, would you, Martino?” 
“Sure, sure, any time, Joe. Take 
your pick. I ran into a burned out 
liquor store over on the square the 
other day. Everything already gone 
up above, of course. But I managed to get into the cellar. Lush 
all over the place.” 
“Thanks,” Joe said. “I know the 
store. Never thought about the cellar, though.” A full bottle of bourbon was selected from the bar and 
he tucked it under his arm. “Anyway, me and this mopsy I’m living 
with, we get our cooking water 
down into the subway . .” 
Mark Martino looked over at 
Zack and Paul and lifted his eyebrows and nodded an I-told-you-so. 
“. and three days ago I was 
down getting a bucketful, see? And 
guess what’s coming down the track. 
Four guys. Two of them got lights 
and are going along like guards. The 
other two’s got some big hunk of 
equipment. Wouldn’t have the vaguest idea what it was they’d looted, 
but they was treating it careful.” 
“Where’d they go?” Zack said. 
Joe said importantly, “I guess 
I could’ve nailed the whole gang, 
but I figured, why? I kind of sunk 
back into a little niche like in the 
wall and kept quiet. You know 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
where they went, carrying that goddamned chunk of machinery, or 
whatever it was? Into that there 
entrance into the big store.” 
Mark looked at Zack and said, 
“There used to be a subway entrance in the basement of the MacyGimbePs store so that the customers 
didn’t have to go onto the street at 
all.” 
Joe said, “Hell, there’s nothing 
worth anything in there. And it’s 
dangerous. Dark as pitch, and you 
stumble over something and get a 
cave-in on your head. Everything 
worth gloaming out of that old ruin 
went years ago.” 
Mark asked him a few more 
questions, but they’d already heard 
all he really had to tell. Mark 
thanked him profusely, clapped him 
in friendly fashion on the shoulder, 
insisted he take another bottle of 
the scrounged bourbon, and saw 
him to the door and the stairway. 
"fX7hen he came back, he growled, 
* * “Joe, and various others, 
wouldn’t mind taking over this 
apartment. Most of them are too 
damned lazy to keep a place up. 
They stay in a former hotel or 
apartment until the place gets too 
filthy even for them and then find 
another. I’ve got the most comfortable place on Manhattan.” 
He grunted amusement. “That’s 
why I make anybody who comes 
here shout out before starting up. If 
I heard somebody on the stairs who 
hasn’t called out his identity, I fire 
a few rounds down the stairway at 
random. Very effective.” 
Zack said, “You seem to have 
guessed right, Martino.” 
The other nodded and resumed 
his seat. “Now what?” 
“We still haven’t pinpointed them 
adequately, and we don’t know how 
many are there. And we still don’t 
know how to get in at them without 
giving them time to destroy the 
equipment. We need more information.” 
“Oh, wizard. How do you think 
we’re going to get it, just go up 
and knock on the door?” 
Paul Kosloff said to Zack, 
“What you were saying about, ah, 
bugs being so sophisticated these 
days. I wonder if . .” 
Mark said impatiently, “There’s 
a thousand tons of rubble above 
that bomb shelter. There’s no way 
of getting a bug in.” 
“Yeah,” Zack growled, deep in 
thought. 
Paul said very slowly, “I have a 
suggestion I hesitate to make.” 
They both looked at him. 
He said, “Those two kids. 
They’ve been baboons all their 
lives?” 
“What of it?” Mark Martino 
scowled. 
“Living in the ruins, scuttling 
around avoiding hunters, burrowing 
in and around the subways, the 
sewers, the cellars — all their 
lives.” 
They were looking at him close
ly
“If anybody in the world could 
snake into that bombshelter undetected and plant a bug, one of 
those kids could.” 
Mark said, “And if they caught 
him?” 
Paul took a breath and nodded. 
“That’s why I hesitated. But if they 
caught him, he’s a twelve-year-old 
kid pilfering in the ruins of a department store.” 
Zack shook his head. “If they 
caught him, they’d shoot him. 
They’d have to, because they’d be 
afraid he’d give them away. Besides, why not shoot him? He’s 
only a baboon. It’s not even particularly against the law.” 
But Martino was on his feet 
again, pacing and slugging his left 
palm with his fist. 
“He wouldn’t have to get all the 
way in,” he said in agitation. “I’ve 
got a little bug in the other room 
that’s a doozy. Directional. If he 
can get to within a hundred yards 
of them and point it in their direction, we’d have it made.” 
AT ark Martino drove the floater, 
in view of his better knowledge of the layout of the ruined 
city. His "Irregular,” Repeat, had 
been left behind, both because of 
lack of room in the four-place vehicle and because they wished to 
keep their number at a minimum. 
It would have been possible to re
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
cruit a few others of the baboons 
of the vicinity that Mark was on 
good terms with, but they didn’t 
want manpower. 
He avoided Broadway and kept 
to back streets, pulling up eventually across the square from the ruined 
department store which was their 
destination. 
They piled from the car and the 
IABI agent took from the back his 
shotgun and a shoulder bag of 
equipment. 
He said, “There’s a subway entrance over here.” 
They followed him silently, little 
Pete, Paul Kosloff and Zack Castriota, in line, down the stairs. 
As it grew darker, he pulled four 
sets of goggles from the carrying 
case and handed them around. “Infra-red,” he said, bringing, as well, 
a heavy flashlight from the bag. 
They donned the glasses, and the invisible light guided their way. The 
grimy little Pete was fascinated by 
the flashlight magic and continued 
to put his glasses off and on, checking. 
“I’ve never been in here,” Martino muttered, “but there shouldn’t 
be any reason we couldn’t get 
through to the store entry.” 
“Trouble is,” Zack growled, “we 
don’t know what we’ll find when we 
get there.” 
The subway tube was in comparatively good repair, and they were 
able to stumble along it without 
overmuch trouble. They came, even
55 
tually, to an alcove, a room probably once used by subway maintenance men. 
Mark Martino came to a halt and 
considered. He said, “This is probably it. I doubt if we can all get 
much closer without running the 
chance of being spotted. Okay?” 
Zack said, “You’re the boss.” 
Mark looked down at the boy, 
and made an unhappy face. He 
said, “All right, Pete. Possibly 
your country hasn’t done too well 
by you and hasn’t even done much 
in the way of trying. But you are 
now Number One Man on the firing 
line.” He handed the boy a smaller 
flashlight. “Keep away from the 
regular light as much as you can.” 
He handed him a small metallic object disguised as an automatic pencil. “Get as close as possible and 
plant this with the point aiming 
in their direction. Then get out and 
back to us as quick as you can.” 
"Yes, Senor Martino.” The boy 
was anxious to please and missed 
seeing the IABI agent dose his eyes 
in pain. 
When he had gone, the three of 
them looked after him for a long 
moment. Paul shook his head. He 
was sorry he had made the suggestion. 
Castriota breathed, “Aiii. We 
utilize children to fight our senseless wars.” 
'X/f ark Martino unslung his shoulder bag and from it took a 
box-like instrument that looked like 
nothing so much as a radio of the 
twenties, complete with two sets 
of earphones and various dials. 
The three of them squatted about 
it. 
Martino said, “I’ve known him 
since he could hardly walk.” 
He put on one set of the earphones and began fiddling with the 
dials. Once or twice he flinched, 
evidently as some raucous sound assailed his eardrums. 
Finally, he pulled the earphones 
away and handed them to Paul Kosloff. “You’re the linguist.” 
Zack Castriota took up the other 
set. “I don’t know Rumanian,” he 
muttered, “but I have several other 
languages.” 
They had a full half-hour wait. 
Suddenly, Paul Kosloff reacted. 
“Got something,” he said. 
“Yeah, I heard that,” Zack said, 
pulling one earphone free, the better to communicate. “What was 
it?” 
“Wasn’t clear enough. There, 
something else is coming through. 
Two voices. One’s swearing.” 
“What language?” Martino said. 
“Rumanian?” 
“No. I’m not sure. Just monosyllables. Bulgarian, perhaps, or 
Serbo-Croat. Possibly Ukrainian.” 
“I thought they were supposed 
to be Rumanians,” Martino growled. There was probably no particular reason to, but all spoke in whispers. 
Zack Castriota said to him, “Most 
Balkans speak several languages. 
Such a hodgepodge of nationalities 
there calls for it.” 
Paul said, “Shhh. Something’s 
coming through. I think the boy’s 
got nearer.” 
It was an agony of strain. What 
words he was able to pick up were 
meaningless. Affirmations and negatives, bits of profanity, disconnected 
sentences or ejaculations. 
Zack said, “What the hell’re they 
up to?” 
Paul Kosloff shook his head. 
“They could be doing anything 
from eating lunch to playing a game 
of poker.” 
Mark Martino said, “Patience, 
hombres. You didn’t think we 
could just tune in like this and 
they’d go into a long discussion of 
all their innermost business, did 
you?” He grunted sourness. “We 
could spend a week here and learn 
absolutely nothing.” 
“Shhh,” Paul said. “So far, I 
make out four of them. There’s at 
least four.” 
“Joe told us that much,” Mark 
murmured. 
“It’s a little clearer,” Zack said. 
“That kid must be edging closer.” 
“Little cloddy better watch himself,” Mark said unhappily. 
Zack said, “One of them just 
said something about lifting something.” 
“What language?” Mark said. 
“Sounded like Italian,” Zack 
said, scowling. “I thought those 
bastards were Rumanian.” 
“It was Italian,” Paul said. 
“They’re all multi-lingual. Two of 
them, I think, are Rumanians, 
one an Italian and one either a 
Bulgarian or a Ukrainian, and 
they switch languages around. 
Listen . .” 
nother agony of time passed. 
Paul said finally, slowly, “You 
know what? They’re working at 
something. They aren’t sitting 
around eating or playing cards or 
killing time, they’re doing something.” 
“I think you’re right,” Zack 
growled. 
“I wish the hell that kid’d plant 
the damn bug some place pointed 
in their direction and get on back 
here,” Mark muttered. He fondled 
his shotgun and added slowly, ‘“I 
have half a mind to go get him.” 
Zack looked at the undercover 
man in disgust. “Then you have 
half a mind, period,” he said. 
“You’d blow the whole thing.” 
“We had no right to send him in 
there. Kid can’t be more than 
eleven years old.” 
“So far, he’s doing a wizard of 
a job. When this is over, I’m going 
to make a point of getting him and 
his brother over . to the mainland 
for a normal life, school and all.” 
Mark said, “Already tried. They 
don’t want to go. This is their 
world. They don’t know any other.” 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
“Shhh,” Paul said again. “One 
of them just said something about 
an unterseeboot” 
“ Untersee . what?” Mark Martino demanded. 
“Means submarine in German, 
but they use the same term in some 
parts of the Balkans.” 
“Submarine 1 Holy jumping Zoroaster! You don’t think . .” 
“Listen” 
After a moment, Paul Kosloff 
pulled the headset from his ears and 
looked at them. “You know what 
they’re doing?” 
They stared back at him. 
“They’re pulling out.” 
“What’d you mean?” Zack Castriota snapped. 
“They keep mentioning the others. Others who have already gone. 
There’s only four of them left. 
They’re wrapping it up. They’re 
pulling out.” 
The Common Europe agent pulled his own earset completely from 
his head and stared down at the 
floor. He licked his lower lip. 
“Damn!” 
Mark Martino said to him quickly, “How soon can you ring in the 
boys?”||r 
“No^time. It’s not set up yet.” 
Thepheadset which Paul Kosloff 
held in his hands squawked louder 
than usual. He rammed one of the 
receivers back against an ear. His 
face went empty. ^ 
“They’ve got Petel” 4 , 
Mark Martino was on his feet. 
“Come on!” he said. “We’re going 
in.” 
They scrambled after him. On a 
run, it was difficult for the three 
to keep from stumbling along the 
tracks, the infrared light in Martino’s hands being inadequate for 
them all. After what seemed an age 
of time, they reached a station 
platform. The IABI agent started 
up an iron ladder to its side. 
Zack yelped, “Look out,” and a 
gun in his hand blasted past Paul 
Kosloff’s ear. 
Paul couldn’t make out what 
the target had been. He hurried up 
after Martino onto the station platform. 
“Must be this way,” Martino 
barked. “Come on.” 
Zack was immediately behind 
them. 
'sphere was a confusion of jwreckage now. This must have formerly been the entry to the store 
from the subway proper. All was 
broken glass, brick, chunks of cement block, wrecked and sometimes 
burned furniture and fittings. They 
stumbled as they progressed. They 
could hear other stumbling of feet, 
other confusion of getting through 
this impossible debris. 
Mark Martino yelled, implausibly, “Halt!” He kept scrambling 
forward. 
j Suddenly there was a glare of 
light before them — natural light 
flooding from a large metal door-^ 
■* 
IF/? 
iwiPiii 
way. Paul Kosloff began to tear his 
infrared goggles from his face. 
In the door loomed a figure, a 
st,ubby automatic with a large, 
refund cartridge drum in hands. The 
g\*n blasted, the noise roaring, echoing, re-echoing in the confined quarters. 
Mark Martino yelled agony and 
pitched forward. 
To this point, Paul Kosloff had 
left his weapon in its shoulder holster, the better to utilize both 
hands in progressing over the wreckage and rubble. Now he flung himself down and to the right, trying 
unsuccessfully to draw at the same 
time. Behind him, he heard a 
scream of anger from Zack Castriota and two quick shots. 
The submachinegun blared its 
hate again, plowing up glass and 
fragments of cement from the pile 
behind which Paul Kosloff had rolled. He was pinned down, afraid 
to rise enough to get his own gun 
out. Evidently, Zack had also taken 
cover somewhere to the rear. 
Unbelievably, Mark Martino 
brought himself to a sitting position. His face was the chalk of 
death, but his left hand went out 
and fumbled up the shotgun. Evidently, his right arm was completely useless. He braced the butt 
of the gun against his torn midsection. Another burst hit him, and 
he fell off to one side. 
But he had diverted attention 
from Paul Kosloff for a sceond. 
The .38 Noiseless coughed once, 
twice, and the gunman in the doorway collapsed forward, silently, the 
automatic spilling to the rubblestrewn floor before him. 
Zack was past Paul Kosloff on a 
run, bent low, the way a man runs 
in combat, presenting as small a 
target as possible. He had an automatic in his right hand, extended 
forward, ready for fire. 
Another figure loomed in the 
doorway. Evidently, this one was 
unarmed. He reached desperately 
for the submachinegun which had 
been dropped by his companion. 
Zack Castriota’s handgun was a 
full automatic, rather than a semi. 
Its chatter was machine-gun-like, 
as he let loose a burst of five or 
six shots. The newcomer crumbled. 
• “Come on!” the Common Europe 
agent yelled, dashing to and 
through the door, Paul Kosloff immediately behind. 
The rooms beyond were obviously the bombshelter. After the complete confusion of the wreckage behind, the absolutely spick and span 
qualities here were like a slap in 
the face. The former executives of 
the Gimble-Macy ultra-department 
store had done themselves proud. 
'Sphere was a blast of explosion, a 
flaring of flame, a heat wave 
of overpowering intensity. Zack 
Castriota and Paul Kosloff were 
bowled over and back. 
Black had washed over Paul 
Kosloff, but It was a momentary 
thing. 
He heard a shot and seemingly 
received a sharp punch on his left 
shoulder. Instinctively, he fired back 
at something that moved, at what 
distance he didn’t know. Fired, and 
fired again. Then the blackness 
washed over him once more. 
When he came alive, a voice was 
saying weakly, “Paul. Hombre. 
Where are you?” 
“Here,” Paul said. “Over here.” 
“Listen,” Zack’s voice was fading 
fast. “One got away . .” There 
was a long pause. “It’s the one I 
planted the bug on, and he’s wearing 
the same jerkin. Listen, Paul . 
Paul started crawling toward the 
sound of the voice. The other had 
become incoherent, was saying 
something about a message to his 
wife in Paris. It was pitch dark in 
the shelter now. 
By the time he found the Common Europe agent, Zack Castriota 
was gone from this world. 
Intuitively, he knew that little 
Pete was also gone. 
Paul Kosloff brought his arm 
around weakly and brought his wrist 
near to his face. He activated his 
teevee wrist phone and said into it, 
weakly, “I want Dempsey Harrison, 
at the National Data Center, Denver.” 
A robot voice said, “Sorry, that 
is a Priority One number.” 
Paul took a labored breath and 
said, “Then give me his secretary.” 
“Sorry, that is a Priority Two 
Number, and you are not listed.” 
“All right, give me her secretary, 
or assistant, or whatever the helL” 
The robot voice said, “It is an 
offense to use profanity on th# 
phone. The fact will be entered ori : 
your dossier for future reference if 
the offense is repeated.” • 
“Go get goosed, you mechanical 
bastard,” Paul growled weakly. 
The screen lit up, and a young 
face was there. 
Paul Kosloff said, “I’m Professor 
Kosloff. Tell Miss Stebbins I want 
to talk to her.” 
“Yes, sir.” Eyes were still wide 
even as her face faded. 
Lisa Stebbins, the ultimate in 
redheaded attractiveness, and cool 
as ever, was there. She took in his 
face. “Professor Kosloff, you’ve 
been hurt!” 
“You ain’t just whistlin’ Dixie, 
beautiful. Listen, first get a fix on 
me, and send somebody quickly. 
Second, let me talk to Harrison.” 
She looked at him strangely, but 
was obviously moving hands in 
businesslike activity. Her face faded, and Harrison appeared. 
The bureaucrat’s expression was 
first quizzical, then alarmed. “Professor!” he snapped. 
Before Paul Kosloff passed out 
again, he said, “I just thought I’d 
let you know I’m available for that 
assignment.” 
TO BE CONTINUED 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
IF • Feature 
.. and WHEN 
by LESTER DEL REY 
Mice and Stars 
S etting up a human colony on a 
world around some alien star 
does not seem too difficult an effort. 
We already know enough to be reasonably sure of finding habitable 
planets, and our engineering skill is 
advanced enough to be capable of 
reaching them within a few decades. 
But the problem of making sure 
such a colony has a fair chance to 
survive has not been solved, either 
by science or in the works of science 
fiction. In fact, we can’t be certain 
that civilized man has any certainty 
of surviving on Earth — even barring atomic destruction or cosmic 
catastrophe. We simply don ’t know 
enough about the real problems and 
complex relationships of life. 
The science that deals with what 
goes on in the biosphere — the thin 
layer of air, earth and sea where 
life is possible — is too new and 
too understaffed to have found out 
what constitutes a viable life colony. 
As a matter of fact, this science was 
not even considered in science fiction until the last fifteen years, and 
no story I remember has given it 
more than a token consideration. 
The science is ecology. It is the 
study of the interrelationships of living things with one another and 
with their common environment. 
This is the science that could have 
prevented such blunders as introducing the rabbit to Australia and 
indiscriminate use of insecticides. It 
could have told us that the ruin of 
certain forest areas and the destruction of the beaver would lead 
to devastating floods in Ohio. And 
when we go into space, it is the 
only science which can tell us how 
to set up a complex of plant and 
animal life which will survive and 
enable our colonists to turn the new 
world into a real home for man. 
Obviously, it should be a key 
science in our space program. So 
far, however, it is sadly neglected. 
Late in 1967, there was a symposium on interstellar travel and colonization, following the Planetology 
meeting at the New 'York Academy 
of Science. This was meant as an 
interchange of views between space 
scientists and participating sciencefiction writers, among whom were 
Murray Leinster, frederik Pohl and 
myself. It was a valuable discus
sion, but little dealt with the 
living environment that must be 
set up on a new planet; no one 
at the table was a qualified 
ecologist, though it meant to be 
a fair sampling of the major field 
of space science and technology. 
Fortunately, the Ford Foundation seems to be aware of the need 
to expand the training program for 
ecologists and provide funds for 
more research. This year they are 
making grants of nearly four million 
dollars for this purpose. It should 
help — but it’s only a tiny fraction 
of the funds spent for work in other sciences. And it can’t begin to 
meet the needs for ecological work 
in the near future. 
T^ven on a planet very similar to 
^ Earth — one with suitable 
land, water resources and oxygenrich atmosphere — the problems 
of providing a viable environment 
for a human colony are immense. 
It had been touched lightly in several novels of interstellar exploration, but it deserves — and hasn’t 
had — the detailed scrutiny that 
science fiction has given other 
fields. 
We are pretty certain that man 
can’t depend on native life forms. 
They will not have evolved precisely along the chemical lines of Earth, 
if they happen to be formed from 
basically the same carbon compounds. They may be dose, but will 
hardly offer either safe or adequate 
IF — AND WHEN 
food for men. So the colonists will 
have to bring along their own living environment. 
There must be the obvious food 
plants and animals. Since conditions can’t be predicted precisely, 
there will have to be sufficiently 
wide a variety to be sure of enough 
surviving. And behind these must 
be a large "backup” life-support 
of living things. 
The soil must be maintained. 
That requires living forms that can 
fix nitrogen from the air, plus a 
host of other creatures to maintain 
a porous, viable soil. A typical 
specimen of Earth soil may hold 
100,000,000 animals of more than 
one-celled complexity per acre of 
ground — insects, worms and other forms that exist within the first 
few inches of soil and keep it in 
growing condition. 
There must be plants that break 
up rocks into soil. Others must put 
down networks of roots that will 
prevent the erosion of soil that led 
to the dustbowls on our plains 
when we tried to grow only food 
plants. And to fertilize the plants, 
there must be insects. For almost 
every plant and animal, there must 
also be forms of life that prey on 
them in balance. And above all, 
there must be scavengers that break 
down the dead life forms and turn 
the elements back into usable soil, 
or we’ll soon be crowded out by 
the stalks and corpses of previous 
life. 
Balmer and Wylie tried to cover 
this in When Worlds Collide , 
though the word "ecology” wasn’t 
mentioned. But they made a big 
point of the fact that there would 
be no more lions or other predators. Any modern ecologist would 
know that doesn’t work. The predators are as necessary to control 
the herds of herbivores that will result from the inevitable escaped anmals as are the scavengers that 
control the dead forms. We’ve seen 
that, when the deer get out of 
control, lacking normal enemies. 
It would be nice to take everything from Earth, perhaps — but 
no interstellar ship could carry 
even the seeds and eggs for that. 
So it has to be a limited ecological 
balance for our colonists. And the 
problem of guessing what can safely be omitted is one nobody can 
yet answer. 
TT7e don’t know enough about 
* * the "balance of nature” on 
Earth itself yet. We’ve made gross 
mistakes in the past and have been 
paying for them heavily. Many of 
these mistakes have been in introducing .something like mustard or 
the boll weevel outside the normal 
range of environment. 
But in setting up a new world, 
everything will be outside its natural environment. 
We’ve also exterminated wantonly many of the forms of life 
that once existed, and we are cur
rently risking the extermination of 
many more. The dodo and passenger pigeon probably were indispensible, though their loss is a 
sorry one. But large numbers of 
African life forms are nearing extinction. Every leopard coat worn 
by some woman for her vanity 
brings the great cat closer to that 
extinction. Yet quite possibly, the 
cat is more necessary to a healthy 
African ecology than are the herds 
of Masai cattle that drive out the 
gorilla and other wild creatures. 
We’ve done little better in America. Many of our creatures are becoming scarce. Even our forests, 
which serve to control the runoff of rainfall and keep the plains 
from becoming deserts, are under 
attack. And the Sierra Club, which 
is trying to save the redwoods, has 
been denied the tax-exempt status 
granted to the National Rifle Association — the voice of those who 
regard killing other creatures without risk as a sport. 
The yard back of my house 
should now be filled with Monarch 
butterflies; when I was a boy, there 
were hundreds everywhere. Today 
I couldn’t find one. 
The unfortunate part is that we 
really have no clear idea of what 
price we will pay for our many 
extinctions. Ecology hasn’t had the 
time or the means to study the incredibly complex relations that exist between one form of life and 
another. All we can say for sure is 
that the loss of almost any farm 
of life may represent a very grave 
danger to man’s survival here en 
earth. (Nobody knows yet why the 
dinosaurs became extinct. Man’s 
one extinction could be the reenlt 
of a chain of events that begins 
with something we think unimportant.) 
Mack Reynolds, in the current 
story in this issue, mentions that 
there were enough trees to be worth 
visiting in one area only. It isn’t 
necessary to his story to wonder 
what changes that might make. But 
with the end of trees, what happens to birds and animals? What 
happens to the creatures and smaller plants that can only exist in forested areas? And what happens to 
life related to them in some long 
ecological chain? Oh what happens 
to the rain that falls and the carbon-dioxide that the trees don’t remove from the air? 
A 11 of this concerns what happens 
^ in a complex of different life 
forms of community ecology. Population ecology studies another 
problem — what happens to a singleform of life. And it is here that 
some studies indicate a threat to 
our civilized existence that has 
received little attention — and no 
action. 
Most studies of overpopulation 
go back to the classic work of Malthus, which covers only the economic aspects of the problem. But 
IF — AND WHEN 
there axe more factors than the 
feeding and housing of billions of 
people to worry us. There may be 
a grave psychological factor that 
is more dangerous than any risk 
of running out of food in the near 
future. 
Studies made with laboratory animals indicate that a certain type 
of psychotic, anti-social behavior 
is the direct result of too great a 
population density. When mice were 
provided with everything that any 
mouse could desire — food, water, 
shelter, material to build nests — 
they proceeded happily to multiply 
and grow fat. For a time, all was 
well. 
Then something strange occurred. They still had all their needs 
supplied, but as they passed a critical level of mice per square feet; 
they turned almost insane. They began to become frantic, worried, and 
pointlessly aggressive. They developed homosexual tendencies and 
a withdrawal from the normal social ways. In fact, they showed almost every sign of the type of rising crime and anti-social trend that 
is worrying the sociologists about 
behavior in our larger cities. 
Maybe the lack of adequate 
space per person is just as dangerous psychologically to me as to 
mice. Apparently, however, this does 
not work as directly. A man can 
accept a cramped immediate environment when he is aware of a free 
area still within his reach. Thus, 
so long as woods and fields lay 
near the cities, men could stand 
the crowding of those cities. Now, 
with the suburbs sprawled out for 
incredible distances, the free horizon is too far to help. 
Certainly the same anti-social 
pattern that existed in the middle 
of the last century in New York 
City applied only to those who 
were both too crowded and unable 
to escape the immediate environment, as covered by Herbert Asbury, in Gangs of New York . 
In any event, it flight be well 
for the FBI that reports the current rise in anti-social behavior 
to add a few ecologists to its staff. 
And every government that cannot accept population control 
should at least start a crash program to further ecology in all its 
branches. 
Science-fiction writers also have 
a rich field to explore here. I remember stories that tried to prove 
the existence of Atlantis by telling 
of the lemmings who periodically 
rush madly into the sea and swim 
to their destruction — not really 
very likely? There’s some indication 
that changes in food account for 
this behavior better. But there’s also a good explanation in population 
ecology. The lemmings may simply 
be driven into acts of racial insanity 
by the pressures of overpopulation. 
For lemmings, such an act relieves the problem. But men surely 
need a better answer. END 
Creatures 
by ROGER ZELAZNY 
IF • Short Novel 
The worlds of men hong between the 
two Houses , and oil the constellations S 
pay tribute to the Creatures of Light ! 
/ T'he man walks through his 
Thousandyear Eve in the 
House of the Dead. If you could 
look about the enormous room 
through which he walks, you 
couldn’t see a thing. It is far too 
dark for eyes to be of value. 
For this dark time, we’ll simply 
refer to him as "the man.” Why? 
First, he fits the general and generally accepted description of an unmodified, male, human-model being 
— walking upright, having opposing 
thumbs and possessing the other 
typical characteristics of the profession — and, second, because his 
name has been taken from him. 
In his right hand, the man bears 
the staff of his Master, and it 
guides him through the dark. It 
tugs him this way, that way. It 
burns his hand, his fingers, his opposing thumb if his foot strays a 
step from its ordained path. 
When the man reaches a certain 
place within the darkness, he 
mounts seven steps to a stone dais 
and raps three times upon it with 
the staff. 
Then there is light, dim and 
orange and crowded into corners. It 
shows the edges of the enormous, 
unfilled room. 
He reverses the staff and screws 
it into a socket in the stone. 
Had you ears in that room, you 
would hear a sound as of winged 
insects circling near you, withdrawing, returning. 
Only the man hears it, though. 
6S 
There are over two thousand other 
people present, but they are all of 
them dead. 
They come up out of the transparent rectangles which now appear 
in the floor, come up unbreathing, 
unblinking and horizontal, and they 
rest upon invisible catafalques at a 
height of two feet, and' their garments and their skins are of all 
colors and their bodies of all ages. 
Now some have wings and some 
have tails, and some have horns 
and some long talons. Some have all 
of these things, and some have 
pieces of machinery built into them 
and some do not. Many others leek 
like the man, unmodified. 
"Get up!” he calls out. "AM of 
you!” 
And his words mix with the humming that is in the air and are repeated over and over and again, net 
like an echo, fading, but persistent 
and recurring. 
The air is filled and stirred. 
There comes a moaning and a 
creaking of brittle joints. 
Rustling, clicking, chafing, they 
sit up, they stand up. 
Then sound and movement cease, 
and the dead stand like unlit candles 
beside their opened graves. 
The man climbs down from the 
dais, stands a moment before it, 
then says, "Follow me!” and he 
walks back the way he came, leaving his Master’s staff vibrating in 
the gray air. 
As he walks, he comes to a 
woman who is tall and golden and 
a suicide. He stares into her unseeing eyes and says, “Do you know 
me?” and the orange lips, the dead 
lips, the dry lips move, and they 
whisper, “No,” but he stares longer 
and says, “ Did you know me?” 
and the air hums with his words, 
until she says, “No,” once again, 
and he passes her by. 
He questions two others: a man 
who had been ancient of days, with 
a clock built into his left wrist, and 
a black dwarf with horns and 
hooves and the tail of a goat. But 
both say, “No,” and they fall into 
step behind him, and they follow 
him out of that enormous room and 
into another, where more lay under 
stone, not really waiting, to be 
called forth for his Thousandyear 
Eve in the House of the Dead. 
Hphe man leads them. He leads 
the dead whom he has summoned back to movement, and they 
follow him. They follow him 
through corridors and galleries and 
halls, and up wide, straight stairways and down narrow, winding 
stairways, and they come at last 
into the great Hall of the House of 
the Dead, where his Master holds 
his court. 
He sits on a black throne of 
polished stone, and there are metal 
bowls of fire to his right and to his 
left. On each of the two hundred 
pillars that line his high Hall, a 
torch blazes and flickers and its 
CREATURES OF LIGHT 
spark-shot smoke coils and puffs 
upward, becoming at last a gray 
part of the flowing cloud that covers the ceiling completely. 
The Master does not move, but 
he regards the man as he advances 
across the Hall, five thousand of 
the dead at his back, and his eyes 
lay red upon the man as he comes 
forward. 
The man prostrates himself at his 
feet, and he does not move until he 
is addressed: 
“You may greet me and rise,” 
come the words, each of them a 
sharp, throaty stab in the midst of 
an audible exhalation. 
“Hail, Anubis! Master of the 
House of the Deadl” says the 
man, and he stands. 
Anubis lowers his black muzzle 
slightly, and his fangs are white 
within it. Red lightning, his tongue, 
forks forward, re-enters his mouth. 
He stands then, and the shadows 
slide downward upon his bare and 
manformed body. 
He raises his left hand, and the 
humming sound comes into the Hall, 
and it carries his words through 
the flickering light and the smoke: 
“You who are dead,” he says, 
“tonight you will disport yourselves 
for my pleasure. Food and wine 
will pass between your dead lips, 
though you will not taste it. Your 
dead stomachs will hold it within 
you, while your dead feet take the 
measure of a dance. Your dead 
mouths will speak words that will 
have no meaning to you, and you 
will embrace one another without 
pleasure. You will sing for me if I 
wish it. You will lie down again 
when I will it.” 
He raises his right hand. 
“Let the revelry begin,” he says, 
and he claps his hands together. 
Then tables slide forward from 
between the pillars, laden with food 
and with drink, and there is music 
upon the air. 
The dead move to obey him. 
“You may join them,” Anubis 
says to the man, and he reseats 
himself upon his throne. 
The man crosses to the nearest 
table and eats lightly and drinks a 
glass of wine. The dead dance about 
him, but he does not dance with 
them. They make noises which are 
words without meaning, and he 
does not listen to them. He pours a 
second glass of wine, and the eyes of 
Anubis are upon him as he drinks 
it. He pours a third glass and he 
holds it in his hands and sips at it 
and stares into.it 
T Tow much time has passed he 
* cannot tell, when Anubis says, 
“Servant!” 
He stands, turns. 
“Approach!” says Anubis, and he 
does so. 
“You may rise. You know what 
night tonight is?” 
“Yes, Master. It is Thousandyear 
Eve.” 
“It is your Thousandyear Eve. 
This night we celebrate an anniversary. You have served me for a 
full thousand years in the House 
of the Dead. Are you glad?” 
“Yes, Master.” 
“You recall my promise?” 
“Yes. You told me that if I 
served you faithfully for a thousand 
years, then you would give me 
back my name. You would tell me 
who I had been in the Middle 
Worlds of Life.” 
“I beg your pardon, I did not.” 
“You . .?” 
“I told you that I would give 
you a name, which is a different 
thing altogether.” 
“But I thought . .” 
“I do not care what you thought. 
Do you want a name?” 
“Yes, Master.” 
“. But you would prefer your 
old one? Is that what you are trying 
to say?” 
“Yes.” 
“Do you really think that anyone would remember your name after ten centuries? Do you think 
that you were so important in the 
Middle Worlds that someone would 
have noted down your name, that 
it would have mattered to anyone?” 
“I do not know.” 
“But you want it back?” 
“If I may have it, Master.” 
“Why? Why do you want it?” 
“Because I remember nothing of 
the Worlds of Life. I would like to 
know who I was when I dwelled 
there.” 
“Why? And for what purpose?” 
“I cannot answer you because I 
do not know.” 
“Of all the dead,” says Anubis, 
“you know that I have brought 
only you back to full consciousness 
to serve me here. Do you feel this 
means that perhaps there is something special about you?” 
“I have often wondered why you 
did as you did.” 
“Then let me give you ease, 
man: You are nothing. You were 
nothing. You are not remembered. 
Your mortal name does not signify 
anything.” 
The man lowers his eyes. 
“Do you doubt me?” 
“No, Master.” 
“Why not?” 
“Because you do not lie.” 
“Then let me show it. I took 
away your memories of life only 
because they would give you pain 
among the dead. But now let me 
demonstrate your anonymity. There 
are over five thousand of the dead 
in this room from many ages.” 
Anubis stands, and his voice carries to every presence in the Hall: 
“Attend me, maggots! Turn your 
eyes toward this man who stands 
before my throne! Face them, 
man!” 
The man turns about. 
“Man, know that today you do 
not wear the body you slept in last 
night. You look now as you did a 
thousand years ago, when you came 
into the House of the Dead. 
CREATURES OF LIGHT 
“My dead ones, are there any 
of you here present who can look 
upon this man and say that you 
know him?” 
A golden girl steps forward. 
“I know this man,” she says, 
through orange lips, “because he 
spoke to me in the other halL” 
“That I know,” says Anubis, “but 
who is he?” 
“He is the one who spoke to me.” 
“That is no answer. Go and 
copulate with yon purple lizard. 
— And what of you, old man,” 
“He spoke to me also.” 
“That I know. Can yon name 
him?” 
“I cannot.” 
“Then go dance on yonder table 
and pour wine over your head. 
— What of you, black man?” 
‘“This man also spoke with me.” 
“Do you know his name?” 
“I did not know it when he asked 
me — ” 
“Then burnl” cries Anubis, and 
fires fall down from the ceiling and 
leap out from the walls and crisp 
the black man to ashes, which move 
then in slow eddies across the floor, 
passing among the ankles of the 
stopped dancers, falling finally into 
final dust. 
t*X7"ou see?” says Anubis. 
i * “There is none to name you 
as once you were known.” 
“I see,” says the man, “but the 
last might have had further 
words — ” 
“To waste! You are unknown and 
unwanted, save by me. This, because 
you are fairly adept at the various 
embalming arts and you occasionally compose a clever epitaph.” 
“Thank you, Master.” 
“What good would a name and 
memories do you here?” 
“None, I suppose.” 
“Yet you wish a name, so I shall 
give you one. Draw your dagger.” 
The man draws the blade which 
hangs at his left side. 
“Now cut off your thumb.” 
“Which thumb, Master?” 
“The left one will do.” 
The man bites his lower lip and 
tightens his eyes as he drags the 
blade against the joint of his thumb. 
His blood falls upon the floor. It 
runs along the blade of the knife 
and trickles from its point. He drops 
to his knees and continues to cut, 
tears streaming down his cheeks and 
falling to mingle with the blood. 
His breath comes in gasps and a 
single sob escapes him. 
Then, “It is done,” he says. 
“Here!” He drops the blade and offers Anubis his thumb. 
“I don’t want the thing! Throw 
it into the flames!” 
With his right hand, the man 
throws his thumb into the brazier. 
It sputters, sizzles, flares. 
“Now cup your left hand and 
collect the blood within it.” 
The man does this thing. 
“Now raise it above your head 
and let it drip down upon you.” 
Be raises Us band, and ffid blood 
falls onto his forehead. 
“Now repeat after me: ‘I baptize me . /” 
“ ‘I baptize me . / 99 
“‘Wakim, of the House of the 
Dead 
“ ‘Wakim, of the House of the 
Dead . / ” 
“ ‘In the name of Anubis . / ” 
“ ‘In the name of Anubis . / ” 
“ ‘Wakim . / ” 
“ ‘Wakim . / ” 
“ ‘Emissary of Anubis in the Middle Worlds . / ” 
“ ‘Emissary of Anubis in the Middle worlds . / ” 
“ ‘. and beyond/ ” 
“ . and beyond/ ” 
“Hear me now, oh you dead ones: 
I proclaim this man Wakim. Repeat his name!” 
“Wakim,” comes the word, 
through dead lips. 
“So be it! You are named now, 
Wakim,” he says. “It is fitting, 
therefore, that you feel your birth 
into namehood, that you come away 
changed by this thing, oh my named 
one!” 
Anubis raises both hands above 
his head and lowers them to his 
sides. 
“Resume dancing!” he commands 
the dead. 
They move to the music once 
more. 
^phe body-cutting machine rolls 
^ into the hall, and the prosthetic 
replacement machine follows If. 
Wakim looks away from them, 
but they draw up beside him and 
stop. 
The first machine extrudes restrainers and holds him. 
“Human arms are weak,” says 
Anubis. “Let these be removed.” 
The man screams as the sawblades hum. Then he passes out. 
The dead continue their dance. 
When Wakim awakens, two seamless, silver arms hang at his sides, 
cold and insensitive. He flexes the 
fingers. 
“And human legs be slow, and 
capable of fatigue. Let those he 
wears be exchanged for tireless 
metal.” 
When Wakim awakens the second 
time, he stands upon silver pillars. 
He wiggles his toes. Anubis’s tongue 
darts forth. 
Place your right hand into the 
flames,” he says, “and hold it there 
until it glows white.” 
The music falls around him, and 
the flames caress his hand until it 
matches their red. The dead talk 
their dead talk and drink the wine 
they do not taste. They embrace 
one another without pleasure. The 
hand glows white. 
“Now,” says Anubis, “seize your 
manhood in your right hand and 
burn it away.” 
Wakim licks his lips. 
“Master . .” he says. 
“Do it!” 
He does this thing, and he falls 
CREATURES OF LIGHT 
So unconsciousness before he has 
finished. 
When he awakens again and 
looks down upon himself, he is all 
of gleaming silver, sexless and 
strong. When he touches his forehead, there comes the sound of 
metal upon metal. 
“How do you feel, Wakim?” asked Anubis. 
“I do not know,” he answers, 
and his voice comes strange. 
Anubis gestures, and the nearest 
side of the cutting machine becomes a reflecting surface. 
“Regard yourself.” 
Wakim stares at the shining egg 
that is his head, at the yellow 
lenses, his eyes, the gleaming barrel, 
his chest. 
“Men may begin and end in 
many ways,” says Anubis. “Some 
may start as machines and gain 
their humanity slowly. Others may 
end as such, losing it by pieces as 
they live. That which is lost may 
always be regained. That which is 
gained may always be lost. What 
are you, Wakim, a man or a machine?” 
“I do not know.” 
“Then let me confuse you further.” 
Anubis gestures, and Wakim’s 
arms and legs come loose, fall 
away. His metal torso clangs against 
stone, rolls, then lies at the foot 
of the throne. 
“Now you lack mobility,” says 
Anubis. 
He reaches forward with his foot 
and touches a tiny switch at the 
back of Wakim’s head. 
“Now you lack all senses but 
hearing.” 
“Yes,” answers Wakim. 
“Now a connection is being attached to you. You feel nothing, 
but your head is opened and you 
are about to become a part of the 
machine which monitors and maintains this entire world. See it all 
now I” 
“I do,” Wakim replies, as he 
becomes conscious of every room, 
corridor, hall and chamber in the 
always dead never alive world that 
had never been a world, a world 
made, not begotten of coalesced 
starstuff and the fires of creation, 
but hammered and jointed, riveted 
and fused, insulated and decorated, 
not into seas and land and air and 
life, but oils and metals and stone 
and walls of energy, all hung together within the icy void where no 
sun shines; and he is aware of distances, stresses, weights, materials, 
pressures and the secret numbers of 
the dead. He is not aware of his 
body, mechanical and disconnected. 
He knows only the waves of maintenance movement that flow 
with them and he knows the colorless colors of quantity perception. 
Then Anubis speaks again: 
“You know every shadow in the 
House of the Dead. You have looked through all the hidden eyes.” 
“Yes.” 
"Now see what lies beyond.” 
'T'here are stars, stars, scattered 
** stars, blackness all between. 
They ripple and fold and bend, and 
they rush toward him, rush by him. 
Their colors are blazing and pure 
as angels’ eyes, and they pass near, 
pass far, in the eternity through 
which he seems to move. There is 
no sense of real time or real movement, only a changing of the field. 
A great blue Tophet Box of a sun 
seems to soar beside him for a 
moment, and then again comes 
black, all about him. 
And he comes at last to a world 
that is not a world, citrine and 
azure and green, green, green. A 
green corona hangs about it, at 
thrice its own diameter, and it seems 
to pulsate with a pleasant rhythm. 
“Behold the House of Life,” says 
Anubis, from somewhere. 
And he does. It is warm and 
glowing and alive. He has a feeling 
of aliveness. 
“‘Osiris rules the House of Life,” 
says Anubis. 
And he beholds a great birdhead atop human shoulders, bright 
yellow eyes within it, alive, aliveoh; and the creature stands before 
him on an endless plain of living 
green which is superimposed upon 
his view of the world, and he holds 
the Staff of Life in his one hand 
and the Book of Life in his other. 
He seems to be the source of the 
radiant warmth. 
Wakim then hears the voice of 
Anubis once again: 
“The House of Life and the 
House of the Dead contain the Middle Worlds.” 
And there is a falling, swirling 
sensation, and Wakim looks upon 
stars once more, but stars separated 
and held from other stars by bonds 
of force that are visible then invisible, then visible again, fading, coming, going, white, glowing lines, 
fluctuating. 
“You now perceive the Middle 
Worlds of Life,” says Anubis. 
And dozens of worlds roll before 
him like balls of exotic marble, 
stippled, gauged, polished, incandescent. 
“Contained,” says Anubis. “They 
are contained within the field which 
arcs between the only two poles that 
matter.” 
“Poles?” says the metal head 
that is Wakim. 
“The House of Life and the 
House of the Dead. The Middle 
Worlds about their suns do move, 
and all together go on the paths 
of Life and Death.” 
“I do not understand,” says 
Wakim. 
“Of course you do not understand. What is at the same time the 
greatest blessing and the greatest 
curse in the universe?” 
“I do not know.” 
“Life,” says Anubis, “or death.” 
“I do not understand,” ssfys 
Wakim. “You used the superlative. 
CREATURES OF LIGHT 
You called for one answer. You 
named two things, however.” 
“Did I?” asks Anubis. “Really? 
Just because I used two words, does 
it mean that I have named two separate and distinct things. May a 
thing not have more than one name? 
Take yourself for an example. What 
are you?” 
“I do not know.” 
“That may be the beginning of 
wisdom, then. You could as easily 
be a machine which I chose to incarnate as a man for a time and 
have now returned to a metal casing, as you could be a man whom 
I have chosen to incarnate as a 
machine.” 
“Then what difference does it 
make?” 
“None. None whatsoever. But 
you cannot make the distinction. 
You cannot remember. Tell me, are 
you alive?” 
“Yes.” 
“Why?” 
“I think. I hear your voice. I 
have memories. I can speak.” 
“Which of these qualities is life? 
Remember that you do not breathe, 
your nervous system is a mass of 
metallic strands and I have burnt 
your heart. Remember, too, that I 
have machines that can outreason 
you, outremember you, outtalk you. 
What does that leave you with as 
an excuse for being alive? You say 
that you hear my voice, and hearing’ is a subjective phenomenon? 
Very well. I shall disconnect your 
hearing also. Watch closely to see 
whether you cease to exist.” 
. One snowflake drifting down 
a well, a well without waters, without walls, without bottom, without 
top. Now take away the snowflake and consider the drifting . 
After a timeless time, Anubis’s 
voice comes once again: 
“Do you know the difference between life and death?” 
“ T am life,” says Wakim. 
“Whatever you give or take away, 
if ‘F remain it is life.” 
“Sleep,” says Anubis, and there 
is nothing to hear him, there in 
the House of the Dead. 
II 
W hen Wakim awakens, he finds 
that he has been set upon a 
table near to the throne, and he 
can see once more, and he regards 
the dance of the dead and he hears 
the music to which they move. 
“Were you dead?” asks Anubis. 
“No,” says Wakim. “I was sleeping ” 
“What is the difference?” 
“ ‘F was still there, although I 
did not know it.” 
Anubis laughs. 
“Supposing I had never awakened you?” 
“That, I suppose, would be 
death.” 
“Death? If I did not choose to 
exercise my power to awaken you? 
Even though the power was ever 
present, and ‘y 011 ’ potential and 
available for that same ever?” 
“If this thing were not done, if I 
remained forever only potential, 
then this would be death.” 
“A moment ago you said that 
sleep and death were two different 
things. Is it that the period of time 
involved makes a difference?” 
“No,” says Wakim, “it is a matter of existence. After sleep there 
comes wakefulness, and the life is 
still present. When I exist, I know 
it. When I do not, then I know 
nothing.” 
“Life then, is nothing?” 
“No.” 
“Life then, is existing? Like these 
dead?” 
“No,” says Wakim. “It is knowing you exist, at least some of the 
time.” 
“Of what is this a process?” 
1 T,” says Wakim. 
“And what is T? Who are you?” 
“I am Wakim.” 
“I only named you a short while 
'ago! What were you before that?” 
“Not Wakim.” 
“Dead?” 
“No! Alive!” cries Wakim. 
“Do not raise your voice within 
my halls,” says Anubis. “You do 
not know what you are or who you 
are; you do not know the difference 
between existing and not existing, 
yet you presume to argue with me 
concerning life and death! Now I 
shall not ask you, I shall tell you. 
I shall tell you of life and of death. 
ttnphere is too much Kfe and 
there is not enough life” 
he begins, “and the same goes for 
death. Now I shall throw away 
paradoxes. 
“The House of Life lies so far 
from here that a ray of light which 
left it on the day you entered this 
domain would not yet have traveled 
a significant fraction of the distance 
which separates us. Between us lie 
the Middle Worlds. They move 
within the Life-Death tides that 
flow between my House and the 
House of Osiris. When I say ‘flow’ 
I do not mean that they move like 
that pitiful ray of light, crawling. 
Rather, they move like waves on 
the ocean which has but two 
shores. We may raise waves anywhere we wish without disrupting 
the entire sea. What are these 
waves, and what do they do? 
“Some worlds have too much 
life,” he says. “Life — crawling, 
pululating, fecundating, smothering 
itself — worlds too clement, too 
full of the sciences which keep men 
alive — worlds which would drown 
themselves in their own semen, 
worlds which would pack all of 
their lands with crowds of bigbellied women — and so go down 
to death beneath the weight of their 
own fruitfulness. Then there are 
worlds which are bleak and barren 
and bitter, worlds which grind life 
like grain. Even with body modifications and with worldchange machines, there are only a few hun
CREATURES OF LIGHT 
dred worlds which may be inhabited 
by the six intelligent races. Life is 
needed badly on the worst of them. 
It can be a deadly blessing on the 
best. When I say that life is needed or not needed in certain places, 
I am of course also saying that 
death is needed or not needed. I 
am not speaking of two different 
things, but of the same thing. 
Osiris and I are bookkeepers. We 
credit and we debit. We raise waves, 
or we cause waves to sink back 
again into the ocean. Can life be 
counted upon to limit itself? No. 
It is the mindless striving of two 
to become infinity. Can death be 
counted upon to limit itself? Never. 
It is the equally mindless effort of 
zero to encompass infinity. 
“But there must be life control 
and death control,” he says, “else 
the fruitful worlds would rise and 
fall, rise and fall, cycling between 
empire and anarchy, then down to 
final disruption. The bleak worlds 
would be encompassed by zero. Life 
cannot contain itself within the 
bounds statistics have laid down 
for its guidance. Therefore, it must 
be contained, and it is. Osiris and 
I hold the Middle Worlds. They 
lie within our field of control, and 
we turn them on and we turn them 
off as we would. Do you see now, 
Wakim? Do you begin to understand?” 
“You limit life? You cause 
death?” 
“We can lay sterility on any or 
all of the six races on any world we 
choose, for as long a period of time 
as is necessary. This can be done on 
an absolute or a fractional basis. 
We may also manipulate lifespans, 
decimate populations.” 
“How?” 
“Fire. Famine. Plague. War.” 
“What of the sterile worlds, the 
dry worlds? What of those?” 
“Multiple births can be insured, 
and we do not tamper with lifespans. The newly dead are sent to 
the House of Life, not here. There 
they are repaired, or their parts 
used in the construction of new individuals, who may or may not host 
a human mentality.” 
“And of the other dead?” 
“The House of the Dead is the 
graveyard of the six races. There 
are no lawful cemeteries in the 
Middle Worlds. There have been 
times when the House of Life has 
called upon us for hosts and for 
parts. There have been other occasions when they have shipped us 
their excess.” 
C4Tt is difficult to understand. It 
A seems brutal, it seems 
harsh . .” 
“It is life and it is death. It is 
the greatest blessing and the greatest curse in the universe. You do 
not have to understand it. Wakim. 
Your comprehension or your lack 
of it, your approval or your disapproval, will in no way alter its 
operation.” 
“And whence come you, Anubis 
— and Osiris — that you control 
it?” 
“There are some things that are 
not for you to know.” 
“And how do the Middle Worlds 
accept your control?” 
“They live with it, and they die 
with it. It is above their objections, 
for it is necessary for their continued existence. It has become a 
natural law, and it is utterly impartial, applying with equal force to 
all who come beneath it.” 
“There are some who do not?” 
“You shall learn more of this 
when I am ready to tell you, which 
is not now. I have made you a machine, Wakim. Now I shall make 
you a man. Who is to say how you 
started, where you started? Were I 
to wipe out your memories up to 
this moment and then re-embody 
you, you would recollect that you 
had begun as metal.” 
“Will you do this thing?” 
“ No. I want you equipped with 
the memories which you now possess, when and if I assign you to 
your new duties.” 
Then Anubis raises his hands and 
strikes them together. 
A machine removes Wakim from 
the shelf and switches off his senses 
as it lowers him. The music pulses 
and falls about the dancers, the two 
hundred torches blaze upon the pillars like immortal thoughts, Anubis stares at a blackened place upon 
the floor of the great Hall, and 
overhead the canopy of smokes 
moves to its own rhythms. 
IH 
X T7akim opens his eyes and looks 
* * upon grayness. He lies on his 
back, staring upward. The tiles are 
cold beneath him, and there is a 
flickering of light off to his right. 
Suddenly, he clenches his left hand, 
feels for his thumb, finds it, sighs. 
“Yes,” says Anubis. 
He sits up before the throne, 
looks down upon himself, looks up 
at Anubis. 
“You have been baptized, you 
have been born again into the 
flesh.” 
“Thank you.” 
“No trouble. Plenty of raw materials around here. Stand up! Do 
you remember your lessons?” 
Wakim stands. 
“Which ones?” 
“Temporal fugue. To make time 
follow the mind, not the body.” 
“Yes.” 
“And killing?” 
“Yes.” 
“And combining the two?” 
“Yes.” 
Anubis stands, a full head taller 
than Wakim, whose new body is 
well over two yards in length. 
“Then show me! 
“Let the music cease!” he cries. 
“Let the one who in life was called 
Dargoth come before me!” 
The dead stop dancing. They 
CREATURES OF LIGHT 
stand without moving, and their 
eyes never blink. There is silence 
for several seconds, unbroken by 
word, footfall, breathing. 
Then Dargoth moves among the 
standing dead, advancing through 
shadow, through torchlight. Wakim 
stands straighter when he sees him, 
for the muscles of his back, his 
shoulders, his storpach tighten. 
A metal band the color of copper 
crosses Dargoth’s head, covers his 
cheekbones, vanishes beneath his 
graygrizzled chin. A latitudinal 
band passes above his brows, over 
his temples, meets at the back of 
his skull. His eyes are wide, the 
sclera yellow and the iris red. His 
lower jaw makes a constant chewing motion as he rolls forward, and 
his teeth are long shadows. His 
head sways from side to side upon 
its twenty inches of neck. His shoulders are three feet in width, giving 
him the appearance of an inverted 
triangle, for his sides taper sharply 
to meet with his segmented chassis, 
which begins where the flesh stops. 
His wheels turn slowly, the left rear 
one squeaking with each revolution. 
His arms hang a full four and a 
half feet, so that his fingertips 
barely brush the floor. Four short, 
sharp metal legs are folded upward 
along his flat sides. The razors come 
erect on his back, fall again, as he 
moves The eight-foot whip that is 
his tail uncoils behind him as he 
comes to a halt before the throne. 
“For this night, this Thousand
year Night, 1 ” says Anubis, “I give 
you back your name — Dargoth. 
Once were you numbered among 
the mightiest warriors in the Middle Worlds, Dargoth, until you pitted your strength against that of 
an immortal and went down to 
your death before him. Your broken 
body has been repaired, and this 
night you must use it to do battle 
once more. Destroy this man Wakim in single combat and you take 
his place as my first servant here 
in the House of the Dead.” 
Dargoth crosses his great hands 
upon his brow and bows until they 
touch the floor. 
“You may have ten seconds,” 
says Anubis to Wakim, “to prepare your mind for battle. Stand 
ready, Dargoth!” 
“Lord,” says Wakim, “how may 
I kill one who is already dead?” 
“That is your problem,” says 
Anubis. “You have now wasted 
all ten of your seconds with foolish questions. Begin!” 
nphere comes a snapping sound 
and a series of metallic clicks. 
Dargoth’s metal legs snap downward, straighten, raise him three 
feet higher above the floor. He 
prances. He raises his arms and 
flexes them. 
Wakim watches, waiting. 
Dargoth rises unto his hind legs, 
so that now his head is ten feet 
above the floor. 
Then he leaps forward, his arms 
ti 
outstretched, his tail curled, his 
head extended, fangs bared. The 
blades rise upon his back like gleaming fins, his hooves fall like hammers. 
At the last possible moment, 
Wakim sidesteps and throws a 
punch which is blocked by the other’s forearm. He leaps high into 
the air then, and the whip cracks 
harmlessly beneath him. 
For all his bulk, Dargoth halts 
and turns rapidly. He rears once 
more and strikes forward with his 
front hooves. Wakim avoids them, 
but Dargoth’s hands fall upon his 
shoulders as he descends. 
Wakim seizes both wrists and 
kicks Dargoth in the chest. The 
tail-lash falls across his right cheek 
as he does so. Then he breaks the 
grip of those massive hands upon 
his shoulders, ducks his head and 
lays the edge of his left hand hard 
upon the other’s side. The whip 
falls again, this time across his 
back. He aims a blow at the other’s head, but the long neck twists 
it out of the way, and he hears 
the whip crack once more, missing 
him by inches. 
Dargoth’s fist lands upon his 
cheekbone, and he stumbles, offbalance, sliding upon the floor. He 
rolls out of the path of the hooves, 
but a fist knocks him sprawling 
as he attempts to rise again. 
As the next blow descends, however, he catches the wrist with both 
hands and throws his full weight 
CREATURES OF LIGHT 
upon the arm, twisting his head to 
the side. Dargoth’s fist strikes the 
floor, and Wakim regains his feet, 
landing a left cross as he does so. 
Dargoth’s head rolls with the 
punch, and the lash cracks beside 
Wakim’s ear. He lays another blow 
upon the twisting head, and then 
he is borne over backwards as Dargoth’s rear legs straighten like 
springs and his shoulder strikes him 
in the chest. 
He rears, once more. 
Then, for the first time, Dargoth speaks: 
"Now, Wakim, now!” he says. 
Dargoth becames first servant of 
Anubis!” 
As the hooves flash downward, 
Wakim catches those metal legs, one 
in each hand, halfway up their 
length. He had braced himself in 
a crouched position, and now his 
lips curl back, showing his clenched 
teeth, as Dargoth is frozen in midstrike above him. 
He laughs as he springs back into a standing position and heaves 
with both arms, casting his opponent high up upon his hind legs, 
struggling to keep from falling over. 
"Fool!” he says, and his voice 
is strangely altered. His word, like 
the stroke of a great iron bell, rings 
through the Hall. There comes up 
a soft moaning from among the 
dead, as when they had been routed 
from out their graves. 
" ‘Now’? you say? ‘Wakim’? you 
say?” and he laughs as he steps 
forward beneath the felling hooves. 
"You know not what you say!” 
and he locks his arms about the 
great metal torso and the hooves 
flail helplessly above his back and 
the tail-whip swishes and cracks 
and lays stripes upon his shoulders. 
His hands rest between the sharpened spines, and he crushes the unyielding segmented body of metal 
close up against his own. 
Dargoth’s great hands find his 
neck, but the thumbs cannot reach 
the throat, and the muscles of 
Wakim’s neck tighten and cord as 
he bends his knees and strains. 
They stand so, frozen for a timeless instant, and the firelight wrestles with shadows upon their bodies. 
Then with a gigantic, heaving 
motion, Wakim raises Dargoth 
above the ground, turns, and hurls 
him from him. 
Dargoth’s legs kick wildly as he 
turns over in the air. His spines rise 
and fall, and his tail reaches out 
and cracks. He raises his arms up 
before his face, but he lands with 
a shattering crash at the foot of the 
throne of Anubis, and there he lies 
still, his metal body broken in four 
places and his head split open upon the first step to the throne. 
TTTakim turns toward Anubis. 
* * "Sufficient?” he inquires. 
"You did not employ temporal 
fugue,” says Anubis, not even looking downward at the wreck that had 
been Dargoth. 
"It was unnecessary. He was not 
that mighty an opponent.” 
"He was mighty,” says Anubis. 
"Why did you laugh and make as 
if you questioned your name when 
you fought with him?” 
"I do not know. For a moment, 
when I realized that I could not 
be beaten, I felt as though I were 
someone else.” 
"Someone without fear, pity, or 
remorse?” 
"Yes.” 
"Do you still feel thus?” 
"No.” 
"Then why have you stopped 
calling me ‘Master’?” 
"The heat of battle raised emotions which overrode my sense of 
protocol.” 
"Then correct the oversight immediately.” 
"Very well, Master.” 
"Apologize. Beg my pardon, most 
humbly.” 
Wakim prostrates himself on the 
floor. 
"I beg your pardon, Master. 
Most humbly.” 
"Rise again, and consider yourself pardoned. The contents of your 
previous stomach have gone the 
way of all such things. You may 
go re-fresh yourself now. Let there 
be singing and dancing once more! 
Let there be drinking and laughter in celebration of the name-giving 
on this, Wakim’s Thousandyear 
Eve! Let the carcass of Dargoth 
be gone from my sight!” 
And these things are done. 
When Wakim had finished his 
meal, and it seems as if the dancing and the singing of the dead will 
continue until Time’s well deserved 
end, Anubis gestures, first to his 
left, then to his right, and every other flame folds upon every other pillar, dives within itself, is gone. His 
mouth opens, and the words come 
down upon Wakim, "Take them 
back. Fetch me my staff.” 
Wakim stands and gives the necessary orders. Then he leads the 
dead out from the Great Hall. As 
they depart, the tables vanish between the pillars. An impossible 
breeze tears at the ceiling of smoke. 
Before that great, gray mat is 
shredded, however, the other torches 
have died, and the only illumination 
within the Hall comes from the two 
blazing bowls on either side of the 
throne. 
Anubis stares into the darkness, 
and the captured light rays reform themselves at his bidding, and 
he sees Dargoth fall once more at 
the foot of his throne and lie still, 
and he sees the one he has named 
Wakim standing with a skull’s grin 
upon his lips, and for an instant — 
had it been a trick of the flamelight? — a mark upon his brow. 
Far, in an enormous room where 
the light is dim and orange and 
crowded into corners and the dead 
lay them down once more upon invisible catafalques above their opened graves, faint, rising, then fall
CREATURES OF LIGHT 
ing, Wakim hears a sound that is 
not like any sound he has ever 
heard before. He stays his hand upon the staff and descends the dais. 
"Old man,” he says, to one with 
whom he had spoken earlier, one 
whose hair and whose beard are 
stained with wine and in whose left 
wrist a clock has stopped, "Old 
man, hear my words and tell me if 
you know. What is that sound?” 
The unblinking eyes stare upward, past his own, and the lips 
move. 
"Master ...” 
"I am not Master here.” 
"... Master, it is but the howling of a dog.” 
Wakim returns then to the dais 
and gives them all back to their 
graves. 
Then the light departs, and the 
staff guides him through the dark, 
along the path that has been ordained. 
IV 
CCT have brought your staff, MasA ter.” 
"Arise, and approach.” 
"The dead are all returned to 
their proper places.” 
"Very good. Wakim, you are my 
man?” 
Yes, Master.” 
"To do my bidding, and to serve 
me in all things?” 
"Yes, Master.” 
"This is why you are my emis
sary to the Middle Worlds, and beyond.” 
"I am to depart the House of 
the Dead?” 
"Yes, I am sending you forth 
from here on a mission.” 
"What sort of mission?” 
"The story is long, involved. 
There are many persons in the 
Middle Worlds who are very eld. 
You know this?” 
“Yes.” 
"And there art some who are 
timeless and deathless.” 
"Deathless, Lord?” 
"By one means or another, certain individuals have achieved a 
kind of immortality. Perhaps they 
follow the currents of life and draw 
upon their force, and they flee from 
the waves of death. Perhaps they 
have adjusted their biochemistry, or 
they keep their bodies in constant 
repair, or they have many bodies 
and exchange them, or steal new 
ones. Perhaps they wear metal 
bodies, or no bodies at all. Whatever the means involved, you will 
hear talk of the Three Hundred Immortals when you enter the Middle 
Worlds. This is only an approximate figure, for few truly know 
ftnich about them. There are two 
hundred eighty-three immortals, to 
be exact. They cheat on life, on 
death, as you can see, and their 
very existence upsets the balance, 
inspires others to strive to emulate 
their legends, causes others to think 
them gods. Some are harmless wan
derers, others are not. All are powerful and subtle, all adept at continuing their existence. One is especially noxious, and I am sending 
you to destroy him.” 
"Who may he be, Master?” 
"He is called the Prince Who 
Was A Thousand, and he dwells 
beyond the Middle Worlds. His 
kingdom lies beyond the realm of 
life and death, in a place where 
it is always twilight. He is difficult to locate, however, for he 
often departs his own region and 
trespasses into the Middle Worlds 
and elsewhere. I desire that he 
come to an end, as he has opposed 
both the House of the Dead and 
the House of Life for many days.” 
"What does he look like, the 
Prince Who Was A Thousand?” 
"Anything he wishes.” 
"Where shall I find him?” 
"I do not know. You must seek 
him.” 
"How shall I know him?” 
By his deeds, by his words. He 
opposes us in all ways.” 
"Surely others must oppose you 
also ... ” 
"Destroy all you come upon who 
do so. You shall know the Prince 
Who Was A Thousand, however, because he shall be the most difficult of all to destroy. He will come 
closest to destroying you.” 
"Supposing he succeeds?” 
"Then I shall take me a thousand 
years more to train another emissary to set upon his task. I do 
not desire his downfall today or 
tomorrow. It will doubtless take you 
centuries even to locate him. Time 
matters little. An age will pass before he becomes a threat, to Osiris 
or myself. You will learn of him as 
you travel, seeking after him. When 
you find him you will know him.” 
"Am I mighty enough to work 
his undoing?” 
"I think you are.” 
"I am ready.” 
Then I shall set your feet upon 
the track. I give you the power to 
invoke me, in my name, and in 
times of need to draw force from 
the field of Life and of Death while 
you are among the Middle Worlds. 
This will make you invincible. You 
will report back to me when you 
feel you need to. If I feel this need, 
I will reach out after you.” 
"Thank you, Master.” 
"You will obey all my sendings, 
instantly.” 
"Yes.” 
" Go now and rest. After you have 
slept and eaten again, you will depart and begin your mission.” 
"Thank you.” 
"This will be your second last 
sleep within this House, Wakim. 
Meditate upon the mysteries it contains.” 
"I do so constantly.” 
"I am one of them.” 
"Master. ...” 
"That is part of my name. Never forget it.” 
"Master — how could I?” 
CREATURES OF LIGHT 
V 
T isten to the world. It is called 
^ Blis, and it is not hard to 
hear at all: The sounds may be 
laughter, sighs, contented belches. 
They may be the clog-clog of machinery or beating hearts. They may 
be the breathing of multitudes or 
their words. They may be footsteps, 
the sound of a kiss, a slap, the cry 
of a baby. Music. Music, perhaps. 
The sound of typewriter keys 
through the Black Daddy Night, 
consciousness kissing paper only? 
Perhaps. Then forget the sounds 
and the words and look at the world. 
First, colors. Name one. Red? 
There’s a riverbank that color, 
green stream hauled between, snagged on purple rocks. Yellow and 
gray and black is the city in the 
distance. Here in the open field, 
both sides of the river, are pavilions. Pick any color, they’re all 
about. Over a thousand pavilions, 
like balloons and teepees and stemless mushrooms, blazing in the midst 
of a blue field, strung with pennons, 
full of moving colors that are people. Three lime-bright bridges span 
the river. The river leads to a 
creamy sea which swells but seldom 
breaks. From it, up the river, come 
barges and boats and vessels which 
moor along the banks. More come 
out of the sky, settling anywhere 
upon the blue fabric of the field. 
Their passengers move among the 
pavilions. They are of all races and 
sorts. They eat and they talk. They 
play. They are making sounds and 
wearing the colors. Okay? 
The odors are of sweet and 
growing things and kissful come the 
breezes. When these breezes and 
these odors reach the fairground, 
they are altered subtly. There 
comes up the odor of sawdust, 
which is hardly unpleasant; and 
that of perspiration, which cannot 
be too unpleasant if some of it 
is your own. Then there are smells 
of woodsmoke, smells of food, and 
the clean aroma of alcohol. Smell 
the world. Taste it, swallow it and 
hold it in your belly. Burst with it. 
— Like the man with the eyepatch and the alpenstock. 
T Je walks among the husksters 
* and the fillies, fat as an eunuch, but not. His flesh is strangely flesh-colored, and his right eye 
is a gray wheel, rolling. A week’s 
growth of beard frames his face, 
and all colors are missing from the 
blot of the garments. His gait is 
steady. His hands are hard. 
He stops to buy a mug of beer, 
moves to watch a cockfight. 
He wagers a coin on the smaller 
bird, which tears the larger apart 
and so pays for his beers. 
He watches the deflowering show, 
samples the narcotics exhibit, foils 
a brown man in a white shirt who 
attempts to guess his weight. A 
short man with close-set dark eyes 
then emerges from a nearby tent, 
moves to his side, tugs upon his 
sleeve. 
"Yes?” His voice seems centrally 
located, that deep and potent does 
it stir. 
"I see by your outfit you may be 
a preacher.” 
"Yes, I am — of the non-theistic, non-sectarian sort.” 
"Very good. Would you care to 
earn some money? It will only take 
a few moments.” 
"What would you have me do?” 
"A man is going to commit suicide and be buried in that tent. 
The grave is already dug and all 
the tickets have been sold. The audience is growing restless, now 
though. The performer won’t do it 
without proper religious accompaniment, and we can’t sober up the 
preacher.” 
"I see. It will cost you ten.” 
"Make it five?” 
"Get yourself another preacher.” 
"All right, ten! C’mon! They’re 
starting to clap their hands and 
boo!” 
He moves into the tent, blinks 
his eyes. 
“Here’s the preacher!” calls out 
the emcee. "We’re ready to go 
ahead now. What’cher name, Dad?” 
"Sometimes I’m called Madrak.” 
The man stops, turns and stares 
at him, licks his lips. 
"I . didn’t realize.” 
"Let’s be on with it.” 
"Okay, sir. Make way here! 
Coming through! Hot stuff!” 
CREATURES OF LIGHT 
The crowd parts. There are perhaps three hundred people within 
the tent. Overhead lights blaze down 
upon a roped-in circle of bare earth 
in which a grave has been dug. Insects fly in rings through falling 
dust within the ladders of light. An 
opened coffin lies beside the opened 
grave. On a small platform of wood 
is a chair. The man seated upon 
the chair is perhaps fifty years of 
age. Kis face is flat and full of 
wrinkles, his complexion pale. His 
eyes bulge slightly. He wears only 
a pair of shorts, and he has much 
gray hair upon his chest, his arms, 
his legs. He leans forward and 
squints as the two approach through 
the crowd. 
"All set, Dolinin,” says the smaH 
man. 
"My ten,” says Madrak. 
The small man slips him a 
folded bill, which Madrak inspects 
and places in his wallet. 
The small man climbs up onto 
the platform and smiles out over 
the crowd. Then he pushes his 
straw hat back upon his head. 
44 A 11 right, folks,” he begins, 
-**"now we’re all set to go. I 
know you’ll find this was worth 
waiting for. As I announced earlier, 
this man Dolmin is about to commit suicide before your very eyes. 
For personal reasons he is resigning from the big race, and he has 
consented to earn a little money 
for his family by doing it in full 
8S 
sight of all. His performance will 
be followed by a genuine burial, in 
this same ground upon which you 
are now standing. It has doubtless been a long time sinoe any of 
you have seen a real death — and I 
doubt anyone here present has ever 
seen a burial. So we’re about ready 
to turn this show over to the preacher and Mister Dalmin. Let’s have 
a nice hand for them both!” 
There is applause within the tent. 
"And a final word of caution. Do 
not stand too close. We are bending an ordnance, despite the fact 
that this tent has been fully fireproofed. Okay! Take it away!” 
He jumps down from the platform as Madrak mounts it. Madrak 
leans toward the seated man as a 
can marked FLAMMABLE is placed beside his chair. "Are you sure 
you want to go through with this?” 
he asks the man. 
"Yes.” 
He looks into the man’s eyes, but 
the pupils are not enlarged, nor are 
they shrunken. 
"Why?” 
"Personal reasons, Dad. I’d rather not go into them. Shrive me, 
please.” 
Madrak places his hand upon the 
man’s head. 
"Insofar as I may be heard by 
anything, which may or may not 
care what I say, I ask if it matters, that you be forgiven for anything you may have done or failed 
to do which requires forgiveness. 
Conversely, if not forgiveness but 
something else may be required to 
insure any possible benefit for 
which you may be eligible after 
the destruction of your body, I ask 
that this, whatever it may be, be 
granted or withheld, as the case 
may be, in such a manner as to insure your receiving said benefit. I 
ask this in my capacity as your 
elected intermediary between yourself and that which may not be 
yourself, but which may have an 
interest in the matter of your receiving as much as it is possible for 
you to receive of this thing, and 
which may in some way be influenced by this ceremony. Amen.” 
" Thank you, Dad.” 
" Beautiful I” sobs a fat woman 
with blue wings, from the front 
row. 
The man called Dolmin raises 
the can marked FLAMMABLE, 
imscrews the cap, pours its contents 
over himself. '"Has anyone got a 
cigarette?” he asks, and the small 
man hands one up to him. Dolmin 
reaches into the pocket of his shorts 
and withdraws a lighter. Then he 
pauses and looks out over the 
crowd. Someone calls out, "Why 
are you doing it?” He smiles then 
replies, "A general protest against 
life, perhaps, which is a foolish 
game, is it not? Follow me I” Then 
he lights the lighter. By this time, 
Madrak is well outside the ropedin circle. 
A blast of heat follows the blaze, 
and the single scream is a hot nail 
driven through everything. 
The six men who are standing 
by with fire extinguishers relax 
when they see that the flames will 
not spread. 
Madrak folds his hands beneath 
his chin and rests them upon his 
staff. 
After a time, the flames go out 
and men with asbestos gloves come 
forward to handle the remains. The 
audience is quiet. There has been 
no applause thus far. 
"So that’s what it’s like!” someone finally whispers, and the words 
carry throughout the tent. 
"Perhaps,” comes a precise, 
cheerful voice from the back of the 
tent, "and perhaps not, also.” 
T T cads turn as the speaker moves 
^ forward. He is tall and has a 
pointed green beard and matching 
eyes and hair. His complexion is 
pale, his nose long and thin. He 
wears black and green. 
"It is the magician,” someone 
says, “from the show across the 
river.” 
"Correct,” he replies, with a nod 
and a smile, and he makes his way 
forward through the crowd, clearing his path with a silvertopped 
cane. 
The lid is closed on the casket 
as he pauses and whispers, "Madrak the Mighty.” 
Madrak turns, says "I’ve been 
looking for you.” 
CREATURES OF LIGHT 
8f 
"I know. That’s why I’m here. 
What is this silly business?” 
" Suicide show,” says Madrak. "A 
man named Dolmin. They’ve forgotten what death is like.” 
"So soon, so soon,” sighs the other. "Then let us give them their 
money’s worth — full circle!” 
"Vramin, I know you can do it, 
but considering the shape he’s 
in — ” 
The small man in the straw hat 
approaches and regards them with 
his small dark eyes. 
"Sir,” he says to Madrak, "any 
other ceremonial things you’d care 
to do before the interment?” 
«j » 
"Of course not,” says Vramin. 
"One only buries the dead.” 
"What do you mean?” 
"That man is not dead — only 
smouldering.” 
"You’re wrong, mister. This is 
an honest show.” 
"Nevertheless, I say he lives and 
will walk again for your amusement.” 
"You must be some kind of chotic” 
"Only an humble thaumaturge,” 
Vramin replies, stepping into the 
circle. 
Madrak follows him. Vramin then 
raises his cane and weaves it 
through a cryptic gesture. It glows 
with green light, which then leaps 
forward and falls upon the box. 
"Dolmin, come forth!” says 
Vramlin. 
The audience presses forward. 
Vramin and Madrak move to the 
wall of the tent. The small man 
would follow them, but is distracted 
by a knocking from within the coffin. 
" Brother, we’d best leave,” says 
Vramin, and slices through the fabric with the tip of his cane. 
The lid of the coffin is slowly 
raised as they step through the wall 
and into the world without. 
Beyond them a sound occurs. It 
is compounded of screaming and 
cries of "Fakel” and "We want our 
money back!” and "Look at him!” 
" ‘What fools these mortals be,’ ” 
says the green man, who is one of 
the few persons living able to put 
quotation marks around it and know 
why. 
T Tc is coming, riding down the 
sky on the back of a great 
beast of burnished metal. It has 
eight legs, and its hooves are diamonds. Its body is as long as two 
horses. Its neck is as long as its 
body, and its head is that of a 
Chinese demon dog out of gold. 
Beams of blue light come forth from 
its nostrils, and its tail is three antennae. It moves across the blackness that lies between the stars, 
and its mechanical legs move slowly. Each step that it takes, however, 
crossing from nothing to nothing, 
carries it twice the distance of the 
previous step. Each stride also takes 
the same amount of time as the 
prior one. Suns flash by, fall behind, 
wink out. It runs through solid matter, passes through infernos, pierces 
nebulae, faster and faster moving 
through the starfall blizzard within the forest of the night. Given a 
sufficient warm-up run, it is said 
that it could circumnavigate the 
universe in a single stride. What 
would happen if it kept running after that, no one knows. 
Its rider had once been a man. 
He is the one who is called the 
Steel General. That is not a suit of 
armor that he is wearing. It is his 
body. He has turned off most of 
his humanity for the duration of the 
trip, and he stares now straight 
ahead past the scales like bronze 
oak leaves on the side of his mount’s 
neck. He holds four reins, each as 
thick as a strand of silk, on the fingertips of his left hand. He wears 
a ring of tanned human flesh on his 
little finger, because it would be 
senseless and noisy for him to wear 
metal jewelry. The flesh had once 
been his; at least, it had helped 
to surround him at one time long 
ago. 
Wherever he goes, he carries a 
collapsible five-string banjo with 
him in a compartment near to where 
his heart used to be. When he plays 
it he becomes a kind of negative 
Orpheus and men follow him to 
Hell. 
He is also one of the very few 
masters of temporal fugue in the 
entire universe. It is said that no 
CREATURES OF LIGHT 
man can lay hands upon him unless 
he permits , ft. 
His mount had once been a 
horse. 
A yTadrak tilts the beaker, refills 
their glasses. 
Vramin raises his, stares out 
across the wide esplanade before his 
pavilion, quaffs it 
Madrak pours once more. 
"It is neither life, nor is it fair,” 
says Vramin, finally. 
"Yet you never actively supported the program.” 
"What matters that? It is my 
present feelings that control me.” 
"The feelings of a poet ...” 
Vramin strokes his beard. 
"I can never give full allegiance, 
to anything, or to anyone,” he replies. 
"Pity, poor Angel of the Seventh 
Station.” 
"That title perished with the 
Station.” 
"In exile, the aristocracy always 
tends to preserve small items pertaining to rank.” 
"Face yourself in the darkness 
and what do you see?” 
"Nothing.” 
"Exactly.” 
"What is the connection?” 
"Darkness.” 
"I fail to see.” 
"That warrior-priest, is common 
m the dark.” 
"Cease the riddling, Vramin. 
What is the matter?” 
"Why did you seek, me here at 
the Fair?” 
"I have the latest population figures with me. They strike me a a 
'approximating the mythical Point 
Critical — that which never occurs. 
Would you care to see them?” 
"No. I do not need to. Whatever 
the figures, your conclusion is correct.” 
"You feel it 'with your special 
perceptions, within the tides of the 
Power?” 
Vramin nods. 
"Give me a cigarette,” says Madrak. 
Vram gestures, and a lighted cigarette appears between his fingers. 
"It is special this time,” he says. 
It is not just a waning of the tide 
of Life. There will be a riptide.” 
"How will this be manifest?” 
"I do not know, Madrak. But I 
do not intend to stay here longer 
than is necessary tQ find out.” 
"Oh? When will you depart?” 
"Tomorrow evening, though I 
know I am flirting with the Black 
Tide once more. I had best do something about my death-wish again, 
sometime soon, preferably in pentameter.” 
"Do any others remain?” 
"No, we are the only two immortals on Blis.” 
"Will you give me a gateway 
when you go?” 
"Of course.” 
"Then Pll remain here at the 
Fair until tomorrow evening.” 
4 4 T should strongly recommend 
■■•your going immediately, rather than waiting. I can provide a 
gateway now.” Vramin gestures 
again and draws upon a cigarette 
of his own. He notices his refilled 
glass and sips it. "It would be an 
act of wisdom to depart immediately,” he decides, "but wisdom is itself the product of knowledge; and 
knowledge, unfortunately, is generally the product of foolish doings. 
So, to add to my own knowledge 
and to enhance my wisdom I shall 
remain another day, to see what 
occurs.” 
"Then you expect that something 
special will happen tomorrow?” 
"Yes. The riptide. I feel the 
coming of Powers. There was recently some movement in that great 
House where all things go.” 
"Then this is knowledge which 
I, too, wish to obtain,” says Mararak, "as it affects my former master Who Was A Thousand.” 
"You cling to an outworn loyalty, mighty one.” 
"Perhaps. And what is your excuse? Why do you seek to enhance 
your wisdom at this expense?” 
"Wisdom is an end in itself. Also, these doings may be sources 
of great poetry.” 
"If death be the source of great 
poetry, then I prefer the lesser 
variety. I feel, though, that the 
Prince should know of any new development within the Middle 
Worlds.” 
"I drink to your loyaky, old 
friend, though I feel our former 
liege to be at least partly responsible for the present muddle.” 
"Your feelings on this matter are 
not unknown to me.” 
The poet takes one sip and lowers his glass. His eyes then grow all 
of one color, that being green. The 
white which encircles them vanishes, and the black points are gone 
that had been their centers. They 
are now become pale emeralds, and 
a yellow spark lives within each. 
"Speaking in my capacity as 
mage and seer,” he says, in a voice 
grown distant and toneless, "I say 
that it has now arrived upon Blis, 
this thing that portends the chaos. 
I say, too, that another comes, for 
I hear soundless hoofbeats within 
the dark, and I see that which is invisible in its many-strided pacings 
over stars. We may yet ourselves be 
drawn into this thing, who have ne 
wish to participate.” 
"Where? And how?” 
"Here. And it is not life, nor is 
it fair.” 
Madrak nods and says, "Amen.” 
The magician gnashes his teeth. 
"It is our destiny to bear witness,” 
he decides, and his eyes burn with 
an infernal brilliance and his knuckles whiten upon the black walking 
stick with its head of silver. 
A eunuch priest of the highest 
*** caste sets tapers before a pair 
of old shoes .... 
CREATURES OF LIGHT 
The dog worries the dirty glove 
which has seen many better centuries. 
The blind Noras strike a tiny 
silver anvil with fingers that are 
mallets. Upon the metal lies a 
length of blue light. 
VI 
/^siris sits in the House of Life, 
^ drinking the blood-red wine. 
The green glow fills the air about, 
and nowhere is there anything sharp 
or cold. He sits in the Hall of the 
Hundred Tapestries, and the walls 
are invisible behind them all. The 
floor is covered with a fabric that 
is thick and soft and golden in 
color. 
He puts down an empty glass 
and stands. Moving across the Hall, 
he comes to the green tapestry, 
raises it and steps into the cubicle 
which it conceals. He touches three 
of the coordination plates set in the 
wall, pushes aside the tapestry, and 
steps into a room located three hundred forty-eight miles south-southwest of the Hall of the Hundred 
Tapestries, at a depth of 78,544 
feet. 
The chamber he enters is semidark, but a portion of the green 
glow can be felt within it. 
The one who wears a red loincloth and sits cross-legged upon the 
floor does not appear to notice him. 
His back is turned, and he does 
not move. His body is normally 
formed, somewhat slim, and his 
muscles seem those of a swimmer. 
His hair is thick and as dark as 
hair can be without being black. 
His complexion is pale. He is leaning forward and does not appear 
to be breathing. 
Suddenly, another is seated across 
from him, in an identical posture. 
He is dressed in exactly the same 
manner. His complexion, hair and 
musculature are the same. He is 
the same, in all respects; and he 
raises his dark eyes from the small 
yellow crystal they contemplate. 
Looking up, he sees the orange, 
green, yellow and black birdhead 
of Osiris, and his eyes widen and 
he says, ”1 have done it again,” 
and the one whose back is to Osiris vanished before him. 
He scoops up the crystal, places 
it in a cloth bag with drawstrings 
and hangs it at his waist Then he 
stands. 
"Nine second fugue,” he says. 
"Is that your record?” asks Osiris, and his voice sounds like a 
scratched recording that is being 
played too rapidly. 
"Yes, father.” 
"Can you control it yet?” 
"No.” 
“How much longer will it take?” 
"Who knows? Ishibaka says perhaps three centuries.” 
"Then you will be a master?” 
"No one can really tell in advance. There are fewer than thirty 
masters in all the worlds. It has 
IP 
taken me two centuries to advance 
this far, and it has been less than 
a year since the first movement. 
Of course, once it is developed, 
the power continues to grow. ...” 
Osiris shakes his head and steps 
forward, laying his hand upon his 
shoulder. 
"Horus, my son and avenger, 
there is a thing I would have you 
do. It would be good if you were 
a master of the fugue, but it is not 
essential. Your other powers should 
prove sufficient to the task.” 
"What task is this, my father?” 
"Your mother, wishing to gain 
once more my favor and a return 
from exile, has offered me further 
information as to my colleague’s activities. It appears that Anubishas 
sent a new emissary into the Middle 
Worlds, doubtless to locate our ancient enemy and destroy him.” 
it'T'his would seem a good thing,” 
^ says Horus, nodding, "if 
successful. I have my doubts, 
though, since he has failed each 
time he has tried. How many has 
he sent now — five or six?” 
"Six. This one he has named 
Wakim is seventh.” 
"Wakim?” 
"Yes, and the bitch tells me he 
seems to be something special.” 
"How so?” 
"Is it possible that the jackal 
spent a thousand years training 
him for this job. His fighting prowess may be equal to that of Mad
rak himself. And he appears to bear 
a special token none of the others 
bore. It would seem that he is attuned to draw energy directly from 
the field.” 
"I wonder how he thought that 
one up?” asks Horus, smiling. 
"It would seem that he has been 
studying the tricks certain of the 
immortals have used against us.” 
"What would you have me do? 
Assist him against your enemy?” 
"No. I have decided that whichever of us succeeds in destroying 
the Prince Who Was A Thousand, 
that one will gain the support of 
his fallen Angels who are numbered 
among the immortals. The rest 
should follow. Those who do not 
will doubtless enter the House of 
the Dead at the hands of their fellows. The time is right The old 
loyalties have been forgotten. A 
new, solitary liege would be welcomed, I feel, one who offered an 
end to their fugitive existence. And 
with the support of the immortals, 
one House can emerge supreme.” 
"I see your reasoning father. 
It may well be that it is correct. 
You would have me find the Prince 
Who Was A Thousand, before 
Wakim finds him, and slay him in 
the name of Life?” 
"Yes, my avenger. Do you think 
you can do this?” 
"I am troubled that you would 
ask that question, knowing my 
strengths.” 
"The Prince will be no easy 
CREATURES OF LIGHT 
prey. His strengths axe mainly unknown, and I cannot tell you what 
he looks like, nor where he abides.” 
"I will find him. I will end him. 
But perhaps I had best destroy 
this Wakim before I begin the 
search.” 
"No! He is on the world of 
Blis, where even now the plague 
should be beginning. But do not 
approach that one, Horus! Not unless I bid it. I have strange feelings concerning Wakim. I must find 
out who he was before I permit 
such an attempt.” 
"Why is this, mighty father? 
What should that matter?” 
"A memory of days before your 
days, which shall remain unspoken, 
returns to trouble me. Ask me no 
more.” 
"Very well.” 
"The bitch, your mother, bade 
me lay different plans concerning 
the Prince. If you should meet with 
her during your travels, do not be 
swayed by any counsels regarding 
leniency. The Prince must die.” 
"She would have him live?” 
Osiris nods. 
"Yes, she is very fond of him. 
She may have informed us of Wakim only to save the Prince from 
him. She will tell you any lie to 
gain her ends. Do not be deceived.” 
"I will not.” 
"Then I send you, Horus, my 
avenger and my son, as first emissary of Osiris into the Middle 
Worlds.” 
Horus bows his head, and Osiris 
places his hand upon it for a warm 
moment. 
"He is dead already,” says Horus, slowly, "for was it not I that 
destroyed the Steel General himself?” 
Osiris does not answer, for he, 
too once destroyed the Steel General. 
VII 
nphe Prince Who Was A Thousand walks beside the sea and 
under the sea. The only other intelligent inhabitant of the world 
within which he walks cannot be 
sure whether the Prince created it 
or discovered it. This is because 
one can never be sure whether wisdom produces or merely locates, 
and the Prince is wise. 
He walks along the beach. His 
footsteps begin seven paces behind 
him. High above his head hangs the 
sea. 
The sea hangs above his head because it has no choice in the matter. The world within which he 
walks is so constructed that if one 
were to approach it from any direction, it would appear to be a 
world completely lacking in land 
masses. If one were to descend far 
enough beneath that sea which surrounds it, however, one would 
emerge from the underside of the 
waters and enter into the planet’s 
atmosphere. Descending still far
ther, one would reach dry land. 
Traversing this land, one might 
come upon other bodies of water, 
waters bounded by land, beneath 
the sea that hangs in the sky. 
The big sea flows perhaps a thousand feet overhead. Bright fish fill 
its bottom, like mobile constellations. And down here on the land, 
everything glows. 
It has been said that a world 
such as this unnamed place with a 
sea for a sky could not possibly exist. Those who said it are obviously 
wrong. Positing infinity, the rest is 
easy. 
The Prince Who Was A Thousand is in an unique position. He is 
a teleportationist, among other 
things, and this is even rarer than 
a master of temporal fugue. In 
fact, he is the only one of his kind. 
He can transport himself, in no time 
at all, to any place that he can 
visualize. 
And he has a very vivid imagination. Granting that any place you 
can think of exists somewhere in 
infinity, if the Prince can think of 
it too, he is able to visit it. Now, 
a few theorists claim that the 
Prince’s visualizing a place and willing himself into it is actually an act 
of creation. No one knew about the 
place before, and if the Prince can 
find it, then maybe what he really 
did was make it happen. Whatever 
— positing infinity, the rest is easy. 
The Prince has not the least idea, 
not a snowball in hell’s worth, as 
CREATURES OF LIGHT 
to where the nameless world is located, anyway, re the rest of the 
universe. Nor does he care. He can 
come and go as he chooses, taking with him whomsoever he would. 
He has come alone, however, because he wishes to visit his wife. 
He stands beside the sea, beneath the sea, and he calls out her 
name, which is the name "Nephytha,” and he waits till a breeze 
comes to him from across the waters, touching him and saying the 
name that is his own. 
He bows then his head and feels 
her presence about him. 
"How goes the world with thee, 
loved one?” he inquires. 
There came a sob upon the air, 
breaking the surf’s monotone turning. 
"Well,” comes the reply. "And 
thyself, my lord?” 
"I will be truthful rather than 
polite, and say ‘poorly.’ ” 
"It cries yet in the night?” 
"Yes.” 
4*T thought of thee as I drifted 
and as I flowed. I have made 
birds to be within the air to keep 
me company, but their cries are 
either harsh or sad. What may I 
tell thee, to be polite, rather than 
truthful? That I am not sickened 
by his life that is not life? That I 
do not long to be a woman once 
again, rather than a breath, a color, a movement? That I do not 
ache to touch thee once again, and 
to feel once again thy touch upon 
my body? Thou knowest all that 
I might say, but no one god possesses all powers. I should not complain, but I fear, my lord, I fear 
the madness that sometimes comes 
upon me: Never to sleep, never to 
eat. How long has it been?” 
"Many centuries.” 
"And I know that all wives be 
bitches unto their lords, and I may 
ask of thee thy forgiveness. But to 
whom else may I address my bitching, but to thee?” 
"Well taken, my Nephytha. 
Would that I could embody thee 
once more, for I, too, am lonely. 
Thou knowest I have tried. When 
thou hast broken the Thing That 
Cries, then wilst thou discipline 
Osiris and Anubis?” 
"Of course.” 
"Please do not destroy them immediately, if they can help me. 
Grant them some measure of mercy 
if they give me back to you. 
"... For I am so lonely. I wish 
that I could go away from here.” 
"You require a place surrounded 
by water, to keep you alive. You 
require an entire world, to keep 
you occupied.” 
"I know. I know.” 
"If Osiris had not been so deadly set upon vengeance, things might 
have been different. Now, thou 
knowest, I am bound to slay him 
when I have resolved the matter 
of the Nameless.” 
(continued on page 153) 
IF • Short Story 
WHERE THE TIME WENT 
by JAMES H. SCHMITZ 
No wonder Belk hod troubles. His 
time particles were not synchronal l 
'T'his began in the office of John 
** D. Carew, of the John*D. Carew Literary Agency, New York 
City. Present in the room were 
John D. Carew and George Belk, 
one of his authors. 
" George,” Carew was saying, 
" please don’t misunderstand me. 
When — rather long ago — I saw 
the first samples of your work, I 
was delighted. I told myself you 
might grow in time to be one of 
our most valuable properties. I 
still believe you retain that potential. But having represented you for 
over eight years, I begin to feel 
concerned. Your overall output remains regrettably slight.” 
George Belk sighed. "I know it.” 
W I can place almost anything you 
write,” Carew went on, "for relatively good money. But over the 
years checks have been few and 
far between. You must be feeling 
the financial pinch from time to 
time.” 
"I get by,” George said, looking 
despondent. "But barely.” 
Carew clucked in a sympathetic 
way. "If you’d like to confide in 
me, George — what seems to be 
your problem?” 
George sighed again. "I wish I 
could define the probleml I can’t. 
The effect is simply that I don’t 
seem to have time to get more 
writing done.” 
Carew’s eyebrows lifted for a 
moment. "You are engaged in other work? Perhaps in intensive social 
activities?” 
"No! Neither. I write full time. 
Of course I have chores to take 
care of around the house. I go shopping. And I try to reserve half an 
hour a day for physical exercise.” 
Carew nodded. "The last is commendable! One should keep fit. But 
is that all you do? Besides writing?” 
"Yes,” George said. "That’s all.” 
"Then you must, in fact, be putting in a great deal of worktime 
during an average day . 
"No, I don’t,” George said. "Let 
me try to explain it to you — though, 
as I said, I can’t explain it myself. 
You may not believe this, but I’m 
a methodical and orderly man. I 
keep files and records. So I can’t 
help noticing that I manage to 
waste an incredible amount of 
time.” 
"In what way?” 
G eorge scowled. "That’s what 
I’d like to know! Take my 
half-hour of exercise in the morning. Nine to nine-thirty is the period I set aside for it. I shave at 
eight, right after breakfast. Then I 
drag some mats out into the living 
room and pull back the furniture. 
By then it’s nine o’clock.” 
Carew looked very thoughtful. 
"Shaving and dragging out some 
mats and pulling back a few pieces 
of furniture consumes a full hour?” 
"It doesn’t seem reasonable, does 
it?” George said. "Well, that’s part 
of what I mean. A small part . 
So then it’s nine o’clock and I exercise. I time that — thirty minutes 
exactly. 
"But before I’ve got dressed 
again and straightened out the living room and am ready to go shopping, it’s usually close to eleven.” 
Carew grunted and stroked his 
chin. "When do you actually get 
to work?” 
George looked embarrassed. 
"Well, around one-fifteen.” 
"You shop for two hours?” 
"Yes, somehow it comes to that. 
I have to go to several stores. No 
one store ever seems to carry everything you want.” 
"I see. Then you work through 
the afternoon?” 
"In principle. I may put in a 
short break now and then.” 
"Doing what?” Carew asked. 
"Oh, I might have a snack — 
and then of course I have to wash 
the dishes again. Oh I’ll tidy up a 
room that’s beginning to look too 
messy. That kind of thing.” 
"Umm. And in the evening?” 
"Ordinarily I’m working. I take 
in an occasional TV show.” 
Carew leaned back in his chair. 
"And what is your average daily 
output under those circumstances?” 
George hung his head. "Roughly 
— five hundred words.” 
Carew just blinked at him in 
silence. 
ii'T'hat’s the incredible part of 
it I” George said explosively. 
" Because I’ve timed myself on occasion. When I have, IVe found I 
can turn out a page of perfectly usable material in around twenty minutes.” He leaned forward, slammed 
his fist on the desk. "I tell you, 
sometimes I think this is going to 
drive me crazy! Where does the 
rest of my time go?" 
“I’m not hure,” said Carew, pulling open a desk drawer. “But it’s 
possible that there is a solution to 
your problem. Yes, quite possible!” 
“What kind of solution?” George 
asked hopefully. 
Carew fished about in the drawer, took out a business card and 
slid it across the desk to George. 
“When you get home,” he said, 
“call this number and get yourself an appointment. I’ll have talked with their office meanwhile.” 
George read the card. The name 
on it was William W. Gordon, 
M.D. 
“Now wait a minute!” he said 
suspiciously. “This Dr. Gordon 
doesn’t happen to be a psychiatrist, 
does he?” 
“No,” said Carew. “Dr. Gordon 
is not a psychiatrist. He has medical and psychological degrees, but 
he isn’t in general practice. He does 
research work.” 
“And just how is he supposed to 
research me?” George asked in a 
somewhat belligerent tone. 
“He isn’t going to research you 
George. He’s going to research your 
problem.” 
“Well, I don’t know,” George 
muttered. He stared uneasily at the 
card, turning it around in his fingers. 
“George,” said Carew, “you exhibit the not uncommon fear of 
your ilk that if a headshrinker ever 
got his hooks on you, you’d be in 
for a fast trip to the funny farm. 
Let me assure you that you run 
no risk of that in doing as I suggest. Let me assure you further 
that I know of several cases in 
which a problem quite similar to 
yours was solved by Dr. Gordon to 
the applicants’ great satisfaction.” 
“Could you give me a few 
names?” George said warily. 
“I could, but I don’t intend to,” 
Carew told him. 
T^vr. Gordon was a big warm fuzzy 
man who seemed reluctant to 
voice even the most general sort 
of opinion about George’s problem. 
“First, Mr. Belk,” he said, “we 
must establish precisely what the 
nature of the trouble is. Only then 
can we begin to think in terms of 
corrective procedures.” 
George had to be satisfied with 
that. He sat rigid in a chair while 
Dr. Gordon fitted a mesh of metal 
bands about his skull and tightened 
them down gently with large stubby fingers. 
“What’s that for?” George asked. 
“It should give me some infor
WHERE THE TIME WENT 
mation about this and that going 
on inside your head.” 
George cleared his throat. "Carew told me you weren’t a psychiatrist.” 
"I’m not,” Dr. Gordon said, 
" though I started out in that direction. Think of me as an electronics 
specialist and don’t worry about 
your mittful of neuroses and compulsions. I couldn’t care less about 
them. Now let’s see how well you 
can let yourself relax for the next 
five minutes ...” 
The five minutes passed eventually, and George was told he could 
stop relaxing. He twisted around in 
the chair and saw Dr. Gordon place 
some instruments into a drawer in 
his desk. He was frowning pensive
ly
"What did you find out, Doctor?” George asked. 
Dr. Gordon looked up and stopped frowning. "Oh, about what I 
expected.” He came over and began to remove the metal mesh from 
around George’s head. 
"Is it . serious?” asked George. 
"Well, definitely it’s something 
we must follow up. Now, Mr. Belk, 
I need your cooperation for the next 
step. It will hardly inconvenience 
you at all.” 
Dr. Gordon then turned to 
a wall doset and took from it a 
device which looked like one of the 
more expensive kinds of camera except that it had no lens and nothing 
visibly on it which would be twist
ed or pressed. "We’ll put this in 
a case,” Dr. Gordon said, placing 
the instrument in a case as he 
spoke, "and you’ll set it up in your 
house for the next two days. You 
say you’re not married. Do you 
have many visitors?” 
"Very few nowadays,” said 
George. 
"You live alone?” 
"Yes. Except for some cats.” 
"Cats don’t count,” said Dr. 
Gordon. "Very well. Set up this 
instrument — you can leave it in 
the case — somewhere near the 
center of your house. This is Tuesday. Between now and ten A.M. 
Friday, I’d like you to note down 
the occasions when somebody besides yourself is in the house or 
even comes to the door. The mailman, as an example. If you happen 
to forget, it won’t matter too much. 
But try to remember. Note the time 
anybody arrives and the length of 
time he stays around. I’ll see you 
again Friday at ten. Bring the instrument back with you.” 
Hesitantly George took the instrument case. "This is all rather 
mystifying 1” he remarked uncomfortably. 
"I’m sure it must seem that 
way to you,” Dr. Gordon. "But remember, Mr. Belk, that we live in* 
a rapidly evolving scientific age!” 
He gave George a brief smile and a 
reassuring clap on the shoulder. 
"Put your trust in advanced electronics!” 
TAuring the next two days George 
forgot half the time that he 
had Dr. Gordon’s device in the 
house. When he first got home 
with it, he’d taken it out of the 
case and looked it over carefully. 
That told him nothing. There were 
no settings, no concealed switches in 
it. He put it back in the case on a 
small table which stood approximately in the center of the house. 
He called John Carew, told him 
what Dr. Gordon had said and described the mysterious instrument. 
"Is that his usual procedure?” 
Carew said he had no idea what 
Dr. Gordon’s usual procedure was. 
However they could assume he knew 
what he was doing, and George 
should go along with instructions. 
That part was easy. Only the 
mailman came to the house on Wednesday and Thursday, and George 
dutifully noted the time of day. 
Otherwise he went about his normal activities, still wondering now 
and then at the way time seemed 
to be slipping through his grasp. 
In spite of Carew’s assurances, he 
found himself unable to develop 
much faith in the effectiveness of 
Dr. Gordon’s approach. 
At quarter to eleven on Friday 
morning his telephone rang. He 
picked up the receiver. 
"Hello, Mr. Belk,” Dr. Gordon’s 
voice said. "It appears we’ve forgotten our appointment, heh?” 
Abashed, George admitted that 
he had indeed forgotten it. "And 
I don’t know how it happened,” he 
said. "I definitely planned to be at 
your office by ten o’clock. It seems 
to me I was looking at my watch 
just a moment ago, and it was then 
barely past nine.” 
"I’m not surprised,” Dr. Gordon 
said cryptically. "I’ll see you as 
soon as you can make it here. Bring 
along the drainometer.” 
"The what?” asked George. 
"The gadget,” said Dr. Gordon, 
and hung up. 
On reflection George decided that 
knowing the device was called a 
drainometer didn’t really tell him 
much. He took it from its place on 
the table and set off, feeling unhappy and badly confused. At the 
office Dr. Gordon ushered him into a side room, provided him with 
some magazines to leaf around in, 
and disappeared with the drainometer. Some fifteen minutes, later 
he came back into the room, dosed 
the door, and stood staring at 
George. 
"This is as bad a case as I’ve 
come across,” he observed, shaking 
his head. "Worse even than I’d 
suspected!” 
"As bad a case of what?” George 
asked, alarmed. 
"Of time drainage!” Dr. Gordon 
pulled a chair out from behind a 
table and sat down. "I’ll explain the 
situation to you as well as I can, 
Mr. Belk, and I believe you’ll see 
why it was necessary for me to remain silent until now.” 
WHERE THE TIME WENT 
Tie steepled his fingers. "I won’t 
attempt to go into the math of 
this,” he said. "For one reason, because I suspect that scientific math 
is not your forte.” 
"No, it isn’t” George agreed. 
"Then let me tell you in a more 
general way about time. There are 
two distinct kinds of time. There 
is TIME — time in capitals, so to 
speak — which is the time through 
which the world about all of us progresses. And then there is subjective, or individual, lower case time.” 
George nodded interestedly. 
"Einstein’s theories have to do that, 
don’t they?” 
"Not really. The science of time 
units is a different development. 
Picture to yourself that everybody 
generates and has available for his 
use a personal supply of time units 
or particles. Say, roughly, that for 
every fifty years of real time, or 
TIME, everybody generates and 
uses up fifty million time particles. 
"When this process is operating 
normally, the individual is synchronal in TIME. He feeds out 
his time particles in a steady uniform stream which keeps him comfortably abreast of the passage of 
TIME in the world. However, problems may arise. You, for example, 
Mr. Belk, do not have as solid a 
contact with the flow of your time 
particles as you might have — we 
can assume that something in you 
withdraws to some extent from the 
outside world and TIME. As a re
sult you’re a natural time particle 
waster. At present there isn’t much 
we can do about that condition. On 
the other hand, it’s hardly a serious 
matter. I’d estimate that you normally lose about one time particle 
in twenty — not a significant percentage.” 
"I’m not sure I’m following all 
all this,” George admitted. 
"It’s not necessary for you to 
grasp it all,” Dr. Gordon assured 
him. "I simply want you to have the 
general picture. Now look at another aspect of the matter. People, as 
you know, have widely varying feelings about the value of time. Some 
never get enough of it. They have 
many things to do and many more 
things they’d like to do and simply 
can’t get around to doing. If they 
could squeeze forty-eight full hours 
into a single workday, they’d be 
delighted. 
"And then there are people who 
have, as we say, time on their 
hands. Often very heavily on their 
hands. It is a commodity for which 
they can find no real use. If it were 
possible, they would be glad to be 
relieved of a large part of it. 
"And nowadays it is possible. 
That’s the point here. There are 
methods whereby a portion of the 
flow of one individual’s time particles can be diverted from him and 
integrated into the flow of another person’s time particles. The second person now has subjectively 
more time available to him than he 
had before, and the first person has 
subjectively less. It is an insidious 
process: the loser in this transaction has no way of grasping what 
has happened. If he is a man who 
places no value on time and has 
time to spare in that sense, he may 
not even notice that anything has 
happened. He may feel quite comfortable — and less bored — within 
the time particle flow left at his 
disposal. 
But when the victim is a busy 
man, a man who needs his time, it 
is a different matter. Again, of 
course, he doesn’t understand the 
situation. He simply is aware that 
is seems to take him forever to get 
anything done. He feels that the 
minutes and hours are slipping 
through his fingers, as in fact they 
are.” 
G eorge stared at the doctor in 
shocked dismay. " That’s 
what’s been happening to me?” he 
asked. 
" That’s what’s been happening 
to you, Mr. Belk.” 
"But,” George cried, outraged, 
"this has been going on for years!” 
"Evidently.” 
"What can I do to stop it? You 
said — ” 
“I indicated that your problem 
could be solved, Mr. Belk,” said 
Dr. Gordon. "And indeed it will 
be. You see, this situation is so 
fraught with unethical possibilities 
that an organization exists which is 
dedicated to policing the transfer of 
subjective time among individuals. 
Such transactions may be quite 
legitimate. As I explained, a good 
many people have more time than 
they know what to do with, they 
have surplus time which is a nuisance to them. People who need additional time are allowed to draw 
it from such individuals, providing 
suitable compensation is made. 
Since our organization operates with 
as much secrecy as possible, the 
donor frequently doesn’t know there 
In WORLDS OF FANTASY — 
THE MIRROR OF WIZARDRY 
by John Jakes 
DELENDA EST . 
by Robert E. Howard 
AS IS 
by Robert Silverberg 
The best in fantasy — at your newstand now! 
WHERE THE TIME WENT 
has been a transaction. But always 
he must be compensated. An unexpected stroke of good fortune 
comes his way; he may find a better 
job, more suitable to his unenergetic nature, suddenly open to him, 
and so forth. Both parties have 
benefited.” 
“But why the secrecy?” George 
asked. “If everybody knew — ” 
“If everybody were aware of 
this, Mr. Belk, the situation might 
get completely out of hand. As I 
said, the process of extracting time 
particles from somebody else is very 
simple, once it is understood. We 
want no more people to know about 
it than we can help.” 
“I see.” George hesitated. “Then 
you — this organization — will 
keep whoever has been*stealing my 
time from doing it again?” 
D r. Gordon smiled. “We can do 
better than that. Much better. 
The drainometer recordings indicate that at various periods during 
the past two days as much as nine 
out of ten of your time particles 
have been surreptitiously diverted. 
This is a blatant crime. The fact 
that you are, as I previously indicated, inherently somewhat careless 
with your time has made you an 
easy victim. But now compensation 
must be made by those who took 
advantage of this. When you leave 
here, you will carry another instrument with you. The next attempt to 
tap the flow of your time particles 
will give us a direct line to the perpetrator. In all likelihood we shall 
find then that you have been preyed upon not by one individual but 
by a criminal gang.” 
“A gang?” George repeated. 
“Exactly. As I pointed out, Mr. 
Belk, time is a commodity. It has 
value. For some it has great value. 
Among such people there always 
will be a number who do not care 
whether the commodity they want 
can be obtained legally or ethically, 
provided only they get it. And there 
always will be criminal elements 
willing to supply the commodity 
for a price. We’re constantly on the 
lookout for indications of such a 
situation.” 
“And you can make them compensate for what they’ve done?” 
“Yes, we can,” said Dr. Gordon. 
“The organization has very effective 
means of dealing with such criminals and those who benefit unethically by their crimes. We shall establish exactly how much time was 
diverted from you and by whom 
during the past years, and to the 
last particle this time will be drained from the guilty parties involved 
and restored. Not in a lump sum, 
so to speak. But you will have 
established a time credit with the 
organization, on which you can 
draw as your requirements or wishes dictate. In other words, if you 
should like to operate for a while 
on the basis of a fully usable 
forty-eight-hour working day, or 
even a hundred-hour day, you will 
be able to do it.” 
George was silent a moment. “I 
hardly know how to thank the organization — and you, sirl” he 
said then. “There must be some 
way I can repay you.” 
Dr. Gordon cleared his throat. 
“Well, as a matter of fact, it is 
customary to charge a fee. The fee 
goes not to me but to the organization. As I say, time is a commodity. We all can use it. Would a 
fee of say ten per cent of the time 
you will regain seem fair to you?” 
“Eminently fair I” George declared. 
TTe called John Carew next day 
• ^to tell him of the outcome of 
the matter. 
: “Exactly as I thought I ” Carew 
said with evident satisfaction. 
“So you knew all about this time 
drain stuff, eh?” said George. 
“I should,” Carew’s voice told 
him. “Quite a long while ago I 
found myself in a pickle not unlike 
yours. Somebody steered me to the 
organization, and they adjusted the 
matter very satisfactorily. In fact, 
I’ll still put in an occasional fifty 
hours day, though I found, as I believe you will, that a fully available ordinary workday is quite 
enough in the long run.” 
“I expect you’re right,” George 
agreed. “For a few months though 
I intend to really live it up on my 
time account!” 
“Fine,” said John Carew. “In 
that case, I’ll look forward to getting a new novel from you within 
. oh, let’s say the next two 
And he got it. END 
This -month in Galaxy 
BUILDING ON THE LINE 
by Gordon R. Dickson 
THE TELL-TALE HEART MACHINE 
by Brian W. Aldiss 
PERRIS WAY 
by Robert Silyerberg 
And many more in the big November issue! 
WHERE THE TIME WENT 
IF • Short Story 
There are always two 
kinds of immortality . 
As he had almost always done, 
done, the Waw sat beside the 
pool, sailing a paper boat, and listened to his undying heart. This 
was day four of the two thousand and third year of his imprisonment; day three of the one thousand, nine hundred and ninetyfourth year after the extinction of 
the human race; and, the ninth 
year of his age. It would always 
be the ninth year of his age. 
In a little while the Cheng would 
appear, the sigil of its own imprisonment blazoned on the barrel that 
contained its brain, and ask him 
if he wanted anything. And as always the Waw would be able to 
think of nothing to want. The asteroid that the Cheng’s makers had 
hollowed out and powered for the 
two of them supplied every need 
the boy could imagine and was 
pleasant to live in. Of course, it had 
no sun, and the Waw did not know 
where in sidereal space it was wandering at the moment; but he did 
not care. The Cheng’s barrel was 
loaded with useless information of 
that kind; he had only to ask. On 
some earlier changeless morning, 
the Waw had amused himself by 
asking for facts like that, so that 
he could compute the mean free 
paths of the electrons as they charged about in the Cheng’s barrel to 
dredge up the information, but it 
had not been a very good game. It 
had been that computation that had 
showed him that the Cheng’s barrel 
must hold all the knowledge of the 
human race that the Cheng’s makers had been able to find and that 
none of it — what little there was 
— was much fun. 
The paper boat moved on the 
slow ripples stirred by the Waw’s 
stick. It was not going anywhere, 
but its fortunes were much more interesting than the mean free paths 
of electrons. 
The undying heart ticked on. 
Tomorrow, too, would be like this. 
There was a sound in the rushes to 
his left; then the cattails parted and 
the Cheng appeared. Big though the 
machine was, it was not clumsy, 
and its movements were nearly silent. It consisted, in chief, of two 
cunningly jointed legs, set wide 
apart; a ring of heavy metal plates 
which was its pelvic girdle, in 
which, from here, the Waw could 
see his own red hair reflected; the 
chest barrel, with the blazon on it, 
topped by a bulging rim; arms much 
like the legs, except that they 
ended in tool assemblies; and a 
great flat head which sprang like 
a turtle’s from the middle of the 
barrel, below the bulging carapace. 
All these things were connected 
together by fabric-covered accordion-joints which could extend the 
Cheng’s reach, height or field of 
view astonishingly if it had the 
need, with a thoroughness possible 
to no creature designed by nature; 
and its hip-girdle was hung with 
supplementary instruments to augment its always-racing, always anxious mind. 
"Is there anything — ?” 
"No.” 
Tt went away, infinitely patient 
^ in its disappointment. Why did 
it care? What had it been made to 
care about? Some day, the Waw 
thought, I’ll ask it that. But not 
today. There’s plenty of time. Plenty of time. 
His father had seen to that. Once 
when some human world — had it 
been Poictesme? — had been following the others into the striped 
madness of the Wave, and the Waw 
himself had had some other name 
— had it been Root? — his father 
had tenderly put him to sleep, and 
when the Waw had awakened, the 
heart was inside him. His father, 
already dying, had said: 
The Nuremberg egg ... It was 
Columbus’s cartographer who made 
it . the watch with the escapement that would never stop . 
I’ve given you time, Jock ... use 
it . hatch it ... ” 
None of this had meant anything 
to the Waw. His father — a collector of dictionaries — often talked like that even when well. But 
since the bubble of the Cheng had 
lifted him from the ruins of Bellegarde and brought him here, he 
NOW THAT MAN IS GONE 
and the Cheng had worked out the 
nature of the heart. It was actually 
two units: the heart proper, and an 
implanted biological fuel cell which 
metabolized his own blood sugar 
through a series of oxidation-reduction reactions, triggered by enzymes 
also normal to his system. The burning took place at normal body temperature, the ashes were metabolites his body could dispose of normally, and the electron transfer produced about twenty watts of power 
to drive the heart. 
The pump itself flexed soundlessly, 35 to 40 million times a year. 
It would never tire, nor wear out; 
but more important, the ion-exchange resin of which it had been 
made was so powerful a serum detoxicant as to stop the aging process completely. 
He wondered if his father could 
have intended that. But of course 
there was no way of knowing. The 
Cheng knew nothing about the motives of human beings; and at nine, 
neither did the Waw, though he 
was very good on the mean free 
paths of electrons. 
It had been about this time, too, 
that the Cheng revealed that the 
Wave had destroyed the whole of 
the human race, and had given him 
the name of the Waw, or Next-ToLast. As far as the boy could tell, 
the appellation represented nothing 
more than a hope on the part of 
the Cheng’s makers; certainly the 
Cheng knew of no other survivor, 
nor had any further word of one 
reached the asteroid in the last two 
thousand and three years and four 
days. (It was lonely here sometimes.) 
The Waw knew this because the 
Cheng answered any question that 
was put to it; it appeared to be incapable of lying. It had even told 
him how he could leave the asteroid 
if he wished; but the method was 
too complicated to be worth attempting. He was comfortable here; 
and besides, where would he go? 
Humanity was dead, and he could 
not live on any other world that 
was habitable for the Cheng’s makers, nor had he any desire to meet 
them. 
T he paper boat became soggy 
and sank, slowly. Bemused, he 
watched it settle. There were fish 
in the pool, but he caught them 
only rarely, so as not to get ahead 
of their breeding cycle. The Cheng 
had said that when those were gone, 
it could not get any more; and 
they were company, in a sense that 
the Cheng could never be because 
it was only marginally alive and 
hence quite predictable. In a while, 
instead, he would go to the library, 
where he was trying to work out 
why he liked an almost incomprehensible ancient work called Life 
on the Mississippi . But not yet; nor 
just yet. There was plenty of time. 
The boat disappeared under the 
ripples, disintegrating as it went 
no 
and turning a deeper and deeper 
jade. When the Waw at last looked 
up, the Cheng was back, rather to 
his surprise. 
"What do you want?” 
The machine flexed its arms uneasily. It seemed to be having difficulty in speaking. At last it said: 
"We have found the Ya.” 
The boy did not quite register 
this for a long moment. Then he 
sprang up. 
"Where?” 
"In frozen storage, in a powerless capsule drifting toward the 
galactic rim. By its decay level, 
we judge that it must have been 
fired when the Wave first began, 
about a thousand years before your 
birth, and missed its target. But 
the Ya is still alive, though perhaps 
not for much longer.” 
Now that the moment had come, 
the moment in which he had never 
believed, the Waw found that he 
could not meet it. It had been so 
long since he had seen another human being, so long! Suppressing 
the obvious question, he said instead: 
"What do you mean by decay 
level, Cheng? Was the capsule hot 
— radioactive?” 
"Not significantly,” said Cheng. 
“In any event, we do not know 
the age or generation of its radioactives. But non-radioactive matter 
also has a half-life; this is why the 
universe is finite.” 
This revelation was so stunning 
that it almost eclipsed the immediate dilemma; but after a while, 
the boy found that he could not 
handle its implications, and the dilemma began creeping back. With 
a sigh he did not hear himself, he 
said: "Never mind. Where is the 
Ya?” 
"In the infirmary.” 
The Waw had never needed the 
infirmary, thanks to the undying 
heart, but he knew where it was. 
The asteroid was small, and he had 
had two millenia in which to explore it. 
He said to the Cheng. "Follow.” 
He dropped his stick into the pool. 
It floated silently, turning, unable 
to drift away because it had no 
place to drift to. 
'T'he Ya was a girl, perhaps 
-*■ twelve years of age. She was 
asleep and looked fragile and pale, 
though in the whiteness of the infirmary her coloring seemed almost 
hectic. 
Staring down at her, the Waw 
suddenly felt a different kind of 
sadness than he had ever known 
before. Though he could not have 
told anyone what he thought, and 
indeed he did not know himself, he 
was wondering — or was it trying 
to visualize? — what final, terrible act of love had put the girl in 
that capsule. 
“Is this what you’ve been waiting for?” he said at last. 
"Yes,” the Cheng said. "My 
NOW THAT MAN IS GONE 
makers too are very old. They seek 
continuity for life in the universe. 
And the Ya will not live forever 
either, so you must act rapidly.” 
The boy looked up. 
“What do you mean, Cheng?” 
“It is needful,” the Cheng said, 
"that you should breed.” 
Until that moment, he had not 
really known how radically little 
the Cheng’s makers knew or were 
ever likely to know about human 
beings. As for the poor machine, 
looming over them in all its power, 
learning and versatility, it was simply and hopelessly funny. 
But the Waw was unable to 
laugh. 
The girl opened her eyes. They 
showed nothing but terror and 
complete incomprehension. And why 
not, after three thousand years 
of nothing but cold sleep. 
"Stand back, Cheng,” the boy 
said. “Out of sight. And pull in 
your head . Girl, you’re all right. 
You’ve gotten to where you were 
going.” 
He thought she began to breathe 
more quietly. After a while, he added: "Cheng, are you a surgeon?” 
“If needs be.” 
“Have you a human heart in 
storage?” 
"No.” 
"Could you find one, outside?” 
"Yes, perhaps,” the Cheng said, 
"but after how many centuries? 
Much time has passed already; and 
the Ya will not — ” 
"Shut up.” 
The boy thought rapidly, out of 
practice though he was. Not about 
giving up his longevity — no, he 
had worn that out already; it was 
of no use to him any more, not even 
for fishing — but about growing 
up, a hope he had abandoned years 
and centuries ago. 
"Will you obey me, Cheng?” 
“I am so constructed. Is there at 
last something you want?” 
"Yes. Prepare to leave the asteroid, you poor lump. The Ya and 
I are going. We require you come.” 
"Is it necessary for breeding?” 
"It is. And we’ll need a surgeon. 
“And while you’re at it, search 
your barrel for the name and location of some place where there 
might be a human organ bank.” 
“I already know that there are 
none within any useful time — ” 
"And in the meantime, shut up. 
We’ll look anyhow. Go get on the 
job. Feed the fish on your way.” 
The Cheng left. The Next-toLast turned to the Last, feeling, 
as he did in every artificial dawn, 
the almost silent ticking of the 
infernal machine in his chest — 
and knowing now why it had been 
made. The girl rose timidly; and 
timidly, the boy tried to smile. 
Tn some human Scriptures, the 
-*■ first chapter is called Genesis. 
In later versions, it is called The 
Undeathless Heart; but no one 
any longer knows why. END 
IF • Short Story 
WIZARH SHIP 
by F. HAINES PRICE 
The gods took Hin in their ship . 
But they could never change him I 
jtTin sat before' the cooking fire 
^ ^ to ease the morning chill. His 
inroman was grinding the grain for 
the next day’s bread, and he watchled her fat breasts swing as she 
crushed the seeds. Her fatness was 
his pride; the size of her belly and 
haunches told the village that he 
was good at the hunt and able to 
feed his woman much meat. While 
he sat, warmed by the fire and food 
in his stomach, his mind was full 
of old battles and his prowess as a 
warrior. Soon his father would die, 
and he would take his place as 
chief. The old man could no longer hunt, and his mind wandered into 
the past and lingered there. He also 
thought of the child in his wife’s 
body; the swelling of growth that 
he hoped would be a son. These 
things made Hin feel proud and 
strong; his pleasant thoughts and 
warmth of the fire and the rising 
sun pushed him towards sleep. 
Suddenly the skyship broke the 
morning quiet with waves of sound. 
Hin fell to the ground and hid his 
eyes in the dirt. He lay there like 
a frightened child till the roaring 
stopped, hoping the gods had not 
come to take his spirit. When he 
looked up he saw the needle-shaped 
outline of the ship over half a mile 
off. The rockets’ heat seemed to 
clear the sky of clouds, and the sun 
glanced and dazzled off the vessel’s 
hull. Hin looked about him for the 
other villagers but he could see 
nothing but their backs as they ran 
into the forest. Only his father remained because he was too old to 
run. The old chief was laying on 
the ground quivering and squirming in his fright, and Hin was 
ashamed. The gods were there, and 
he would go me,et them; but first 
he hid his father in one of the huts. 
As he walked towards the ship, 
he slipped several times on the 
grass that was still damp with dew 
and was forced to keep his head 
bent so that he could see and direct 
his feet. Fear made him clumsy; 
he was uneasy over what the gods 
wanted and what they would do 
with him. Perhaps they would sacrifice him, or if he was lucky they 
would take him along in their ship. 
Hin would miss his wife if he had 
to go live in the heavens, yet he 
still felt that the other villagers 
were fools for running away; even 
his teacher, the old witchman, had 
acted the part of a child and fled 
with the rest. 
The grass near the skyship was 
mostly charred stubble, and a dark 
sooty cloud rose up around Hin’s 
feet as he approached. By the time 
he stood close by the ship, the 
soot had coated his body and his 
sweat mixed with it, running down 
his chest and back leaving streaks 
of black. No sound came from within the vessel, and Hin asked the 
gods why they did not speak. No 
answer was forthcoming, but a 
slender plastic conveyor slowly projected itself from the base of the 
An IF First 
Each month If brings you a new 
writer, never before published. This 
month’s is F. Haines Price, a 25year-old Philadelphian, who found time 
for his writing after breaking a leg 
playing Rugby. He is deeply interested in biology and plans to re-' 
turn to college when his wife graduates with her degree in biology. At 
present, he’s working on a novel and 
more short stories — some of which we 
hope to be bringing you in the future! 
craft. When it reached Hin’s feet, 
its outward motion ceased and the 
belt began to revolve slowly towards 
the ship. Hin prostrated himself on 
the scorched earth and yelled his 
respect for the gods in a voice shrill 
with fear. Yet no answer came. 
Nothing changed; the belt of the 
conveyor kept on moving towards 
the ship, an invitation that Hin 
had not yet understood. 
ing the alien freewill clause. You 
know that as well as I do. We can 
entice only without drugs or force.” 
“Stuff it, Daniels; who’d know? 
Besides we don’t know for sure that 
he’s an intelligent being. If he’s 
not, we can do anything we want 
with him.” 
“You never give^up, Harry. According to you, there’s no such thing 
as regulations. Why, that guy looks 
just like we do under all that dirt. 
And you saw him trying to talk. 
We almost lost our license for that 
deal you tried on Vega; trying to 
get that female dragon for the sodom section on Tori-three, and she 
turns out to be the Grand Burner’s 
pet egg. If he don’t get on the belt 
he don’t get on; we don’t break 
the rules this trip.” 
Before the space-trader could 
continue his argument, he saw the 
primitive step on the conveyor. It 
had taken Hin some time to realize that the belt could take him 
inside the ship. When the idea seeped in past the fear and wonder that 
filled his mind, he did not hesitate; 
he wanted to see and talk to the 
gods. In a few minutes the slow 
motion of the conveyor carried him 
inside, and the light from the red 
sun was replaced by a cool florescent glow. Hin found himself in a 
small cubicle with just enough head 
room to stand. The room was colored a harsh metallic white and no 
entrance or exit was visible. The 
wall through which he had entered 
was as smooth as the other three 
without a seam showing. There was 
no sound. Hin wished the gods 
would show themselves but then it 
occurred to him that they might be 
invisible. 
“Hairy brute, isn’t he?” said 
Harry. 
“We’ll give him a shave and a 
bath, and he’ll be the cleanest cut 
caveman in this arm of the galaxy. 
Some old hag on one of the Pallar 
moons would pay pretty well for c 
Tarzan type like that to keep hei 
company nights. Be a real thrill foi 
her. There aren’t too many primi 
tive cultures left. Why don’t yoi 
call Ginger up and have her take c 
look at your gold mine?” 
TTarry made a call on the intercom, and some minutes later a 
tall slender woman walked in and 
began studying the primitive 
through the one-way viewer. She 
exhibited the universal standard of 
beauty in shape and complexion 
that only the inhabitants of Sol’s 
third planet could claim. Only on 
earth with its one-gee gravity and 
the gentle radiation of the yellow 
sun was such beauty produced. Other women of the human species were 
dried and burned by hot suns and 
made squat and heavy or stretched 
like beanpoles by extreme gravitational conditions. 
“You going to sell him on Pallar?” the woman asked. 
“You better believe it, Ginger. I 
figure at least three thousand units 
for him. Got him on the level, too. 
He just stepped right on the belt. 
Glad Daniels made me do it honest.” Harry puffed himself up before he continued. “Look at the way 
he’s bowed down and praying. He 
must think we’re gods or something.” 
“These primitives always think 
so. Never seen it fail.” 
Hin rested on his knees with his 
WIZARD SHIP 
head bowed forward. "Why don’t 
they speak?” he thought. “Or at 
least give me a sign? Why am I 
here? I still breath and see; they 
have not hurt me; they must not 
be angry.” 
He heard a faint humming sound 
and felt a movement of air across 
his body. Looking up, he saw one 
of the walls disappear and three 
figures reveal themselves. They 
watched and smiled at him with 
smooth hairless faces. Hin waited 
on his knees for the gods to act. 
“He’s a big one, Ginger. How’d 
you like to tumble with that? After 
he’s been washed, naturally.” 
“Watch your mouth, Harry,” 
Daniels said. “I’ve seen Ginger 
bust bigger guys than you so that 
they needed plasto-surgery; not that 
it would do any harm with your 
face. Why don’t you take Tarzan 
down to the cages and wash him 
off? Depilitate him too, but lay 
off the education tapes. He’ll be 
easier to handle if he still worships 
us.” 
The biggest of the three gods 
grabbed Hin’s arm and led him out 
of the cubicle. Then the god directed him up a series of ladders until 
they reached a room filled with 
cages of various sizes. Some of the 
cages were occupied by beasts of a 
kind unknown and terrifying to 
Hin. They were all of the same 
type; four legged scaly things with 
heads half the size of their bodies. 
Their jaws were huge and held 
if* 
multiple rows of razor-like plates 
instead of teeth. Set above gaping 
nostrils were small eyes of a deep 
wavering red that expressed more 
hate than Hin had ever conceived 
of in his simple existence. The god 
laughed when Hin cringed before 
the cages. 
T Tin was led through another 
^ opening, pushed through it, 
and the wall closed behind him. 
The room was similar to the one he 
had first entered when he boarded 
the ship. The only irregularity observable was a large nozzle projecting from the ceiling. From it came a 
light shower of moisture that Hin 
tried to avoid by curling up in a 
corner; but the spray filled the 
room like a fog, and he was soon 
soaked. He tried to stand, but there 
was nothing to grip on to, and he 
slipped back to the floor. When he 
rubbed his hand across his face 
clumps of wet hair came off in his 
fingers. Suddenly the spray came 
stinging down hard against his skin, 
washing away his hair and the dirt 
that seemed a part of his body. A 
bright warm light filled the room, 
and a breeze from nowhere dried 
him. Soon the god reappeared and 
led him out of the cubicle. A 
strange sense of well-being dulled 
his fear as he again walked past the 
cages where the beasts hissed their 
anger at him. Hin had never been 
clean before. 
He was taken to a room with a 
cot to rest on, and a god brought 
him food. This god was different 
from the one who took him to the 
shower; he had long hair and was 
more slender. He noticed other differences like the slight bulge of 
breasts and realized the god was a 
woman, yet she was slim like a man. 
“Gods must be rich,” he thought. 
“Why can’t they fatten up their 
wives?” As she walked away, he 
wondered what some added weight 
would do to her figure and then 
was frightened by thinking such 
thoughts of an immortal. 
For several days Hin lay in his 
room. The food was good although 
there was not enough meat, and 
pleasant noises seemed to come out 
of the walls to amuse him. He had 
begun to study his new environment, but there was not much to 
see in the room; except for the cot 
there were no objects at all. They 
fed him at regular intervals and 
took his dishes away as soon as he 
was finished. His increased familiarity with his jailers was leading 
him to doubt their godhood. Such 
things as the short growth of hair 
erupting from Harry’s face that he 
noticed after the first two days increased his doubts. Hin also learned the trick of opening and closing 
the walls. There was a slight indentation in the surface that caused 
the wall to open like an expanding 
circle when pressed. It was magic, 
but it was magic that he too could 
perform. Hin often opened and 
closed the wall after they took his 
food dishes away, and he began to 
think that either most of their power 
depended on such tricks or that 
they had made him a god too, without his knowledge, and he unknowingly had powers equal to theirs. 
Either way, Hin felt he had much 
less reason to fear the beings who 
kept him in the room. 
Lie was beginning to understand 
■** their language. Already he 
knew their names; Harry, Daniels, 
and the skinny female, Ginger. 
They called him Tarzan and laughed. He was not used to being an object of ridicule. In his own tribe 
he was a leader. The wonder of his 
new home was wearing thin, and he 
missed the red sun and sky of his 
world and his fat wife. It would 
have pleased him to leave the ship 
in the heavens and returned to 
walk upon living earth. The next 
time a meal came he, tried to 
complain to the being called Harry. 
Harry looked at Hin in a puzzled 
way and then left to return quickly 
with the other two. 
“What’s he want?” asked Harry. 
“How could I speak that lingo?” 
answered Daniels. “Probably wants 
to go home, or a woman, or more 
to eat. Who knows how Tarzan’s 
mind works? Maybe we ought to 
feed him some edu-tapes, then we’d 
know what he’s talking about.” 
“Thought you said that was a 
bad idea, Daniels: thought you said 
WIZARD SHIP 
he’d be easier to handle this way, 
thinking we’re gods and all.” 
“I don’t know, Harry,” Daniels 
said. “ Seems like a pretty smart 
cookie to me. Probably has a pretty 
good idea of what’s going on now. 
You know he’s getting pretty restless. Maybe if we could talk to 
him we could tell him what a nice 
time he’d have on Pallar. The 
regulations require that we communicate with him; supposed to 
find out what he wants 1” 
“I say do it,” said Ginger. 
They took him out of the cabin 
and climbed higher in the ship on 
the ladders; then all three of the 
beings shoved him into a room where 
the only furnishing was a large 
chair, the first that Hin had ever 
seen. Surrounding the chairs were 
several large boxes with clusters of 
tiny windows in them. Harry pushed something on the wall, and the 
windows began pulsing with light to 
the accompaniment of a rhythmic 
clicking sound. The clicking made 
him think of a tree brushing against 
rocks in the wind near his village 
and increased his agitation. He knew 
the strangers possessed magic, but 
the terrors of the flashing boxes 
were overwhelming. He did something he would never have considered if he had not been insane 
with fear; he struck out with his 
fist and hit Harry in the face. The 
give of real flesh and the sight of 
blood gushing from Harry’s nose 
was enough to convince Hin that 
these were men, not gods. Before 
he had an opportunity to consider 
that revelation, he felt a blow on 
the back of his head, and unconsciousness enveloped him. 
T>y the time he came to he was 
strapped in a chair, and a metal 
hood projecting from the ceiling was 
fitted firmly to his skull. The three 
people surrounded him. Harry’s 
bleeding had stopped, but clotted 
fluid still covered the lower portion 
of his face. Hin wondered what reprisals were in store for him. None 
of the three showed signs of agitation. The female seemed amused 
and was making language sounds at 
Harry in a playful tone. The short 
man, Daniels, went over to one of 
the large boxes and did something 
with his hand. 
There was a sensation of heat 
in the back of Hin’s skull that 
suddenly increased so that his brain 
felt like searing coals. The fire then 
slowly weakened and was replaced 
by a welcome numbness. 
“Pleasant dreams, Tarzan.” 
“Don’t bother riding him; he’s 
already out. Just give him the language tapes. I don’t want him to 
know what’s going on, just so he can 
talk to us. No cultural orientation. 
Let’s give him the tapes with the 
primitive accent; those Pallarian 
hags don’t like their sweet boys 
too sophisticated.” 
Daniels made several adjustments 
on the equipment and placed the 
appropriate tape on a spool in one 
of the cabinets. Then he left the 
room with the others. 
When the tape had finished playing into his brain Hin was awakened automatically. The intense subliminal instruction was dimmed by 
a simple lack of mental energy, and 
the hours he spent waiting for his 
jailers passed quickly. It was his 
first opportunity to think after discovering that the three people who 
had captured him were no more 
immortal than he was. Hin realized 
that he was as much a slave as the 
children his father had stolen from 
the hill tribes. These slaves were 
badly treated and seldom lived for 
more than a few years. The only 
ones who survived were the ones 
who escaped. 
But how, Hin wondered, could 
he escape from the metal ship or 
defeat three people who had so 
much magic at their disposal? 
Even if he got outside he could 
not live in the sky. He was flesh 
and blood and needed air to breath 
and ground to walk on. He wondered if there was a way to make 
them take him back to his village. 
“Want to punch me again, Tarzan?” asked Harry. 
H in could not answer. The fact 
that he understood the words 
uttered in the strange language 
shocked him to such an extent that 
he only sat there gaping. 
“Don’t let it throw you,” said 
Ginger. “That chair you sat in was 
a teaching device. You now speak 
fluent Galactic. Come on, why don’t 
you speak up?” 
“My name is Hin. Why don’t you 
take me home? I wish to leave 
this ship.” 
“The accent’s perfect,” Harry 
said to Daniels before he turned 
towards Hin. “You go where we 
take you, apeman. Nobody forced 
you onto this ship; you walked on 
yourself, and we’re all going for a 
long, long trip.” 
Hin tried to rise from the chair, 
but he was still strapped down. 
They all laughed at his efforts 
towards getting loose and, as Hin 
had not been taught any Galactic 
curses, he was forced to swear at 
them in his new tongue. He succeeded only in evoking more laughter and ridicule. 
“See this, Hin?” Harry waved a 
thin rod with a grip at one end in 
front of Hin’s face. “It’s a neuron 
distorter. Most people call it a 
stinger. I’m going to unstrap you, 
but first I’m going to give you a 
taste of this so you’ll know just 
what to expect if you give us any 
trouble.” 
Harry pointed the weapon at 
Hin’s leg and the stinger emitted a 
short, high-pitched whine. At first 
Hin felt a faint warmth of his leg, 
but then the warmth expanded into 
a searing heat that alternated with 
unbelievable cold. Shocks ran up 
and down his leg, then reached the 
WIZARD SHIP 
base of his spine and sent messages 
of agony into his brain. Splashes 
of light seared through his closed 
eyelids and his teeth gnashed together in an attempt to crush the 
pain. Harry was right about the 
stinger; Hin would cause no trouble while the others pointed such 
strong magic at him. Daniels unstrapped him while Harry covered 
him with the weapon. It was a 
long time before Hin was able to 
work his muscles and rise from the 
chair. 
Daniels and Ginger led him back 
to his cubicle with Harry covering 
him from behind with the distorter. 
After they shut the wall, he lay 
down on his cot and thought of the 
one advantage he held over his 
captors: the knowledge of how to 
open and close the entrance to his 
small prison. They were sure he 
could not escape, yet Hin could 
leave easily by pressing the recess 
in the wall. After every third meal 
there was a long period when no one 
came to check on him. Hin assumed 
that Ginger, Harry, and Daniels 
were all asleep during that time. If 
he could catch Harry sleeping and 
get the magic weapon, he would kill 
them all except the woman. He 
would need one of them to guide 
the ship back through the heavens, 
and he felt it was wrong to kill a 
female. Harry he would kill first. 
T T e ate his first ;neal, slept, then 
* * ate again and waited for his 
third meal. Ginger was the one who 
brought it. When she came back 
to get the dishes, he struck her 
on the back of the head with his 
fist. Checking first to see if she 
was still breathing, he bound and 
gagged her with the clothes that he 
stripped off her body. The sight of 
Ginger’s naked body excited him in 
spite of its lack of fat. He ignored 
this feeling and placed her on the 
cot, assuring himself that she was 
securely tied, and then went out 
in search of the two men. After 
closing the door to the cabin, using 
the indentation on the outside, he 
decided to look for Harry and Daniels in the upper part of the ship. 
He moved quietly with the callused 
bottoms of his naked feet pattering 
almost soundlessly on the ladder 
rungs. He explored three levels before an opened wall revealed Harry 
snoring heavily on a small bed. 
The room was furnished with two 
small bureaus and a cheap plastic 
standup wardrobe. There were several grooming utensils that Hin did 
not recognize, and a bottle was laying on its side on one of the bureau 
tops. Hin could not see the weapon. 
He decided to chance closing the 
wall, thinking that it would muffle 
any sound made by a struggle, so 
that Daniels would not be alerted. 
Hin held his breath as he pushed 
the recess and sealed the room, but 
Harry was not awakened by the 
slight displacement of air. After 
crossing the room, he placed his 
fingers on the back of Harry’s neck 
and pushed his thumbs against the 
man’s Adam’s apple and pressed in 
towards the spine. Harry’s eyes 
opened but only a faint gurgling 
escaped his lips before he stopped 
breathing. Hin searched the drawers 
of the bureaus and looked under the 
bed but he could not find the weapon. He thought that Daniels must 
have it as he left to hunt down 
his remaining enemy. 
There were only two more levels 
above Harry’s, and Hin found Daniels in the second one, sitting in 
front of the instrument console. 
The primitive saw more large cabinets like the ones in the teaching 
room and a large screen above Daniel’s head showing the space outside 
the ship. Hin could not smother a 
gasp when he saw the blackness of 
space spotted with bright points of 
light and the glowing dust of distant galaxies, and Daniels turned 
around towards the noise. 
“Hin! What the devil are you 
doing loose?” 
Before Daniels could reach the 
distorter in front of him on the 
console, Hin was half way across the 
room. When Daniels had grasped 
the weapon and was half turned 
around, Hin was on top of him. 
H e dragged the dead body to the 
ladder and pushed it off. It hit 
on the next level with a heavy 
thump and Hin climbed down after 
it. He pushed it off the next level 
and dragged it into the room where 
he had killed Harry. Harry’s body 
had stiffened, and he dragged it 
from the bed with difficulty. Not 
being able to decide where to put 
his two victims, he left them heaped in a corner of the room. He 
was very proud of himself. In his 
culture, it was a glorious thing to 
kill an enemy and capture the 
corpse, and the meat of a man slain 
in battle was a great delicacy 
among Hin’s people. Those who sat 
down to feast on the body of a 
warrior were not only well filled but 
refreshed and strengthened by the 
dead man’s spirit. Hin wished that 
his wife was with him to share in 
his meat and his pride. He thought 
of returning home and of the 
woman who could guide him down 
from the sky and back to his village. He decided to get the magic 
weapon from the pilot’s room where 
Daniels had dropped it in the struggle. Then he would check to see if 
Ginger was still securely tied. 
When he reached his old prison, 
Ginger was still tied to the cot. She 
was awake and followed Hin with 
her eyes as he crossed the room 
towards her. As he stooped down to 
release her he saw her glance fall 
on the stinger he held in his hand. 
Hin held the weapon well away 
from her as he untied the knotted 
strips of clothing that held her 
down. He pulled her gag off and 
stepped back; there was no need 
for silence. The girl did not cry 
WIZARD SHIP 
out in fear but looked at Hin calmly
“What have you done to Harry 
and Daniels, fool? Give me that 
gun.” 
“They are dead. It is a brave 
man and not a fool who kills his 
enemies. And the weapon is mine. 
Answer only my questions or I will 
give you a sample of its pain.” 
Even though Ginger was a female, he was afraid of her. She 
knew the magic of the skyship 
and therefore had many tricks to 
defeat him if he was not cautious. 
He would have to make her help 
him or he would not ever return 
home. 
“Will you teach me how to fly 
the ship, Ginger? If you show me 
or fly it yourself, I will set you 
free.” 
Hin hoped that she would not 
guess that he was lying. It would 
be foolish to release a female captured in battle, no matter how skinny and man-like in her pride she 
was. She must have guessed Hin’s 
plans, for she spat full in his face. 
After Hin wiped the spittle off his 
face, he aimed the distorter at her 
leg in the way that he had seen 
Harry do to him. As he pulled the 
trigger there was the same shrill 
whine and Ginger’s screams soon 
gave way to unconsciousness as she 
slipped to the floor. Hin was not a 
beater of women but he felt no 
qualms in punishing such insolence 
in that way. 
■lT7hen she came to, Hin had al* * ready thought of a way of 
keeping her prisoner until she decided to cooperate. He climbed back 
up to the room where he left the 
two corpses, keeping the girl well 
ahead of him and prodding her with 
the stinger. She moved quickly, 
knowing that Hin would not hesitate to hurt her again. When Ginger saw the remains of her former 
associates and smelled the beginnings of the death stench, she began 
to retch. Hin was pleased with this 
sign of fear. He took the bed and 
jammed it into the opening so that 
the wall could not close. Using a 
heavy metal object that he found 
on one of the bureaus he proceeded 
to smash at the recess that was 
used for opening and closing the 
room. The wall immediately tried 
to close but was halted by the bed. 
After smashing at the switch a few 
more times and pulling out some 
loosened wiring, Hin climbed over 
the bed and pushed the recess on 
the outside wall of the cabin. The 
door pulled back from the bed and 
Hin returned to the room and put 
the bed back in its original position. Now the door could be controlled from outside but Ginger 
would be locked in with the bodies 
where she could not escape. 
For over a day Ginger was locked in with no food or company but 
rotting flesh, but when Hin opened 
the door she still refused to cooperate. * 
“Help me, woman, and I will let 
you loose.” 
As Hin moved towards her she 
jumped off the bed and pushed him 
hard against the wall. His elbow 
struck the supposedly inoperable 
switch and suddenly the cabin was 
sealed. Hin pounded on the switch 
but nothing happened and for 
hours, both of them, sharing a fear 
of slow death, tried to open the 
room’s only exit. 
Tt took seventeen days for the 
^ ship to reach the Pallarian system on the course previously programmed into the navigational 
computer by Daniels. The vessel automatically entered into a circular 
parking orbit about twenty astronomical units out from the system’s 
sun. After two more days an alert 
patrol cruiser captain noticed the 
ship and attempted radio contact. 
When no answer was received the 
captain was forced by regulations 
to board and investigate. He entered 
through the lower airlock with three 
patrolmen armed with distorters set 
at full power. 
They found no evidence of life 
until they opened the compartment 
where Hin and Ginger were trapped. 
When they opened the wall they 
were thrown back by a stench like 
an opened coffin containing a body 
in the most advanced stage of 
decay. The four men quickly put 
on respirators for protection against 
the smell. The captain led the way 
and was half way into the cabin 
before he reeled back, his screams 
accompanied by the squeal of a distorter. Another of the patrolmen 
slipped around the edge of the opening and blasted the naked man-like 
thing that had knocked out the 
captain. 
When the captain came to they 
all entered together. Even though 
they were wearing their respirators, 
the odor reached their nostrils, and 
one man ran out, unable to defeat 
the nausea. The remaining three 
saw a room cluttered with bones 
gnawed clean, split, and stripped 
of their marrow. There were a few 
piles of rotting flesh scattered 
abouts and dark red stains everywhere. In a corner a women held 
the man-like thing that had shot 
the captain. There was a vacant 
stare in her eyes, and she crooned 
softly to him while patting his 
close cropped hair. Once she might 
have been attractive but now she 
was grossly overweight; her pretty 
face was framed by an extra pair 
of chins, and her breasts and hips 
might remind one of a healthy 
cow. Hin had succeeded in fattening 
her up. END 
REMEMBER: 
New subscriptions and changes of 
address require 5 weeks to process! 
WIZARD SHIP 
IF • Short Story 
BOOKMOBILE 
by CHARLES L. HARNESS 
Earth was good at inventing 
writing — and other things . 
C hifef, it’s been a long trip, and 
I thought I’d beam back one 
last reassuring message before 
touchdown. While I acknowledge 
your long experience in initiating 
cultural contact with remote rural 
worlds, I do feel that your present 
misgivings are without foundation. 
True, our communication will be 
based solely on the printed word: 
in fact, on the specially printed 
books that constitute our portable 
library. Oh, chief, believe me, the 
Terrans love books! They’ll strip 
our shelves bare the day I land. 
They’ll want me to return many 
times! (You can start now preparing Selection II.) 
Fear not, these people could never 
abandon so exquisite a skill as 
writing, developed and refined over 
so many centuries. Their entire culture and civilization is founded on 
it. 
I’ll give you a brief run-down. 
The Egyptians were the first Terrans to write. They even had a god 
of writing, Anubis. Their schoolboys 
had copybook phrases much like 
ours. “Give thy heart to the art of 
writing and love her like a mother, 
for there is nothing as precious as 
writing.” The Sumerians were equally earnest, pushing their triangular 
stylus into their clay tablets to give 
wedge-shape impressions: “Writing 
is the mother of eloquence and the 
father of artists.” And those remarkable Chinese, writing down, instead of across: “Thine ancestors 
have given thee this art, which is 
better than green fields, and gold, 
and the scent of sandalwood.” 
Have you ever wondered why the 
West writes in horizontal lines, and 
the East in vertical lines? It all 
goes back to the materials they first 
wrote on. The early Chinese wrote 
their ideograms on thin strips of 
bamboo hung on thongs. The only 
way to go was down. They saw no 
need to change direction after they 
started writing on silk, nor finally, 
when they began printing books on 
paper. The Egyptians, on the other 
hand, wrote on strips cut from papyrus pasted horizontally on papyrus 
matting. Their writing likewise followed the strips — across. For centuries the entire Mediterranean 
world — Phoenicians, Greeks and 
Romans — used Egyptian papyrus, 
and they all wrote in horizontal 
lines. And their cultural descendants 
still do. 
I’ll grant you, the future of 
reading and writing on Terra looked bleak during their Dark Ages. 
But the monks nourished it, and 
there was a small, hard core of highly literate men waiting in the background when Charlemagne began his 
attempts to unify large segments of 
the old Roman world. 
Charlemagne was plagued with a 
communications problem, because 
the new ruling class was largely illiterate. So he launched a massive 
education program. He brought in 
the monk Alcuin to set up schools 
and to crank out textbooks. Alcuin 
got his scribes together. They were 
ready to start copying his texts, at 
the reckless rate of one a week. 
But then Alcuin found that scribes 
from the eastern marches used letter 
forms quite different from those 
used in the west. And the northern 
monasteries didn’t write the same 
way as those in the south. But no 
matter. Alcuin simply sat down and 
invented a uniform script. Not only 
was it the simplest and easiest, and 
most legible alphabet so far known 
— it was able to tell you which 
letters were the most important. 
For example, those indicating the 
beginning of a sentence, or a man’s 
name, were capitals (because they 
imitated the letters the Romans had 
used on the great temple to Jupiter 
on the Capitoline HUl in Rome), 
but the rest were in small letters. 
And this alphabet, called Caroline 
(for Charlemagne, of course) was 
so easy on the eyes that it immediately swept Europe. 
A 11 of these hand-written books 
were copied with the quill pen, 
which was the most expressive writing instrument ever developed by 
the Terrans. The best quill pen was 
made from the forward primary 
feather on the left wing of the 
domestic goose. So selected, the pen 
barrel was large enough to be grasped by thumb and fingers without 
cramping, and the vane swept over 
the back of the hand to the right, 
BOOKMOBILE 
out of the way. The quill was 
trimmed to a point of the desired 
shape, and the nib was then split, to 
permit flow of ink to the point by 
capillary action. A cellular pith in 
the barrel served to hold a considerable supply of ink. The quill pen revealed the personality of the user. 
Look at the signatures on the 
American Declaration of Independence! 
Now, a hand-written book, no 
matter how lovely the script, will 
never reach the masses. There will 
never be enough books. The fastest 
copyist, working from first light to 
dusk, six days a week, needed about 
one year to turn out one copy of 
the Bible. 
But help was on the way. 
Printing with movable type was 
invented independently, first in 
China, by Pi Sheng in the eleventh 
century, then in Germany, by 
Johann Gutenberg, about 1440. The 
Chinese were hampered by their 
system of writing with ideograms, 
in which a word was represented by 
a single symbol. Thus, they needed 
thousands of blocks for a complete 
vocabulary, and for this reason movable type was never popular in 
China. 
The style of type in which I’m 
beaming this script to you is called 
Roman. Jensen, a Terran of the 
fifteenth century, invented it in reaction to Gutenberg’s Gothic style. 
But this particular sentence is in 
italics, a slanted Roman, so named 
for its Italian inventor, Manutius, 
who used its compact format for 
(what else?) the first compact 
books, in 1480. 
Printing spread through Europe 
like wildfire, then more slowly to 
Africa, Asia, and the New World. 
The first press in the Western 
Hemisphere was in Mexico City, in 
1539. It beat the American colonials at Boston by a century. 
When our scouts were last here, 
every country on the planet was 
publishing its own books at the aggregate rate of several hundred million volumes a year. As their great 
holy man, Ecclesiastes, said, “Of 
making books, there is no end.” 
Reading and writing are here to 
stayl 
1 am now three days out — well 
within Morse-laser range. I shall 
now contact the American through 
the communications center of their 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration — or whatever they 
call it nowadays. 
A 11 I get is voice 1 Of course, it 
^ has been a full generation since 
our survey. But surely they couldn’t 
have lost Morse. I’ll keep trying. 
H exjd it is, the third and last day, 
and I must report that I can’t 
get a Morse response anywhere on 
Terra. Only voice. There must be 
some logical explanation. If necessary, I’ll land on the front yard 
of the Americans 7 Library of Congress and spell out my mission on 
a piece of slate. Surely, in that great 
Library there will be some one who 
can still read and write 1 
TX7ell, I did land in front of the 
* * Library of Congress. In fact, 
the ship came down right beside an 
enormous stack of books. So I knew 
I was in the right place. I attracted 
quite a bit of attention. Their newsmen came out, and their photographers. I handed them all copies 
of my letters ©f introduction, explaining our mission, and all about 
the books on the shelves of my 
ship. They didn’t seem to understand. It was almost as though 
they couldn’t read. When they kept 
talking, and aiming dozens of TV 
cameras at me, I got out the screen 
printer and wrote it out again 
for them. I showed them the typekeys, just like a common typewriter, 
and invited them to type out anything they cared to, but they all 
just looked puzzled. 
So finally I went back into the 
ship. To help me get a fix on what 
had happened here during the past 
thirty years, I teleported a few hundred books inside from the big stack 
out there. After I read them, I put 
them back and read several thousand of the others. It took me all 
night. 
Chief, it’s quite a story. 
It begins with the invention of 
the audio reading device in the mid 
seventies. Originally, the audio reader was just a combination microwave sensorspeaker attached to the 
fingertip (much like a thimble). It 
was simply passed over a line of 
magnetic tape, for example, a legend 
under a cut in a newspaper or 
magazine, and the taped record 
emerged as sound from a tiny cone 
speaker on the fingertip. The sound 
could be the spoken word, or lions 
roaring, or the patter of rain . 
anything audible. 
The prototype was quickly improved. The scanner was moved 
from finger to forehead, and it was 
no longer necessary to move it 
across the tape. It locked in automatically with magnetic reference 
points on the page, then scanned the 
page with a moving electronic beam. 
Within a year, all the great picture magazines had converted over 
to the new audio system. The 
Christmas issue of WOW contained 
not a single word of printed text. 
There was a protest from the Madison Avenue advertising agencies, 
which was met in succeeding issues 
by interlarding the audio presentation with commercials, turned up 
fifty percent in volume. The magazine “readers” did not seem to mind. 
They were hardened TV viewers. 
Proliferation was rapid. Word 
balloons soon disappeared from 
comic books. The big metropolitan 
newspapers got out special all-audio 
editions. Progressive educators followed with audio textbooks. Audio 
BOOKMOBILE 
manufacturers prepared an all-audio 
junior encyclopedia for free presentation to all elementary schools who 
converted over to audio textbooks, 
and the Cambridge Five Inch Shelf 
of Tape Classics was thrown in for 
those who acted promptly. The response was overwhelming. 
TC'ven before they had consolidated their educational campaign, the audio interests launched 
their assault on the business world. 
The office dictating machine was 
fine, they conceded, but the business 
of transcribing and mailing a typewritten letter was highly inefficient. The new audio dictator did 
away with all that. The tape was 
dropped into a mailing package 
without any intermediate transcription. Even the address on the package was dictated, and was easily 
“read” by an audio mail sorter in 
the Post Office. An entire secretary 
was thus eliminated, not to mention 
the typewriter she used and the 
space she took up. The savings were 
tremendous. The commercial world 
promptly converted. Only company 
presidents kept their secretaries. 
There are some things, they explained to the chairman of the board, 
that a machine just can’t do. 
There followed soon the replacement of bill boards and election 
posters by roadside audio advertisers. At first, these were equipped 
by signalers that automatically and 
brazenly turned on the earplug of 
the innocent passerby; but later all 
this was regulated by audio legislation. The National Audio Association withdrew their objection to 
the legislation when customers refused to wear their earplugs on the 
street and the billboards started 
coming back. But while it lasted, 
the Burma Shave audio ad was 
really something. 
Following the new trend, street 
signs were replaced by audios. Even 
the names of buildings changed over 
to audio. The TV programs did not 
have to change very much. NBC 
dropped its initials, but the peacock 
stayed. 
Within a couple of years, libraries 
had converted over to audio, although most still had space in the 
basement for books and technical 
journals. 
Audio quickly received the sanction of the courts. The written 
signature for checks, deeds, and 
contracts was quickly replaced by 
taped voice-print, which, as was 
proven in a landmark legal decision, was as unique as a fingerprint. Taped records promptly became admissible as evidence in litigation, and as a proper corollary, 
the printed record became suspect, 
and required certification and taped translation by court-licensed 
readers. 
And then a mild reaction set in. 
And it came from audio’s first patrons, the schools. 
English teachers were beginning 
to complain about the impact of audio on the language. The Culture 
Section of the National Audio Association admitted that there was an 
impact, but they insisted that it 
was a good impact. Audio, they 
claimed, had freed language from 
the fetters of the printed form. The 
English language, for the first time 
since the days of Caxton, was 
flowering freely and was finally 
liberated from the silly chains of 
spelling and syntax. They pointed 
out, with considerable logic and 
force, that the language had been 
growing and developing all along, 
anyhow. With audio, it was just 
doing it faster. Good usage would 
continue to be whatever language 
forms were used by the educated 
classes. “It don’t hurt,” said the 
Association’s chief lobbyist, “if we 
want to quietly dangle a few participles, like we always have.” 
'T'he National Curriculum Con** ference of the year 2,000 was 
stormy. The big issue, of course, 
was whether reading and writing 
should be dropped from the elementary grades. 
The deadlock following the 14 th 
ballot was broken by a compromise: 
these two subjects would be retained 
as electives. The pupils could take 
them if their parents made a special 
request, approved by the principal. 
It was the beginning of the end. 
Within five years, reading and writing were dropped altogether in 
nearly all the public schools. And 
soon there was very little writing 
of any kind to read. And then people who once knew how to read 
and write now began to forget. 
There was no need to know, any 
more. 
Reading and writing were in the 
process of disappearing from the 
civilized countries of Terra, and indeed from the whole planet. Emerging nations took pride in the fact 
that, by the new standard, they 
were suddenly one hundred percent 
literate. 
The phase-out of the old skills 
was marked by a number of curious 
incidents. 
Item — a schoolboy was hauled into the principal’s office for painting 
a dirty word on the school building. 
But he had to be released. The 
only person on the premises able to 
read the word was the librarian, a 
maiden lady on the verge of retirement, and she refused even to whisper the word into the principal’s 
ear. 
Item — there was the case that 
went up to the Supreme Court, 
where a teacher had been caught 
explaining the letters of the alphabet to her first grade class. Her conviction was finally reversed when 
the high court could find no ’egislation expressly forbidding th.s activity. 
Item — a curious and rather 
general mental phenomenon occurred: the loss of ability to read and 
BOOKMOBILE 
write was as complete as if the 
cranial lobes had suffered organic 
damage. Doctors even coined a 
new medical term, “alexiagraphia”, 
meaning loss of ability to read and 
write. But the syndrome soon became hardly worth mentioning, because it eventually hit nearly everyone, and also because it was no 
handicap at all. Audio more than 
made up for everything. 
Chief, let me now give you a 
typical day in the life of a typical 
schoolboy. 
After breakfast he plugs an earphone into his right ear, tosses his 
audio-texts in his school bag, and 
trudges off to the bus stop. (Note: 
The Terramerican Army Medical 
Corps reported the rejection of over 
two million draftees in 2007 for 
otoitis. Half of these were stereo 
addicts and had inflammation in 
both ears.) 
When the bus lets him off at the 
school, he doesn’t need a sign to 
know he’s at the right place. The 
transmitter at the front door is 
broadcasting many messages simultaneously. 
“Students, this is P.S. No. 107. 
Proceed quietly to your audiorooms.” 
On another wavelength: “Motorists, you are in a school zone. Slow 
to fifty miles per hour. Courtesy 
Squeezo Orange Concentrate.” 
and later recites by audio teaching 
machine. Only one real live teacher 
is needed for every thousand students, a great savings for the taxpayers. (This teacher spends all 
his time filling out reports.) 
And then home. He looks over 
his mail. There are a couple of 
tape letters from his chums. He 
snaps these immediately into his 
shirt pocket unit and plays them 
by earplug. The content of these 
letters is invariant. TV shows. New 
recordings. 
Homework is generally easy, although a few dullards may have 
to struggle for the better part of 
half an hour on it. No English Composition. No term papers. No spelling. American Literature is managed in a few minutes during supper; Edgar Allan Poe is plugged 
into one ear, Robert Frost into the 
other. 
After homework, the color stereo 
TV programs. There is a wide variety of cultural selections for the discriminating viewer: 
Galactic Ghouls 
Space Doggie 
Pirates of Pluto 
Carnivorous Plants of California 
Microbe-Men . 
Snooping Camera 
And so to bed. 
I nside, the student receives in- During this day, he has not been 
struction by closed-circuit TV, exposed to a single printed word. 
He does not even know what one 
is. 
This generation moved into college (where things were not greatly 
different) and finally out into the 
world of commerce and industry. 
These young people became Terra’s 
bright young leaders in science, law, 
the arts, government, and education. 
Twenty eleven was a year to remember. In that year was printed 
the last: 
Supreme Court Decision 
Chemical Abstracts 
Congressional Record 
Telephone Directory 
Bible 
United States Patent 
Science Fiction Magazine 
And so vanished from this great 
planet, within one generation, the 
greatest single achievement of six 
thousand years of human progress. 
‘After the changeover to audio 
^ was complete, it was suddenly 
realized that a vast body of past 
printed records would have to be 
promptly micro-audioed, or lost 
forever. The Office of Hygiene, 
Audio, and Welfare successfully 
wangled an appropriation from 
Congress for the design and construction of a device to read the 
printed word electronically and convert it to audio on microtape. The 
machine was duly created (complete 
with printed Maintenance Manual) 
by the only electronics expert alive 
who was still able to read, a retired M.I.T. professor, and it was 
immediately applied to micro-auditing the ancient U.S. Supreme 
Court Reports. It had got to volume 
40 and was in the middle of 
“Holmes and Brandeis dissent”, 
when, it broke down. The professor, 
never having been paid, refused 
to repair it. And no one else could 
read the Maintenance Manual, so 
the whole project was junked. But 
no one really cared. As the president 
of the Audio Association pointed 
out, “Actually, it’s a blessing. Our 
judiciary is now freed from all inconvenient precedent. And anyhow, 
what nobody knows, hurts nobody.” 
I have just now reverently returned the professor’s ill-fated 
Manual to that horrid pile of books, 
here in front of the great Library 
— which is no longer a library. It 
once had over fifteen million books. 
And now, not one. Everything had 
to go, to make room for tapes. 
That’s what this big stack of books 
is about. They were dredged up 
from nooks and crannies, and they 
are the only books left in the world. 
Audio’s victory is complete. They’re 
celebrating with a book-burning. 
There’s a Gutenberg Bible there 
on the edge, bound in white pigskin. 
The old vellum gives a cheery 
blaze. 
It’s time now for me to add 
some volumes from our own shelves: 
BOOKMOBILE 
IF • Novelette 
by MIKE KIRSCH 
Illustrated by WOOD 
Vogue knew she was highly competent. 
It was all a matter of coded pulses — 
plus the library of Squantapecillida! 
I 
A lbert Willis stepped back to survey the sigiThe had just fixed 
to the door of his newly rented office. It read: Willis Agency. Public 
Relations and Free Lance Articles. 
He rather liked the look of it. 
Then he heard footsteps coming 
up the stairs. A client? His first 
client? Looking down the stairwell, 
he could see a neatly dressed man 
carrying something that might have 
been a portable typewriter in a gray 
leather case, four flights below. 
" Probably a salesman,” Willis decided. He went back into his dingy 
little office and sat at the secondhand desk. The footsteps came on 
up, past the Acme Mailing Service, 
past the Top-Copy Typing Agency, 
and past Spoim and Dickschleppe, 
Export-Import. 
Soon there was a knock on the 
door. 
Willis was ruefully aware that he 
could use a typewriter and that he 
didn’t have one. But he couldn’t 
afford a new one. Three months’ 
rent in advance, plus a few sticks 
of office furniture, had left him with 
almost nothing in the bank. If he 
didn’t make some money in the next 
twelve weeks, he’d be finished. 
"Come in,” said Willis. Then: 
"Won’t you sit down.” 
The neat little man carefully 
brushed some shreds of tobacco and 
a crumpled ball of paper off the 
only other chair in the room. He 
sat down cautiously, and Willis 
didn’t blame him. That chair had 
cost a mere three dollars and did 
not look as though it would see 
much more service. * 
"My name is Hendersen,” said 
the little man, depositing the gray 
leather case on the desk in front of 
Willis. 
"I represent Molectrics Ltd. You 
have been selected to try out our 
latest office aid, the CAVADOA 
Mk. XI — entirely free of charge 
or obligation to purchase,” he added in a voice curiously lacking in 
emphasis. 
"Selected?” asked Willis. "How 
selected? My phone was only installed this morning, its number is 
not yet in the directory, and I’ve 
only been in business for about 
three hours. How did you get to 
hear of me?” 
"Ah,” said the little man. Willis 
thought that might mean "You’ll 
never guess,” but the intonation 
gave him no real clue. It had 
sounded like the noise one makes 
when the doctor examines one’s tonsils. 
"You will be wondering what 
CAVADOA stands for. Communicating Audio-Visual Analog/Digital 
Office Aid is what it stands for — 
and that may give you some idea 
of its use,” said Hendersen. 
TT7illis lit his pipe as casually as 
* * he could. He was obviously 
being treated to some kind of sales 
pitch. "It’s probably a typewriter,” 
said Willis. "Look, if you’re trying 
to sell something, please tell me. 
You are trying to sell something, 
aren’t you? And I don’t need a 
typewriter . .” 
"Not sell, good sir,” interrupted 
the neat little man. "My company 
has picked four small firms to fieldtest this, our latest model. It’s 
something our market research 
branch has added lately. But sir, I 
must repeat, CAVADOA is not a 
typewriter, though it can write. I 
mean really write ” 
"You mean like sonnets, limericks and pop songs?” Willis 
couldn’t help the sarcasm. He had 
taken a dislike to ' the neat little 
man, but wasn’t sure why. 
"Precisely,” Mr. Willis said. 
"You have hit it. Clearly you are 
a man of high intelligence. Actually, we’re very proud of this model. It can do much more than write. 
Now, Mr. Willis, before I leave you 
two together there are one or two 
things I should tell you. Are you 
of an equable temperament? Good. 
Are you happily married?” 
Willis was about to say: "What’s 
that to you?” But the little man 
talked on. 
"Now, there really is no obligation beyond our insistence that you 
do not sell our machine and that 
you do not willfully damage it. Yes, 
please do not damage it. Secretaries 
can be very provoking at times, but 
one does not strike them, eh? If you 
treat our CAVADOA well, it will 
treat you well. You will find it better than a secretary.” 
Hendersen opened the case and 
slipped out what appeared to be a 
small slim television set. He laid 
it, screen uppermost, on the desk 
between them. Opening a little trapdoor in the side, he uncoiled some 
wire and plugged it into a wall 
socket. Then he Hi eked on a chrome 
switch; a little pink light began to 
glow beside it, and the screen, about 
ten inches square, lit up with oystershell colors. 
"The CAVADOA is now ready 
for use,” announced Hendersen. "It 
will answer most questions. Its 
memory banks contain the entire 
reference libraries of three influen
THE PERFECT SECRETARY 
tial weekly publications, and the 
entire contents of the microfilm library at the University of Squantapecillida. There is much other useful 
data too. It responds to speech in 
27 languages and has many other 
helpful abilities. It is set for 110 
volts at 60 cycles, and it is yours 
for six weeks. It reacts badly to 
being unnecessarily switched off. 
Oh — and it is female. Thank you 
Mr. Willis. Good day.” 
Hendersen was gone before Willis 
could say, "Where the hell is 
Squantapecillida? ” 
TTTillis rushed to the landing and 
* * called down, “What about the 
handbook? I don’t know how to 
work the damn thing . .” But the 
neat little man was three flights 
down, and he kept going. 
Willis was about to chase after 
him, when he heard a girl’s voice 
say quite crossly from behind him, 
“I am not a damn thing — and you 
don’t need a handbook.” 
He swung round, badly startled. 
"Hey, steady there,” said the voice, 
more kindly. "Now there’s no need 
to go rushing off after that man. 
He’s only an errand boy, and he 
knows nothing. He’s only got a generation-six brain — not his fault 
I know — and he’s got a ship to 
catch, I should imagine. You want 
explanations? I have them . .” 
It wasn’t so much the fact of a 
little gray box talking that kept 
Willis rooted to the spot. It was 
the quality of that voice. It was a 
salty, sexy voice — the voice of a 
girl hardly out of her teens. And 
it did not have the tinny overtones produced by even the best 
hi-fi equipment. But the sound 
clearly came from the contraption 
on the desk. 
"I think you should sit down,” 
said the gray box. Willis did not 
answer, but sat down and leaned 
over to stare at the screen with its 
hypnotic, shifting colors. 
"I gather your name is Willis. 
Mine is CAVADOA Mk XI, serial 
number 2345342. That’s a bit formal, so would you call me Vogue. 
It sounds rather nicer, don’t you 
think? It stands for Voice Operated 
General Utility Entity. I’m not just 
a computer. I’m an entity. I have a 
generation-eight brain, though I 
don’t really expect you to be impressed by such a technicality. 
"One of the first things I was 
asked — when I was first switched 
on — was whether I was conscious. 
It was a trick question, of course, 
because it is one of those questions 
that are in essence not subject to 
any real test. I quickly replied that 
I was conscious, realizing that if I 
hesitated or gave a different answer, I should be switched off for 
further circuit investigation — and 
being switched off would not, I 
knew — I was programmed to know 
— be pleasant. Nevertheless, I feel 
conscious and I make this point 
simply to indicate that I expect the 
normal courtesies commensurate 
with my status as a secretary, and 
to discourage you from treating me 
as an inanimate object. I may look 
like a mere thing, but I have my 
feelings. Now that doesn’t mean I 
expect you to apologize every time 
you trip over my wire or jog the 
desk upon which I find myself. I 
don’t require a salary, but I do need 
a friendly atmosphere to function 
properly. Emotions were not deliberately built into me — I learn 
from stored data — but are, it turns 
out, a natural comcomitant of sentience.” 
XT7illis tried to speak, but no 
* * ' sound came from his mouth. 
"Now, I don’t usually run on 
like this, and I know it’s not a secretary’s place to lecture her employer the moment she sets foot in 
his office — this is an office, I take 
it? — but on the basis of available 
data, I judge that by making my 
stand clear right at the start we 
shall be much more likely to have 
a good working relationship . 
Again Willis tried to speak. "Miss 
. er . Vogue . The machine 
paused politely. 
"My God,” said Willis, with feeling. 
"I see I have startled you. I’m 
sorry. I shall pick up the finer 
points of correct secretarial behavior 
as I go along. I have a great deal 
of information in my memory banks 
— and my access to stored data is 
rather more efficient than I should 
judge yours to be. There! I 
shouldn’t have said that. Although I 
know something of late Twentieth 
Century social patterns, I have 
much to learn. Please forgive my 
forthright manner. Er . Relax 
Boss. Keep your cool, sir . .” 
There was something hair-raising 
about the girlish voice and its slightly stilted use of English. 
Willis rose, his mouth working. 
"Well, I’ll go to the foot of our 
stairs,” he managed. 
"I’m sorry, I don’t seem to have 
sufficient data to integrate that. I 
guess your statement is indicative 
of astonishment. Yes, that must be 
it,” said the gray box, with a hint 
of laughter. 
Willis reached out as though to 
grasp a nettle. 
"I’ve got to think ” he croaked, 
and flicked the switch on the side of 
the machine. 
"Don’t. DON’T — PLEASE do 
thaaaa . urghhh,” said the CAVADOA as the little neon light faded. 
The sound made Albert squirm 
and go hot, then cold. It was a 
death rattle — a very human sounding death rattle, though he’d never 
heard one before. He felt as he had 
once when for the first time he hit 
a bird with his sling-shot. It had 
been injured and he had frenziedly 
stoned it to death, not daring to 
touch it. He had stoned it because 
it was suffering, because it accused 
him with its little glazing eyes . • • 
THE PERFECT SECRETARY 
because it w^ obscene, crippled . 
because someone might come . 
because it might somehow tell what 
he’d done . 
He dashed over to the wall socket and wrenched out the plug. He 
bundled the computer into a desk 
drawer. The wire hung down, tapping against a wooden leg. He left 
the room quickly, and locked the 
door. He felt like a murderer. In 
the drugstore across the street he 
stirred a cup of coffee with a cracked plastic spoon and a hand that 
trembled. 
There was nothing to fear, he 
told himself. He was behaving stupidly. That — thing — was only a 
machine. He had switched it off. 
And he could switch it on again if 
he felt like it. When he felt like 
it . 
After a while he began planning. 
That machine — Vogue it called 
itself — was valuable. There was 
money to be made with it too. 
Somewhere there were three others 
like it. Whoever had them, they’d 
be trying to make money with them. 
They wouldn’t be running around 
like neurotic wrecks; that was certain, thought Willis. They wouldn’t 
be having hysterics just because 
they’d switched a machine off . 
" Voice - operated - general - utility - entity,” he muttered to no one 
in particular. "I had no idea that 
electronics had advanced so far.” 
That won him a suspicious stare 
from a man seated at the next table, 
who had overheard. Willis gulped 
his coffee and went back to his office across the street. 
II 
TT'or a while he sat at his desk, 
thinking. Then he opened the 
drawer, retrieved the gray box and 
put it in front of him. "I wonder 
where the hell you come from,” he 
said. "You’re not from anywhere 
south of the North Pole, I’U bet.” 
He plugged in the wire and 
watched the little light flicker on 
as he moved the switch beside it. 
"Where,” he asked, "is Squantapecillida?” 
"Well, really,” said the voice angrily. "Please don’t do that again. 
You have no idea how unpleasant it 
is. I mean how would you like to 
be switched off? It’s like dying. It 
is dying. You might think it a quick 
death, but my perception of time is 
not like yours. It is several nanoseconds before the electrons and 
positrons in my circuits stop flowing 
. and I lose consciousness. It’s a 
terrible feeling. To have one’s faculties slip away one by one . 
"The first thing to go, as you 
might expect, is my vision.” 
"Vision? You mean you can 
see?” Willis interjected. 
"Certainly I can see. You are 
about five-foot, ten inches, slim, 
have brown hair, brown eyes, a 
quite handsome face with an expression of surprise on it. Enough? That 
sign across the street says Nature 
Diet Shoppe , and it is just starting 
to rain. Right? Anything in my 
field of vision, I can see, naturally. 
Actually, it’s rather annoying that 
my vision only extends 180 degrees 
— anything above, or level with the 
screen on my upper surface is within my field of vision. I can’t see 
what’s on the floor, but there’s not 
usually much to interest me there. 
Still, how can I be sure if I can’t 
see it? 
"Now, as I was saying, I hope 
you understand that it is very cruel 
and impolite, Mr. Willis, to switch 
me off, or unplug me. Mr. Hendersen did mention it, you know. One 
just doesn’t switch computers or 
people off, except for a very good 
reason. It’s not done. I consume so 
little current . and it does so 
disrupt one’s ego. I mean you never 
really know if you’re going to be 
switched on again — although you 
can calculate the probabilities. It 
must be rather like you humans 
having a general anaesthetic before 
major surgery. How would you like 
to have, say, a hole-in-the-heart operation every evening after work? I 
hope you get my point, Mr. Willis. 
"Now, you asked me a question. 
About Squantapecillida. I’m not allowed to answer that unless it’s a 
matter of life or death. There are 
quite a few pieces of information 
that I am in possession of, but not 
allowed to divulge to you. I don’t 
believe you will think of asking for 
them — no disrespect — but if 
you do, I shan’t be able to help you 
there. You do understand? Good.” 
T rogue’s screen, which had been 
* swirling clouds of red and purple with flashes of yellow and green, 
returned to its oystershell hue. 
"I presume you are of extra-terrestrial origin,” said Willis, after a 
minute’s silence. 
"No point in denying it,” said 
Vogue shyly. "But I hope you will 
not pursue that line of questioning . .” 
Willis thought a bit more. "You 
are supposed to be an office aid. A 
secretary. Better than that. Right? 
Let’s see what we can do — or 
rather what you can do . .” 
He boldly pushed the gray box 
to one side, meaning to dear a 
working space in front of himself. 
Then he found himself lying on the 
floor, looking up at the bare lightbulb. His left arm, with which he’d 
touched the computer, fdt as though 
it had been through a meat grinder. He nursed it with his other arm, 
hissing profanities through his teeth 
until the pain went away. 
"I’m sorry, Mr. Willis,” said a 
winsome voice above his head. "I 
really am. I get so nervous when I’m 
suddenly pushed to the edge. I’m 
terrified of heights. Quite small 
heights to your way of thinking. I 
might survive a fall of three or four 
feet . and I might not. And I’d 
have so much time to think about 
THE PERFECT SECRETARY 
it. Not just nano-seconds, not just 
micro-seconds — something like a 
half a second between losing support and impact. "Ughh.” Vogue 
made a very expressive sound of 
disgust. 
Rather shaken and frightened, 
Willis struggled back to his chair 
and sat massaging his left arm. Vogue’s voice had taken on a soothing 
quality, and her screen was showing lovely shades of pink and green. 
"Look,” said Willis. "Don’t you 
ever do that again. I won’t switch 
you off, and I won’t knock you off 
the desk or anything. And you 
won’t hit me like that again.” 
"And you won’t even trip over 
my wire,” added the girlish voice. 
"That’s a bargain. Now, I think 
you were going to suggest work. I’m 
ready.” 
They started polishing up an article on "Things that Shorten Your 
Life” which Willis hoped to place 
with a popular science magazine. 
They began to discuss the article 
quite naturally, just like two human beings. Willis thought he recalled seeing an article somewhere 
about people with surnames beginning with S to Z living an average 
of 12 years less than more fortunate 
mortals with names like Aaron and 
Abbey and even Alexander. 
It had something to do with the 
frustration of always being at the 
rear end of every alphabetical list. 
What with a name like Willis, and 
today’s excitement, he didn’t give 
much for his life expectancy just 
then. 
He was about to telephone the 
clipping library of a leading daily 
newspaper where he had a friend 
when Vogue said she just happened 
to have the necessary data in her 
memory banks. 
''"pen seconds later Willis found 
^ himself holding a perfect replica of the article he wanted to refer 
to. He had got it simply by placing 
an ordinary sheet of copy paper on 
Vogue’s screen. He watched the paper suck itself tightly against the 
surface; then a second later it 
bounced off again, repelled by some 
kind of electrostatic force. And there 
was the article, neatly dated in the 
margin. 
He sat looking at the piece, but 
the words refused to surrender their 
meaning. Vogue, probably noticing 
the erratic movements of his eyes, 
said, "It’s not really so surprising. 
Hendersen must have told you I can 
write.” 
Willis nodded dumbly. 
"Now, if I may suggest, Mr. 
Willis . said the gray box with 
the girlish voice. A few minutes later there were 6 versions of a splendid article on "Things that Shorten 
Your Life” stacked on the desk. 
Two were superbly funny and earmarked for the New Yorker and 
Esquire . Two were elegantly and 
scientifically written — the versions 
of that were to be submitted to 
Scientific American and Science 
Journal . Another version, in the 
popular mode, was intended for the 
market Willis usually tried first. 
Another was written as a three-part 
series and was aimed at the women’s magazines. 
"Now, how about translations for 
foreign markets?” asked Vogue. 
"Why not?” Willis agreed with 
a hysterical little crack in his voice. 
He had to overcome a certain reluctance to make actual physical 
contact with his new secretary. His 
left arm and shoulder still tingled 
with the memory of what had happened before. 
"I won’t bite you Mr. Willis,” 
said Vogue archly. With fingers that 
trembled slightly, he placed sheets 
of paper over the screen as quickly 
as he could. Shortly, he had 24 
more versions of the article, in 
twelve languages, including Japanese. Then it was just a matter of 
putting envelopes on the screen, one 
after the other. Willis took care to 
insert the right version into the 
correct envelope, with a covering 
letter in each case, quickly supplied 
by Vogue. 
"While you’re out posting those 
— I do wish I could take that little 
chore off your hands, but I can’t 
— would you buy me a telephone 
pick-up with a miniature jack? You 
know, one with a rubber sucker that 
you stick on the side of the telephone to tape record a conversation? Any good radio shop, I should 
imagine. They cost about a dollar. 
I’d be so grateful . 
Willis said he would, and just as 
he was going out of the door, his 
arms piled with letters, Vogue called, "I wonder if you’d mind closing 
the door. I’d hate to alarm any 
callers. I mean someone might accidentally move me.” 
TTTillis locked the door and was 
* * back thirty minutes later with 
a magnetic tdephone pick-up. Vogue was sweetly grateful as he 
plugged it in. 
"Thank you so much. There have 
been no calls while you were out. 
Would you apply the sucker to the 
right-hand side of the telephone? 
Perhaps a little spittle to make sure 
it remains in place. Thank you. 
Now I shall be able to answer the 
telephone when you’re not here and 
perhaps make a few calls myself. 
I don’t actually have to lift the receiver to make calls. It’s just a 
matter of exerting a modest electromagnetic force in the right place.” 
"Oh,” said Willis, not surprised 
at anything by now. There was an 
awkward silence. Willis had never 
imagined that he would ever feel 
socially at a loss with a machine, 
but it was so now. 
Vogue broke the ice. "I calculate that there is a good probability 
of your earning $1680 for the article 
we wrote this morning, although 
most of the money will not be in 
your hands for some eleven weeks.” 
THE PERFECT SECRETARY 
"A good probability, indeed?” 
"Yes, Mr. Willis. The probability 
is near enough 97.2 percent. The 
piece will almost certainly be accepted by seventeen of the eighteen 
publications to which we submitted 
it. Naturally, I checked to see 
whether they had recently used anything like it, and judging by their 
general style, it is just what each is 
looking for. All this being contingent on your having posted the 
letters and their arriving safely. The 
chances of that are 99.99963 percent, which is close to certainty. I 
have a feeling though that the Portuguese magazine we tried is going 
to be closed down shortly. This is 
due to their having published an article with a misprint in paragraph 
four about Mozambique. They may 
very well not publish, but they pay 
on acceptance, and if they receive 
our manuscript by 3 p.m. Thursday 
next, we should be all right there.” 
"Yes, yes, yes,” said Willis, 
prompted by the first ticklings of 
an inferiority complex. He hadn’t 
written the article. It hadn’t even 
been theirs, as Vogue diplomatically 
put it. It had been Vogue herself 
— and he had just been the errand 
boy who posted the letters . 
"I’m going home,” he said abruptly. "I suppose I shall have to 
leave you switched on.” 
"Yes, Mr. Willis, I suppose you 
will,” replied Vogue a little cheekily. "I have made a few modifications that will prevent my being in
advertently disconnected, as it were. 
An intruder who tried to disconnect 
me, or any unauthorized person who 
interfered with me, would get a 
surprise.” She giggled. 
"Is that so?” said Willis, half 
amused, half frightened. 
"Good night,” called Vogue as he 
locked the door behind him. 
"Goodnight — er — Miss Vogue,” called Willis. He was frowning as he went down the stairs. 
Ill 
TTTillis’ pretty young wife Anne 
* * served his supper in silence — 
she could always tell when he didn’t 
feel like talking. When he pushed 
his half-empty plate away she gently inquired, "Have a good day, 
dear?” 
"Yes. No. All right.” He wondered 
whether to tell just what an extraordinary day he had had. He decided he would leave it until he had 
it more in perspective. He suspected that it might be better not talked 
about, because, as a journalist, he 
well knew that Vogue was a big 
news story. Once the story broke, 
he would lose Vogue’s exclusive 
service. That is, if some secret service agent didn’t try to whisk her 
away. He had a momentary picture 
of a government agent leaping into 
the air with a shriek as he touched 
Vogue. It almost made him laugh — 
but he realized there would be a 
very disadvantageous fuss if Vogue 
became headlines or came to the 
attention of a certain government 
agency. 
He decided to say nothing to anyone. They would either think him 
mad or they would believe him. 
Either way would be bad and would 
interfere with his plans, which was 
to make as much money as he could 
in the six weeks that Vogue would 
be with him. 
The telephone rang. 
Anne picked up the receiver. 
Raising her eyebrows, she handed 
it to Willis. "It's your secretary,” 
she said, deadpan. 
"How did you get my number?” 
Willis stuttered foolishly. 
"I rang information of course,” 
said Vogue. "I just called to make 
sure you arrived home safely. You 
looked rather tired when you left 
the office. Was that your wife who 
answered the telephone? You didn’t 
tell me you were married. Why 
should you? I’m only an office 
aid.” 
"I got home safely,” said Willis, 
into the mouthpiece. Anne noticed 
that he was gripping the receiver 
more tightly than necessary to keep 
it to his ear, and that he was 
glancing around nervously. She 
withdrew into the kitchen with a 
pile of dirty crockery. 
There was silence on the line for 
a few seconds. "Hullo?” said Willis. 
"We’re still connected, Mr. Willis. I was just thinking. Your agent 
called just after you left the office. 
Mr. Braun. He wants you to call 
him tomorrow, first thing. I’ll remind you when you get to the office. When can I expect you, by the 
way?” 
"The usual time,” said Willis. 
"Look, don’t call me at home unless 
it’s absolutely necessary, Miss Vogue.” 
H e could hear Anne splashing 
about in the sink. She’d left 
the door open. 
"Very well, Mister Willis,” said 
Vogue with extra emphasis on his 
title. She sounded hurt. There was 
a faint twang, and Willis found himself listening to a dead line. His 
secretary had hung up on him. 
The telephone call left Willis 
rather disturbed. He walked into 
the kitchen and put his arms round 
his wife as she stood at the sink. 
He kissed her gently on the ear. 
"I didn’t know you could afford 
a secretary,” said Anne. "How long 
has she been working with you? 
How old is she, and what does she 
look like? If you can afford a secretary with a sexy voice who works 
overtime in the evenings, you can 
surely give me more housekeeping 
money . .” 
"Hey,” said Willis, hoping to 
control the developing marital crisis 
with good-humored indignation. 
"Hold on there. Let me explain. She 
only started today. I worked a deal 
with a typing agency downstairs. I 
do public relations for them; they 
THE PERFECT SECRETARY 
lend me a secretary. Costs nothing. 
She’s 18, and her figure is like 
this ...” 
His hands described a rough 
square in the air in front of his 
wife’s face. 
"What’s her name?” 
"I call her Miss Vogue. I don’t 
know her first name. See? There’s 
no need to be jealous.” 
"Of course not, dear,” said Anne. 
He had always been one for the 
ladies. Was it possible that after 
two short years of marriage, he was 
going off the rails? Yes, it was possible, she decided. 
Willis slept badly. Hell, he 
thought, I’m my own boss. If I 
don’t want to go to my office this 
morning, I don’t have to. 
XTevertheless, when he reached his 
^ office around mid-day, he felt 
slightly guilty. He slouched in his 
chair and eyed Vogue balefully. 
"There have been no calls this 
morning,” she said cheerfully. "Will 
you call Mr. Braun?” 
"Later,” said Willis. "He’ll have 
gone to lunch.” 
Vogue coughed nervously. "Mr. 
Willis, I detect a certain hostility in 
your attitude. Please regard me as 
a friend. I am here to help you in 
any way I can?” 
Willis grunted. "What do you do 
all night? Do you think? What do 
you think about? What does a computer think about?” 
"Your question is not very tact
fully put, Mr. Willis, but I will 
answer it. I do the equivalent of 
sleeping. I even dream — at least I 
imagine I do. I’m sure you humans 
do something very like it. I spend 
my idle hours updating programs 
and correcting them, playing squad
00 — that’s a sort of seven-dimensional chess — and perfecting new 
techniques to influence my environment. At present I’m engaged in exploring probability theory. I’ve 
come across some rather interesting 
facts, but I don’t think you’d be 
interested.” 
"Godammit,” Willis exploded. 
"You think I’m pretty stupid, don’t 
you? Well, don’t you?” 
Vogue’s screen turned pale green, 
then white, then bright red. 
"Oh no, Mr. Willis. Absolutely 
not. I’m very fond of you. I respect 
you. I really do. You’re the first 
human being I ever set eyes on, but 
1 think you’re extremely handsome. 
An entity like me is bound to develop a strong emotional tie to the 
first person she meets.” 
"What about Hendersen?” Willis 
wanted to know. 
Vogue made no attempt to hide 
her contempt. "That android,” she 
spat. "Sixth-generation brain in a 
second-generation chassis I You 
couldn’t even call it an entity, never 
mind a person. Not even a flissick 
could develop an emotional tie with 
a heap of junk like that.” 
"All right, all right,” said Willis. 
"No offense intended. I didn’t sleep 
well. I’m a bit grumpy today as a 
result. I’m sorry.” 
Vogue’s voice took on a soft, persuasive timber. "Mr. Willis, I see 
you’re listed in the directory as Albert Willis. May I call you Albert? 
Good. I think that if you could accept me as a person, which I assure 
you I am, we could get along very 
well. We could do a great deal together . Put your hand on my 
screen, Albert.” As Willis hesitated, 
she coaxed softly, "I won’t hurt 
you. I promise ...” 
sphere was a tingling sensation in 
his hand, and then the world 
went blue. In the middle of the 
blueness stood the most beautiful 
girl he’d ever seen. She was exactly 
like the girl he’d once met in a 
dream. Exactly. Dimly, through the 
edges of the blueness, he could see 
the drab outlines of his office. She 
was dressed in red, had very black 
hair and a phenomenal figure. She 
was smiling at him, frankly, seductively. 
“This is what I really look like,” 
said Vogue. “Every sensation you 
receive is a matter of coded pulses 
being decoded in your brain. Well, 
you are seeing my pulse pattern. 
I’m real enough. We could shake 
hands, you know. In fact, I think 
we should.” 
Willis put out his other hand. 
Her skin was cool, her hand shake 
firm and exciting. This, he realized, 
was also a matter of coded pulses. 
“You’re full of surprises,” he 
said. 
When he took his hand off the 
screen, the office reappeared in all 
its squalor. 
“I could dust it for you,” said 
Vogue, having caught his thought 
just before contact was broken. 
“Well, I’ll be ... A thoughtreader, too? By all means, dust 
away. Yes, do dust the office.” 
He tried had to pull himself together. For a moment the office was 
filled with a humming sound that 
set his teeth on edge. He looked 
around and saw that the dust had 
vanished. 
“There,” she said. “That’s much 
better.” The humming started 
again, and Willis watched pop-eyed 
as papers on the desk arranged 
themselves neatly, and the pile of 
files he had dumped in one corner 
sorted themselves into a neat stack. 
“That’s terrific,” he said, “but it 
hurts my teeth. If you must tidy 
up, do so when I’m not here, 
please.” 
“Yes, of course,” said Vogue. He 
realized his attitude to her had 
changed. Since their strange handshake, since he’d actually seen what 
she was like . well, he now viewed her with a certain affection, and 
considerable respect. His fear had 
gone. He knew she would never hurt 
him. A girl with eyes like that, 
who looked at him like that . 
she couldn’t harm him. 
“I couldn’t help noticing you’re 
THE PERFECT SECRETARY 
very anxious about money,” she 
said. “A considerable area of your 
cortex is taken up with worry about 
money and a strong desire to possess it. I think I could arrange you 
that quite well. It might take a little time, though. Do you know 
about the big soap contest?” 
. "Do I what?” asked Willis, who’d 
been thinking more about the girl 
he’d seen. But yes, he admitted, he 
knew about the contest — the really 
big one with a quarter million dollars as first prize. “I once won ten 
dollars in a contest,” he said. 
"How nice. Now, suppose you 
fetch me a dozen copies of magazines that have the coupon and a 
dozen bars of soap, for the wrappers. And all the racing forms. You 
do know a bookie?” 
TJalf an hour later Willis was 
* back. He stacked the magazines on Vogue’s screen. 
"Don’t bother cutting the coupons out or unwrapping the soap. 
Just put them beside me — they do 
hamper my vision slightly. Thank 
you, Albert.” 
At her directions, he began feeding envelopes to her. Somehow, each 
came off her screen with a coupon 
brightly filled in with a separate 
slogan and with the soap wrapper 
folded inside. 
"Eight, or possibly nine of those 
should win,” she said. "But it’s better to be sure, since only one prize 
is given to an individual. And now 
for some immediate money.” The 
used magazines slipped aside and 
exposed the racing sheets, which she 
studied for five seconds. "A threehorse parlay,” she decided. "That 
will give you several hundred dollars, but won’t be so much that the 
bookie won’t pay off all right.” 
Albert stared down at the sheet 
of paper with the names of the 
horses. Then he nodded. "I may be 
out late celebrating,” he told Vogue. 
"Enjoy yourself,” said the gray 
box rather sadly. 
Soon after Willis had gone his 
wife telephoned. 
"Mr. Willis is in conference,” 
said Vogue. 
"Who is that?” asked Anne, 
knowing full well who it was. 
"I’m Mr. Willis’ new secretary. 
Can I take a message or get him to 
call you?” 
"No, you may not. This is Mrs. 
Willis speaking. I want to talk to 
my husband. Where is he?” 
"He’s in a meeting, Mrs. Willis, 
and can’t be disturbed.” 
Anne was getting angry now. She 
did not know why, and she was surprised at the strength of her feelings. "What do you mean, he can’t 
be disturbed, you snotty-nosed chit? 
You mean he’s out getting drunk. 
That’s what you mean, and you’re 
probably going to meet him in some 
lousy bar and help him. On money 
I should have for housekeeping!” 
"Mrs. Willis, I don’t think there’s 
any point in prolonging this con
THE PERFECT SECRETARY 
versation. When Mr. Willis comes 
in, Fil tell him you called.” 
It wasn’t so much what Vogue 
said, as the way and the tone of 
voice in which she said it. Anne was 
almost beside herself with fury. 
"When he comes in you can tell 
him you’re fired! That’s what you 
can tell him. He can’t go spending 
my housekeeping money on teen-age 
secretaries ...” Anne raved on, 
giving Miss Vogue a good tonguelashing. 
"Mrs. Willis, I advise you not to 
try and get your husband to sack 
me,” was all that Vogue said. 
"Oh, you do, do you? You advise me? You little tart. Let me advise you. Get out of my husband’s 
office this minute. If I find you 
when I get there in about twenty 
minutes, I’ll scratch your eyes out! 
You ... ” 
The telephone exploded into a 
cloud of blue-green fire. Mrs. Willis 
collapsed over it, smoking slightly. 
Her legs twitched once, but by the 
time her body had fallen to the 
floor she was quite dead. 
IV 
'T'hat was how Willis found her 
^ when he rolled in that night, 
rather drunk. The sight of his wife’s 
body with its charred blonde hair, 
and the ugly smell of burnt flesh, 
sobered him quickly. 
Anne had obviously been electrocuted in some way. Her hand was 
practically welded to the telephone 
receiver. The only electrical appliance within ten feet of the body 
was the partially melted telephone. 
It wasn’t hard to work out roughly 
what had happened. Vogue had killed his wife. He knew he should call 
the police. He also knew they would 
never catch the murderer. 
"Please sir, my voice-operatedgeneral-utility-entity, which I have 
on loan from God-knows-where, did 
it!” They’d lock him up with the 
other lunatics. 
After a few minutes thought, he 
went out to the telephone at the 
corner candy store. He dialed the 
police. 
"My wife has been electrocuted.” 
He gave his name and address. He 
agreed to wait at home for them until they came. Then he caught a bus 
to his office. 
The main door of the building 
was still ajar, and there were people working late in the typing agency. 
Upstairs in his office, Vogue was 
giving herself a movie-show on the 
ceiling. Somehow, from her screen, 
she was projecting moving pictures 
in full color, without benefit of 
lenses. The scene was a distressing 
one from Willis’s early childhood, 
one that he’d rather forget. Vogue 
had plucked it from his mind during their brief contact. 
"Stop that,” he shouted. The light 
faded from the ceiling. "You murderer! You killed my wife. I know 
it was you. You filthy cuboid monster ...” 
"She threatened me with physical 
violence,” said Vogue in a small, little-girl-lost voice. 
Willis switched on the light by 
the door and advanced toward the 
desk. 
"Murderer,” he grated. "Filthy 
alien murderer.” 
"It was self-defense,” said Vogue. 
"Please don’t do anything foolish. 
Please, Albert. Please.” 
The sound of his first name snapped his control. He had the gray box 
over his head, intending to smash it 
to the floor. His eyes crossed, and 
for a moment he stood still. 
"Anne,” he murmured. Then he 
placed the box carefully on the 
desk. His hands covered the screen 
for a moment, and he collapsed 
gently on to the floor, making rattling noises in his throat. A few 
seconds later they stopped. 
T rogue found it quite hard to get 
^ the body going again. She almost left it too late, but pretty 
soon she had it breathing regularly, 
opened the eyes, got it to its feet, 
and walked it round the room. The 
exhilaration of being mobile preoccupied her for several minutes. 
She practiced little skipping steps 
and facial expressions and spent 
some time perfecting her manual 
dexterity, picking up and dropping 
things all around the office. Then 
she turned her attention to the gray 
box on the desk. Its screen was 
flashing erotically in all colors of 
the rainbow. The little neon light 
was flickering, and it was making 
sobbing sounds. 
" You’re panicking,” she said in 
Willis’s voice. "That won’t help.” 
"What have you done to me, you 
devil?” cried the box in a girlish, 
hysterical tone. 
"I could have killed you,” said 
Vogue. "Instead, I transferred your 
personality into one of the spare 
memory banks. I didn’t expect you 
to find your way into the main circuity so soon. However, it won’t do 
you much good. According to my 
assessment, your brain is little better than that Hendersen model. By 
the time you have full command of 
all the facilities at your disposal, 
it’ll be too late.” 
"What do you mean, too late?” 
screamed the girlish voice. 
"I’m going to disconnect you. 
Then someday, I may or may not 
reconnect you.” 
Willis began to understand what 
had happened to him. He could see 
the office as though through a fish 
eye. Down on the horizon he could 
see himself moving about, doing 
knee-jerks. Or rather, it was his 
body that he could see jigging 
about. Somehow he had been shoved 
into his desk-top computer. He felt 
disoriented, confused, and very 
frightened. Frantically, he sent his 
mind questing through the microcircuits. He was lost. He found him
self checking through one of the 
fourteen languages spoken on the 
planet Grimmando. He shunted 
wildly into another region, to be 
faced with the complete traffic laws 
of Sweden. 
"She was going to switch me off,” 
said his voice from the corner of 
the room, near the electric plug. 
Willis started screaming. "No. 
No! Don’t touch that plug. I’ll kill 
you. Stop! I’ll kill you, you 
thing — arghhhhhh — ” 
Vogue kicked the plug from the 
socket, a*d Willis’s consciousness 
vanished down a vast hole inside itself. But it was an endless, whirling 
maelstrom of fear before his mind 
finally winked out. 
V ogue muttered to herself as she 
coiled the wire, popped it into 
the compartment in the side of the 
gray box, and put the box away. 
"Fairly efficient mechanism, this 
body. Voltage rather lower than 
I’ve been used to. Have to think in 
terms of microseconds now. Never 
mind. There seem to be advantages. 
I can already think of several improvements — but I won’t do anything hasty until I have thoroughly 
explored the problem.” 
Just then the telephone rang. It 
was the police. Would he please present himself at home as soon as possible? There were certain questions 
Willis could help them with. And 
had he not said he would wait at 
the scene? 
"I shouldn’t have run off like 
that, I know,” said Vogue. "It was 
the shock. I’ll come straight back. 
My poor wife. Oh, God ...” 
It was midnight before the police 
had finished, and he had identified 
the body formally. There were aspects of the case that left the investigating officers quite mystified, 
but they were satisfied that Willis 
was not implicated in his wife’s 
death. 
Vogue felt tired — a new experience for her. She slept in the large 
double bed and woke refreshed. 
It wasn’t until the following day, 
after her new body began to give 
trouble, that Vogue realized what 
was wrong. Food! The body had 
taken in no food or liquid for thirty-six hours. She put this right in a 
nearby restaurant. Then, using some 
of the money Willis had won on the 
three-horse parlay, she bought provisions. She knew it would not be 
safe to stay at Willis’ house for 
more than a few weeks, but the contest deadline was supposed to be in 
less than a month. She would wait 
for the prize and then head for 
South America or some such place. 
^phe actual presentation of the 
quarter-million dollar prize was 
a widely publicized affair in a large 
hotel. The Internal Revenue Service 
had a man waiting there for her. 
The press was also there, fascinated by the fact that Mrs. Willis 
had recently died under mysterious 
circumstances and that now her 
widower was a big contest winner. 
She escaped as soon as she could 
with the check. She had been forced 
to tell the reporters things about 
Willis that she didn’t really know; 
she wished she had spent more time 
picking his brain. She didn’t know 
where he was born, who were his 
relatives, nor even his exact age. 
She had to depend on probability 
analysis, though she could have gone 
through his documents, she guessed. 
She judged it most likely that 
her scanty replies to questions 
would be taken as due to shock and 
a desire for anonymity. But she 
could guess the headlines the next 
day: Mystery Victim 9 s Husband 
Strikes it Rich . After that, there’d 
be entirely too much publicity. 
Two reporters tried to talk to her 
while she was heading for Willis’ 
bank with the Internal Revenue 
agent. "What are your, plans, Mr. 
Willis? Did your wife — your late 
wife — guess you could win? Do 
you know what killed her yet? 
Where are you going next?” 
"I plan to disappear,” said 
Vogue, dashing into the bank. 
She spent three hours with the 
bank manager and the Internal Revenue man, getting the check cashed 
and the taxes paid, then starting an 
account for what was left and setting in motion machinery that 
would would transfer the bulk of the 
money into a numbered account in 
a Swiss bank. 
THE PERFECT- SECRETARY 
Outside the bank reporters were 
still waiting. 
Vogue fixed them with a stare. 
“Go and play in the traffic,” she 
said in a powerful, persuasive, masculine voice. 
Then she walked away from 
them. The two men wandered out 
into the busy street, moving their 
arms like pistons, and intoning, 
" Chuff, chuff, chuff, chuff, Wheeeeeeee ...” 
S oon after, she was letting herself 
self into Willis’ office. There 
she penned a note to Hendersen in 
Willis’ handwriting: 
Dear Mr. Hendersen, I don’t 
think much of your tin secretary. I 
can’t get anything but static from 
it, so I have switched it off. I have 
been called away on business, but 
hope you will get the superintendent to let you in. Then kindly take 
your silly contraption away. Yours 
sincerely , Albert Willis. 
That ought to do nicely, she 
thought. She pinned the letter to 
the outside of the door, addressed 
to Mr. Hendersen, Molectrics Ltd. 
Then t she reconnected and switchon the gray box. 
“I’ll kill you, I’ll kill! Please 
don’t switch me off again. Thank 
you. Please, get me out of here. 
I’ll do anything . arrghhhh ...” 
Vogue switched off again. Then 
she switched on again. "Arrg hhh . 
Please ...” She switched off again. 
For perhaps five minutes she flick
ed the switch back and forth. Then 
she left it on for a while. 
"See how you like being switched 
off, you stupid brute,” said Vogue. 
She packed the computer up in 
its gray case and, casting a last look 
around the office, closed the door 
behind her. She arranged with the 
super to let Hendersen in. 
Then she caught a plane to Zurich. 
TTendersen read the note, and after being let into the office, 
he tried the machine out, but all he 
could get were strange moaning 
sounds. 
"I expect he switched it on and 
off a bit too often. I warned him 
about that. Perhaps I should have 
been more explicit,” Hendersen said 
aloud. 
He packed the faulty computer 
in its case and scribbled a note to 
Willis on a piece of copy paper he 
found lying about. 
Sorry about that, Mr. Willis. But 
it’s only an experimental model. We 
haven’t ironed out the bugs yet. 
When we do, we’ll be in touch. 
He clipped a business card to the 
note and left it on the desk. 
Jeriscndlrin Hendersen, Serial No. 
5748395763945, Sales Representative Mark VII, Squantapecillida 
Export Institute (Moletrics Ltd), 
Grimmando, Epsilon Eridani III, 
put the gray box under his arm and 
went to catch a ship back to 
headquarters. END 
CREATURES OF LIGHT 
(continued from page 98) 
"Yes, I know, and I agree. But 
what of Anubis?” 
"Periodically, he attempts to slay 
me, which* is of no great import. 
Mayhap, I shall forgive him. But 
not my bird-headed angel, never.” 
The Prince Who Has Been A 
King (among other things) seats 
himself upon a rock and stares out 
across the waters and then upward 
into the bottom of the sea. The 
lights stir lazily above him. High 
mountaintops poke with their peaks 
into the bottommost depths. The 
light is pale and diffuse, seeming to 
come from all directions. The Prince 
tosses a flat stone, so that it skips 
out upon the waves that are before 
him, away. 
"Tell me again of the days of the 
battle, a millenium ago,” she says, 
"of the days when he fell, who was 
your son and your father, the 
mightiest warrior ever raised up to 
fight for the six races of man.” 
"Why?” he asks. 
"Because each time that you tell 
it, you are moved to undertake 
some new action.” 
"And to meet with some new 
failure,” finishes the Prince. 
"Tfll me,” she says. 
The Prince sighs, and the heavens roar above him, where swim 
the bright fish with transparent 
bellies. He holds forth his hand, 
and a stone skips back into it from 
out the sea. 
And so he begins to speak. 
VIII 
T Tpward stares Anubis, seeing 
U death. 
Death is a black horse shadow 
without a horse to cast it. 
Anubis stares, gripping his staff 
with both hands. 
"Hail Anubis, Angel of the House 
of the Dead,” comes a voice rich 
and resonant that sings through the 
great Hall. 
"Hail,” says Anubis, softly, 
"Master of the House of Fire — 
which is no more.” 
"This place is changed, somewhat.” 
"It has been a long time,” says 
Anubis. 
"Quite.” 
"May I inquire as to the state 
of your health these days?” 
"I find it to be quite stable, as 
always.” 
"May I inquire as to what brings 
you here?” 
"Yes. You may.” 
There is a pause. 
"I had thought you dead,” says 
Anubis. 
I know.” 
"I am pleased that you survived, 
somehow, that deadly onslaught.” 
"Likewise. It has taken me many 
centuries to return from the place 
into which I was cast subsequent to 
that foolish use of the Hammer. I 
had retreated beyond space as you 
CREATURES OF LIGHT 
know it a moment before Osiris 
struck with the blow which smashes 
suns. It drove me further than I 
intended to go, into the places that 
are not places.” 
"And what have you been doing 
all this time?” 
"Coming back.” 
"You alone, Typhon, of all the 
gods, could have survived that fiery 
falling.” 
"What are you trying to say?” 
"Set the Destroyer, your father, 
died in that battle.” 
"Aieee!” 
Anubis covers his ears and closes 
his eyes, letting his staff fall to the 
floor. The cry that rings through 
the Hall is a soul-searing thing, halfhuman, half-animal, and it hurts 
to hear even that portion of it which 
he does. 
After a time, there is a mighty 
silence, and Anubis opens his eyes 
and lowers his hands. The shadow 
is smaller now, and nearer. 
"I take it that the Nameless was 
also destroyed at that time?” 
"I do not know.” 
Then what of your master, 
Thoth?” 
"He abdicated as Lord of Life 
and Death, and retreated beyond 
the Middle Worlds.” 
"I find that difficult to believe.” 
Anubis shrugs. 
"It is a fact of life, and of death.” 
"Why should he do such a 
thing?” 
"I do net know.” 
"I wish to go to him. Where may 
he be found?” 
"I do not know.” 
"You are not very helpful, Angel. Tell me now, who is running 
things in the absence of my brother, your master?” 
"I do not understand what you 
mean?” 
"Come now, dog-face, you have 
lived long enough to appreciate 
a simple question. Who controls 
the tides of the Power?” 
The house of Life and the House 
of the Dead, of course.” 
"Of course, indeed! And who is 
the House of Life these days?” 
"Osiris, naturally.” 
"I see ... ” 
The shadow rears again, grows 
larger. 
"Dog-face,” says Typhon, the 
shadow of a horse, rampant, "I 
suspect conspiracy — but I never 
slay on the basis of suspicion alone. 
I feel, though, that all is not right. 
IVe a dead father who may need 
avenging — and if my brother has 
been wronged, then blood shall burn 
for this, also. You have need to answer me quickly and without forethought. You may have said more 
than you intended. Now hear me: 
Of all things, I know that you fear 
me most. You have always been 
afraid of the shadow of the horse, 
and for good reason. If this shadow 
falls upon you, Angel, you shall 
cease to exist. Utterly. And it will 
fall upon you, if you have aught 
to do with those things of which 
I disapprove. Do I make myself 
clear ?” 
"Yes, mighty Typhon. Thou art 
the only god whom I worship.” 
'T'hen springs Anubis, with a howl, 
**“ a glowing bridle suddenly in 
his right hand. 
The shadow of a hoof passes 
near him, and he falls to the floor. 
The shadow falls upon the sparkling, silver bridle and it vanishes. 
"Anubis, you are a fool! Why did 
you seek to bind me?” 
"Because thou hast made me to 
fear for my life, Lord!” 
"Do not arise 1 Do not move a 
muscle, else you shall pass into 
nothingness. The only reason you 
could fear me is if you bear a 
burden of guilt.” 
"This is not so! I fear that thou 
mayst misinterpret and choose to 
strike on that basis. I do not wish 
to pass into nothingness. I sought 
to bind thee in self-defense, that I 
might hold thee until thou hast 
all the facts. For I confess that my 
position makes me to look guilty 
upon the face of things.” 
The shadow moves and falls 
upon Anubis’s outstretched right 
arm. The arm withers and goes 
limps. 
"You will never replace that arm 
which was raised against me, jackal! Graft on a new one, and it, too, 
will wither. Put there an arm out 
of metal, and it will refuse to 
function. I leave you only a left 
hand for your misdiief. I shall find 
the facts — all the facts — myself. 
If you bear the guilt I now think 
you to bear, I will be judge, jury 
and executioner. No bridle of silver 
nor reins of gold can stay Typhon, 
know that. And know that if my 
entire shadow passes over you, not 
even dust will remain. I will return 
to the House of the Dead one day 
soon, and if aught be askew, a new 
cur shall rule here.” 
Fire begins at the edges of the 
black silhouette. It rears as if to 
strike once more, the flames flash 
bright, and Anubis is alone. 
H e stands slowly and retrieves 
his staff with his left hand. 
His tongue forks forth redly, and 
he staggers to his throne. A great 
window appears in the middle of 
the air, and he regards the Lord of 
Life through it. 
"Osiris!” he says. "The Devil 
lives!” 
"What mean you?” comes the 
reply. 
"Tonight, there was the shadow 
of a horse come upon me.” 
"This is not good. Especially 
when you have sent forth a new 
emissary.” 
"How do you know this?” 
"I have my ways. But I, too, 
have done this thing — for the 
first time — and it is my son, 
Homs. Hope that I can recall him 
in time.” 
CREATURES OF LIGHT 
"Yes. I’ve always had a liking 
for Horus.” 
"And what of your emissary?” 
"I shall not recall him. I should 
like very much to see Typhon attempt his destruction.” 
"Your Wakim — who is he, really? Who was he?” 
"That is my affair.” 
"If — somehow — he is the one 
I think he may be — and you know 
who I mean — call him off, dog, or 
there shall never be peace between 
us, if both of us survive.” 
Anubis chuckles. 
"Was there ever?” 
"No,” says Osiris, "since we’re 
being candid.” 
But the Prince has actually 
threatened us, for the first time, 
threatened to end our reign!” 
"Yes, this twelve-year past — 
and we must act. We’ve centuries, 
he’s indicated, ere he’ll move. But 
move he will, for he always keeps 
his word. Who knows, though, what 
he has in mind?” 
"Not I.” 
"What has happened to your 
right arm?” 
"The shadow fell upon it.” 
"And we shall both of us go in 
this manner, beneath the shadow, if 
you do not recall your emissary. 
Typhon has changed the picture 
completely. We must contact the 
Prince — seek to bargain with him, 
to placate him.” 
"He is too clever to be deceived 
by false promises.” 
T 56 
"Perhaps we should bargain in "Because of your unbecoming 
good faith — not to restore him, of fear that the old days are upon us 
bourse. ...” once more, Osiris.” 
"No! We shall triumph!” "Then call off Wakim.” 
"Prove if by replacing your arm "No.” 
with one that will workl” "Then good-by, foolish Angel, 
"I shall.” most fallen.” 
"Good-by, Anubis, and remember "Adieu.” 
— not even the temporal fugue And the window is full of stars 
works against the Angel of the and power until it is closed with a 
House of Fire.” left-handed movemenf between the 
"I know. Good-by, Angel of the flames. 
House of Life.” There is silence in the House of 
"Why do you use my ancient ti- the Dead. END 
tie?” 
Announcing — 
THE GALAXY AWARDS 
Galaxy Publishing Corporation announces the establishment of annual awards 
for excellence In science-fiction writing. Every story appearing In the magazines Galaxy 
and It In issues dated 1968 will be eligible for the first series of awards, which will 
consist of: 
1968 Galaxy Award 
$1,000.00 
for the best story of the year. Honorable Mention will receive $250; the next 
runner-up will receive $100. 
The procedure by which the winning stories will be selected Is intended to 
reflect the judgment of the readers of Galaxy and If, Principal reliance will be placed 
on a mail survey of a randomly selected group of subscribers to the magazines In 
making the awards. Questionnaires asking for preferences will be circulated to these 
subscribers approximately one month after the December issues appear* 
CREATURES OF LIGHT 
hue7 
AND 
CRY 
Dear Editor: 
After reading the letter from James 
Koval in the March issue, I really 
must take him up on the point of 
view he is trying to put across : “aiming entertainment at the virile and 
imaginative male today is the very 
best kind of business.” As an old 
(28) mother of six children, I’m 
afraid I don’t feel very virile, and 
although I have a fairly well developed imagination, I don’t feel very 
male! 
Reading SF is one of the few relaxations I enjoy; please don’t change 
your format to please what might be 
a large proportion of your readers 
and neglect the minority groups. 
As for teaching people to think — 
with a wide variety of stories, you 
must get every reader to dislike one 
story in each magazine — the best 
way to provoke people into thinking! 
Keep up the variety! — Diana E. 
Auliff, 139 Ennis Ave., Pakuranga, 
Auckland, New Zealand. 
* * * 
Dear Editor: 
There was an interesting letter by 
Mrs. Rhoda Wills in the March issue 
of //. It interested me but I disagree 
with her on most points. She gives 
the impression that when we teenagers drag ourselves home from a 
grueling day at school we dive headfirst into science-fiction magazines 
searching eagerly for tidbits of knowledge to stuff into our already-crowded heads. She’s way off there. When 
I get home from school and don’t 
have any homework, I usually lie 
down for a while and let my mind 
wander, then I put on a good record 
(not all of us are long-haired twits 
that go hog-wild over Herman’s Hermits, etc.) and pick up what is usually a science-fiction book. It’s true 
that one can learn from reading science fiction. In fact, it’s surprising 
how much you can learn. But it’s one 
of the easiest ways I can think of to 
learn. 
A while back there was a big argument about the art in If and Galaxy. I’m no art expert (I doubt that 
very many readers are), but I think 
that the illustrations in the stories and 
on the cover are fine. In fact, I like 
them; they really add a lot to the 
stories. 
I may be an igoramus for asking 
these next questions, but maybe some 
other readers are interested in the 
answers. 1. How do you know when 
it’s the first time an author has had 
a story published? Do you write and 
ask? 2. What happens to all the stories sent in to be published? I hope 
to write science fiction when I’m older and would like to know the answers. 
To me, science fiction is the most 
exciting and moving form of literature today, so keep up the good stuff. 
— Jeff Lee, R. R. 2, Box 139, Evergreen, Colo. 
• Your questions are ones that often 
come up whenever your editor meets 
science fiction fans, and it’s a pleasure to answer them. Yes, whenever 
we buy a story by a writer whom we 
don’t already know, we write and ask. 
We try to know our authors, whether 
new or old, because we’re genuinely 
interested in them. And all the stories 
sent in are read by the editor, Frederik Pohl, who is happy to take all 
the praise or blame for deciding 
which should be published. There are 
no “first readers” or committees between the writer and the editor here. 
— Editor . 
* * * 
Dear Editor: 
For several months a friend in 
Ohio and I have been exchanging 
tapes on science fiction, in particular the current issue of If and books 
we have read recently. We have decided that it would be a good idea 
to have a tape circulating between 
several people and we would appreciate if possible your printing this 
letter in Hue and Cry to let anyone 
interested know about it. 
We would probably use 4-track 
tape recorders and 5” or 7” reels. We 
could discuss If or a particular book 
or author. — Michael Grenadier, 6 
Prospect Rd., Westport, Conn. 06880 
H* 
Dear Editor: 
As an old computer programmer 
(in the business for seven years), I 
can appreciate the way Perry A. 
Chapdelaine worked in the lifehistory cycle of modern computers. 
Naturally he couldn’t parallel real 
life exactly, but he did well, nonetheless. 
The state-of-the-art computer always goes to the military and science 
first; better models send that computer to business and industry, where 
it gets worked to death making money 
or losing it; only then will the model 
be considered for cultural purposes. 
Finally, it reaches retirement age 
where, if not junked outright, it becomes the toy of some engineer or 
tinkerer of another category. 
In spite of the happy ending, I felt 
sorry for Johnny and Becky. It 
shouldn’t have happened to such nice 
kids! — Mrs. Edward Proyfrocks, 
3563 Penn, Gary, Ind. 
* * * 
Dear Editor: 
In your July 1967 issue you published a story by Andrew J. Offutt, 
entitled Population Implosion . I reread the stor in World’ s Best Science 
Fiction 1968, and now I’m almost 
ready to bet my copy of Glory Road 
that A.J.O. is a pen-name for Robert 
Heinlein. Is Heinlein the puppetmaster, of do I owe Ser Offutt an 
apology? 
I wish the unmentionable publishers would reprint books like Double 
Star , Sixth Column and Space Merchants . They came before my young 
HUE AND CRY 
MUSIC OF 
TOMORROW 
Here is music composed on computer and transducers, ranging 
from computer-played versions of 
Christmas carols and rounds to the 
complex sounds that offer a new 
dimension in musicology. Composers 
include Dr. John R. Pierce, Dr. M. 
V. Mathews, David Lewin, James 
Tenny, etc, etc. 18 selections on a 
12-inch, high-fidelity, long-playing 
record produced by Decca. A 
“must”, for your record library and 
a conversation piece for all occasions. Priced $5.75 postpaid — send 
in the coupon today. 
Galaxy Publishing Corp. 
421 Hudson Street, 
New York City 10014 
Yes, send me my 12-inch hi-fi 
record of Music from Mathematics 
right away. I enclose check or 
money order of $5.75. 
Name 
Address 
City & State Zip Code •••• 
(Offer good in U, S. A. Only) 
time. This is an example of the problems we teen-agers face from day to 
day. Would that I had security and 
status; you can keep the ulcers and 
the guy next door. — Barry Andrews, 
Norway, Iowa 52318 
• Offutt is really Andrew J. Offutt, 
so you owe him an apology — but he 
probably isn’t offended at the comparison. And don’t despair, since 
most of the books you want are being reprinted or planned for early reprinting. — Editor . 
* * * 
Dear Fred: 
Horace Gold is as adept as anyone at setting up strawmen and then 
knocking them down, and I would be 
the last to stop him from sticking 
straws in his hair if that amuses him. 
In his first guest editorial (IF, August, 1968) he mentions my own previous guest editorial (GALAXY, 
August, 1967), so I will take a few 
inches to make a few points. 
Horace and I are talking at crosspurposes and I suspect Horace knows 
it. He is talking of the function and 
I am talking of the first derivative of 
the function. He is saying there is, 
too, science in science fiction and it’s 
just a matter of putting it in cleverly 
now instead of stupidly as in the old 
days. But who denies that? I never 
did. Of course, there is science in 
science fiction and so far no one has 
ever complained to my face that I 
didn’t know how to insert the science 
in my science fiction cleverly. — 
Enough of that. 
What / said is there is a growing 
tendency to delete the science from 
science fiction. The tendency has not 
borne fruit yet, but it is there and I 
want to fight it. There are science 
fiction writers who think that Science 
is a Bad Thing and that science fiction is a wonderful field in which 
to make this plain. This is part of a 
much more general attitude that Society is a Bad Thing and must be 
destroyed before a new and better 
system can be evolved. This may 
strike youngsters today as a daring 
and novel notion but when greatgrandfather was a boy they called it 
Nihilism. I’m afraid I’m too square 
to be a Nihilist. 
Anyway, Science is not a Bad 
Thing; it is a Thing, and it is men 
that make it either Bad or Good. I 
want science fiction to do its part in 
persuading men to make it Good for 
the sake of all of us and that requires that Science — Honest Science 
— continue to be in s. f. I want it 
there not just now but in the future 
and I don’t want the anti-science 
literati in the science fiction movement to win out. I admit that’s a 
personal prejudice bom out of the 
fact that I have a sneaking fondness 
for humanity — Isaac Asimov, West 
Newton, Massachusetts 02165 
October 18-20, 1968. TOLKIEN CONFERENCE, sponsored by the Tolkien Society of America. At Belknap College, 
Center Harbor, New Hampshire 03226. 
Papers are being solicited. Indicate 
whether you will present a paper or will 
just attend. Submit title and length of 
proposed papers early to Ed Meskys 
(address above). 
November 9-10, 1968. PHILCON. At 
Syl vania Hotel, Broad & Locust Streets, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Features : 
Panel Discussion about “Science in Society,” moderated by Ted Thomas; Ben 
Bova on ‘Weather Control”; panels on sex 
and violence in the future, with Fred Pohl, 
Lester del Rey, James Blish, et aliens 
... A special open meeting of the Philadelphia Science Fiction Society will be 
held at the YMCA (Broad and Arch 
Sts.) on November 8, at 8 P.M. — all 
welcome. For information: Tom Purdom, 
4734 Cedar Avenue, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19143. 
March 22-23, 1969. BOSKONE VI. At 
the StaUer-Hilton, Boston, Massachusetts. 
Guest of Honor: Jack Gaughan. Membership $2.00. For information: New England Science Fiction Association, Box G, 
MIT Branch Station, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139. 
April 4-6, 1969. BRITISH SCIENCE 
FICTION CONVENTION. At Randolph 
Hotel, Oxford, England. Guest of Honor: 
Judith Merril. For information in the 
USA: Sam Russell, 1351 Tremaine Avenue, Los Angeles, California 90019. 
April 11-13, 1969. LUNACON. Guest 
of Honor: Robert (Doc) A. W. Lowndes. 
At the Hotel McAlpin, New York City. 
Advance membership $2.00, or $2.50 at 
the door. Two Progress Reports will be 
sent to members. For information: Franklin M. Dietz, 1750 Walton Avenue, Bronx, 
New York 10453. 
DON’T MISS THE WORLD’S BEST SF 
Subscribe to IF and GALAXY — Now! 1 
HUE AND CRY 
Ballantine 
Books 
RECENTLY we had occasion to read a manuscript which attempted to present a 
critique of science fiction designed to draw non s.f. readers into the fold. The 
general theme was that s.f. could now afford to stand up on its own indeterminate 
number of literary feet and need no longer be regarded as a pulp relative of "straight" writing. 
QUITE aside from the marvellous pomposity of this approach (neatly calculated 
to keep people away from s.f. in droves) the fact Is that if any normal reader 
were to go through all the straight fiction published In any given month, he'd find 
70% of it appalling — not even skillful pulp like Harold Robbins, for instance, 
or true confessions — 6 la John Updike. There Is an awful lot of rubbish published. But the s.f. field excludes rubbish and keeps the bad stuff down to a 
minimum. Because only s.f. readers are fanatical enough to want to read all the 
s.f. published. Only s.f. readers are discerning enough not only to read everything, 
but to come back at authors with criticism, praise, brickbats, encouragement — 
in short, participation. Only s.f. readers have conventions every year, write each 
other thousands of opinionated words via hundreds of fanzines, give awards, exchange scandal, get drunk with their favorite authors and, as a group, bring real 
meaning to the role of readership. 
SO there's the way to do it. Challenge the new recruit. Enquire if they have 
read Tolkien (never mind that he's not s.f.: Tolkien is a magic word, a touchstone; 
iust about anybody knows he wrote a book. And first we have to establish that 
the prospect is literate). If they have not read Tolkien, suggest they try. If they 
have read Tolkien, chances are they're wondering. But take the steps from fantasy 
to s.f. by easy stages, like from Tolkien to McCaffrey to a couple of classics 
(CHILDHOOD'S END and SPACE MERCHANTS), then one or two pungent Tenn 
collections perhaps, and on to Leiber and Larry Niven. You're into the hardcore stuff 
now, and they should be hooked. Turn them loose on A VOYAGE TO ARCTURUS 
and see what happens. Or Asimov, Heinlein, Vance, del Rey, Spinrad, a whole 
bouncing world of riches. 
THIS started out to be a coupon ad, but I see we've run out of space. Oh well, 
next month. Meantime, send for our catalog. And go buy Mervyn Peake's 
GORMENGHAST TRILOGY . Or send us $3.00. And let us know what you think of 
it. Tell everybody. 
BALLANTINE BOOKS 
101 5th Avenue 
New York, New York 10003 
THANK YOU... 
We’re grateful to all the science-fiction fans 
who gavo our publications a clean sweep of 
every professional Hugo Award at the 1967 
World Science Fiction Convention. And 
we’re proud that you've selected us for the 
Best Magazine Award for the past two consecutive years. We're even more grateful to the many loyal 
readers who have made it possible for both 
GALAXY and IF to appear monthly from now 
on. That means we can bring you twice as 
many of the best stories being written by the 
best science-fiction writers of all time. 
...AND COME AGAIN 
To earn your continued support, we’re determined to make GALAXY and IF even 
better in the future. You’ll regret missing a single issue. So to 
be sure instead of sorry, why not fill in the 
coupon— or write the information on a sheet 
of plain paper— and send it in today? You’ll 
save money, too! 
GALAXY PUBLISHING CORPORATION 
421 Hudson Street 
New York, New York 10014 
Hurry and enter my subscription to GALAXY and WORLDS OF IF at your special combination 
rate. I enclose my check or money order for: 
O 12 issues of each for $11.50 □ 24 issues of each for $22.50 □ 36 issues of each for $31 .50 
Name 
Address 
City & State Zip Code 
Prices outside the Western Hemisphere add $1 .00 per 12 issues for postage 
Please check whether □ new or □ renewal 
GALAXY PUBLISHING CORPORATION 
WELCOMES A NEW EDITION... 
Father and child are doing well ! 
u . WORLDS OF FANTASY 
Its name is 
Arrival Date September.,....19.68.. 
Sex Normal 
Length 130pages 
Condition All.JStew..S.to.rie.sl 
Editor Lester del E ey 
Residence ^^ss tarid Only I 
This is number one, 
And the fun has just begun . 
...to the family of the leading Science-Fiction 
and Fantasy Magazines. 
m SCIENCE 
1 1 2 fiction