WORLDS OF 
DECEMBER 1968 
SCIENCE FICTION f 
nr* worlds of . 
lOMORROW 
WORLD'S BEST SCIENCE FICTION MAGAZINE 
IF Is Awarded “HUGO” for Third Straight Year! 
THE HOLMES-GINSBOOK DEVICE by ISAAC ASIMO 
THE COMSAT ANGELS 
by J. G. BALLARD 
THE PAWOB DIVISION 
by HARLAN ELLISON 
ALL STORIES NEW 
tm 
L 'M.‘ v. , 
% * 
: 'w.V 
Br 
Explore the fascinating field of space 
technology. Gain new insights and a 
broader understanding through this 
authoritative new book. 
What will the space systems of the future 
be like? 
One thing you can be sure of, they will become 
more and more complex as they are called upon 
to perform new and daring missions. But no matter how complex they become, you can also be 
sure of thi^g; several basic subsystems will always 
remain common to all. This new book covers each 
of fhese basic subsystems in detail. It presents the 
material in a clear, concise, readable fashion. The 
result is a storehouse of information for anyone 
who requires quick authoritative facts, but does 
not have the time to consult many different 
sources in order to acquire it. 
*4 
What kind of information will you find 
in this book? 
Here is the Table of Contents. Each subject is 
covered in great detail by men who are authorities in their field. 1. Structures and Materials; 
2. Flight Control; 3. Propulsion; 4. Life Sciences; 
5. Life Support Systems; 6. Secondary Power Sys
tems; 7. Communications. Because all informat 
is accurate, current and thoroughly dependal 
this book will serve as a useful reference sou 
for years to come. 
The author and the contributors. 
R. D. Heitchue, the editor, has been associa 
with Douglas Aircraft Missile and Space Syst 
Division since 1957. For four years he had 
responsibility of directing advanced studies 
space launch vehicles, unmanned spacecraft, ; 
manned planetary systems. All the contributors 
senior members of the technical staff at Doug 
and have an average of 19 years of professio 
experience. 
Here's how you can take advantage 
of our 30-day Approval Offer. 
Simply fill out the coupon below and mail it 
the address below. We'll send you your copy 
Space Systems Technology immediately for a 
day examination period. 
SPACE SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY 
Edited by R. D. HEITCHUE, Missile and Space Systems Divisn 
Douglas Aircraft Company, Inc. 
1968 / Approx. 288 pages / $15.00 
Available at your bookstore, or write to: Dept. M-545 
REINHOLD BOOK CORPORATION 
A Subsidiary of Chapman-Reinhold, Inc. 430 Park Ave. N.Y. 10C 
1 
, REINHOLD BOOK CORPORATION 30-DAY APPROVAL OFFE 
430 Park Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022 
Please send me copy(ies) of SPACE SYSTEMS TECh 
NOLOGY (500-599), at $15.00 each, on 30 days' approval (U.S./ 
| and Canada only) under the following terms: 
□ Bill me (plus delivery charges). 
□ Purchase order attached. □ Total payment enclosed (Reinhol 
I pays shipping. Same 30-day approval offer). 
Name 
| Address 
I City State Zip 
| Please include sales tax on New York orders. Dept. M-54 
DECEMBER, 196* 
Vol* 18, No* 12 
ISSUE 133 
WORLDS OF 
SCIENCE 
FICTION 
ALL NEW 
STORIES 
Frederik Pohl, Editor Lester del Rey, Managing Editor 
Robert M. Guinn, Publisher 
Judy-Lynn Beniamin, Associate Editor Mavis Fisher, Circulation Director 
NOVELETTE 
THE STARMAN OF PRITCHARD'S CREEK 15 
by Julian F. Grow 
SPECIAL SUPPLEMENT 
THE TIN FISHES 67 
by A* Bertram Chandler 
SHORT STORIES 
THE HOLMES-GINSBOOK DEVICE 5 
by Isaac Asimov 
THE CANALS OF SANTA CLAUS 41 
by Bram Hall 
THE COMSAT ANGELS 54 
by J. G. Ballard * 
THE PAWOB DIVISION 99 
by Harlan Ellison 
SERIAL 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY (conclusion) 102 
by Mack Reynolds 
FEATURES 
EDITORIAL 4 
by Frederik Pohl 
IF - AND WHEN 36 
by Lester del Rey 
HUE AND CRY 161 
SF CALENDAR 162 
Caver by BOK from THE PAWOB DIVISION 
IF published monthly by Galaxy Publishing Corporation. Robert M. Guinn. 
President, Vol. 18, No. 12, Main Office: 421 Hudson Street, New York, 10014. 
60c per copy. Subscription 12 Issues $6.00 in the United States, Canada, Mexico, 
South America and Central America and U.S. Possessions, elsewhere $7.00. 
Second-class postage paid at New York, New York, and at additional mailing 
offices. Copyright by Galaxy Publishing Corporation, 1968. All rights, including translation reserved. All material must be accompanied by self-addressed 
stamped envelope. The Publisher assumes no responsibility for unsolicited 
material All stories are fiction, and any similarity between characters and 
actual persons Is coincidental. 
Printed in the U.S.A. by the Guinn Company, New York, N.Y. 10014 
IF • Editorial 
Three In A Row 
W e’re proud and pleased to be 
able to tell you that, for the 
third year in a row. If has won the 
“Hugo” award as the world’s best 
science-fiction magazine. 
There were also, of course, a number of awards in other categories — 
best science-fiction novel, best short 
story, best artist and so on. We’re 
going to try to do again what we 
did once before, which is to celebrate the occasion by rounding up a 
new story by each of these worthies 
(in Jack Gaughan’s case, it would 
be more accurate to say a new cover) 
and print them in a special Hugo 
issue. With a little luck, we’ll do just 
that, and the special issue will be in 
March. 
As most of you know, the Hugos 
are awarded by vote of the annual 
World Science-Fiction Convention. 
The current one was in Berkeley, 
California; next year’s, to be held as 
usual on Labor Day Weekend, will 
be in St. Louis — and it appears 
that the 1970 one will once again 
get outside the United States, probably occurring in Heidelberg, Germany. We’ll have a full report on 
this year’s doings, provided for us 
by Bob Bloch, in an early issue. 
This is just by way of saying 
“thank you”. We do appreciate the 
vote of confidence, and we wanted 
you to know. 
We’d also like to call your attention to the rather unusual circumstances surrounding the cover on this 
issue. 
Hannes Bok and Ray Bradbury 
discovered each other. Bok encouraged Bradbury to embark on the 
story-a-week program that got him a 
wastepaper-basket full of rejection 
slips, then a few sales, and ultimately 
one of the most distinguished writing careers in science fiction. And 
Bradbury repaid him by touting the 
merits of the artist, Bok, to every 
editor who would listen. 
A lot of editors did listen; Hannes 
was one of the most popular artists 
of a couple of decades ago. His tragic death, at an early age, has kept us 
from seeing much of his art lately 
— but this cover was found and 
offered to us, and we were delighted 
to be able to print it. It is very unlikely anybody will ever have a Bok 
cover on a science-fiction magazine 
again. 
— THE EDITOR 
IF • Short Story 
The Holmes - Ginsbook Device 
by ISAAC ASIMOV 
Illustrated by GAUGHAN 
In Science, the double feel licks 
the one-pinch effect every time l 
T have never seen Myron Ginsbook in a modest mood. 
But then, why should I have? 
Mike — we all call him Mike, 
although he is Dr. Ginsbook, Nobel 
Laureate, to a reverential world — 
is a typical product of the 21st 
Century. He is self-confident, as 
so many of us are, and by right 
should be. 
He knows the worth of mankind, 
of society, and most of all of himself. 
He was born on January 1, 2001, 
so he is as old as the Century exactly. I am ten years younger, 
that much farther removed from the 
unmentionable Twentieth. 
Oh, I mentioned it sometimes. 
All youngsters have their quirks 
and mine had been a kind of curiosity about mankind’s earlier history, concerning which so little is 
known and so little, I admit, ought 
to be known. But I was curious. 
It was Mike who rescued me in 
those days. " Don’t,” he would say, 
leering at the girls as they passed 
in their bikini business suits, and 
leaning over at intervals to feel 
the material judiciously, “don’t 
play with the past. Oh, ancient his
tory isn’t bad, nor medieval times, 
but as soon as we reach the birth 
of technology, forget it. From then 
on it’s scatology; just filth and 
perversion. You’re a creature of the 
Twenty-first. Be freel . Breathe 
deeply of our century’s clean air! 
It will do wonders for you.^Look at 
what it’s doing for that remarkable girl to your left.” 
And it was true. Her deep 
breathing was delightful. Ah, those 
were great days, when science was 
pulsing and we two were young, 
carefree and eager to grab the 
world by. the tail. 
Mike was sure he was going to 
advance science enormously and I 
felt the same. It was the great 
dream of all of us in this glorious 
Century, still youthful. It was as 
though some great voice were crying: Onward! Onward! Not a glance 
behind l 
I picked up that attitude from 
Paul Derrick, the California wizard. 
He’s dead now, but a great man 
in his time, quite worthy of being 
mentioned in the same breath with 
myself. 
I was one of his graduate students and it was hard at first. In 
college, I had carefully selected 
those courses which had had the 
least mathematics and the most 
girls* and had therefore learned 
how to hemstitch with surpassing 
skill but had, I admit, left myself 
weak in physics. 
After considerable thought, I re
alized that hemstitching was not 
going to help me make further advances in our great Twenty-first 
Century technology. The demand 
for improvements in hemstitching 
was meager and I could see clearly 
that my expertise would not lead 
me to the coveted Nobel Prize. So 
I pinched the girls good-by and 
joined Derrick’s seminars. 
I understood little at first but 
I did my best to ask questions 
designed to help Derrick demonstrate his brilliance and rapidly 
advanced to the head of the class 
in consequence. I was even the 
occasion for Derrick’s greatest discovery. 
TTe was smoking at the time. He 
* was an inveterate smoker and 
proud of it, always taking his cigarette out and looking at it lovingly between puffs. They were 
girlie-cigarettes, with fetching 
nudes on the clear white paper — * 
always a favorite with scientists. 
“Imagine,” he would say in the 
course of his famous lectures on 
Twenty-first Century Technological Concepts, “how we have advanced on the Dark Ages in the 
matter of cigarettes alone. Rumors 
reach us that in the Hl-Famed 
Twentieth Century, cigarettes were 
a source of disease and air-pollution. The details are not known, 
of course, and no one, I imagine, 
would care to find out, yet the rumors are convincing. Now, however, 
IF 
a cigarette liberates air-purifying 
ingredients into the atmosphere, 
fills it with a pleasant aroma, and 
strengthens the health of the smoker. It has, in fact, only one drawback.” 
Of course, we all knew what it 
was. I had frequently seen Derrick 
with a blistered lip, and he had a 
fresh blister that day. It impeded 
his speech somewhat. 
Like all thoughtful scientists, he 
was easily distracted by passing 
girls, and on those occasions he 
would frequently place his cigarette 
in his mouth wrong-end-in. He 
would inhale deeply and the cigarette would spontaneously ignite, 
with the lit end in his mouth. 
I don’t know how many learned 
professors I had seen, in those days, 
interrupt their intimate conversations with secretaries to yell in agony as another blister was added to 
tongue or lip. 
On this occasion, I said in jest, 
"Professor Derrick, why don’t you 
remove the igno-tip before putting 
the cigarette in your mouth?” It 
was a mild witticism and actually, 
if I remember correctly, I was the 
only one who laughed. Yet the 
picture brought up by the remark 
was a funny one. Imagine a cigarette without its ignitable tip! How 
could one smoke it? 
But Derrick’s eyes narrowed. 
"Why not?” he said. "Observe!” 
In front of the class, Derrick 
whipped out a cigarette, observed it 
carefully — his particular brand 
presented its girlies in life-like tints 
— then pinched off the igno-tip. 
He held it up between two fingers of his left hand and said again, 
"Observe!” He placed the unignitable residue of the cigarette in his 
mouth. A thrill went through us 
all as we observed from the position of the girlie that he had deliberately placed the cigarette in 
his mouth wrong-end-in. He inhaled 
sharply and nothing, of course, happened. 
"The unblistering cigarette,” he 
said. 
I said, “But you can’t light it.” 
"Can’t you?” he said and, with 
a flourish, brought the igno-tip up 
against the cigarette. We all caught 
our breath. It was a sheer stroke 
of genius, for the igno-tip would 
light the safe outside end of the 
cigarette, whichever end it was. 
Derrick inhaled sharply and the 
igno-tip flared into life, igniting 
the outer tip of the cigarette — and 
the tip of Derrick’s thumb and 
forefinger. With a howl, he dropped 
it and naturally, the entire class 
laughed with great cheerfulness this 
time. 
It was a stroke of misfortune for 
me. Since I had suggested the miserable demonstration, he kicked me 
out of his class forever. 
This was, of course, unfair, since 
I had made it possible for him to 
win the Nobel Prize, though neither of us realized it at the time. 
IF 
Y ou see, the laughter had driven 
Derrick to frenzy. He was determined to solve the problem of 
the unblisterable cigarette. To do 
so, he bent his giant mind to the 
problem full time, cutting down his 
evenings with the girls to five a 
week — almost unheard of in a 
scientist, but he was a notorious 
ascetic. 
In less than a year, he had solved 
the problem. Now that it is over, 
of course, it seems obvious to all 
of us, but at the time, I assure you, 
it dumbfounded the world of science. 
The trick was to separate the igno-tip from the cigarette and then 
devise some way of manipulating 
the igno-tip safely. For months, 
Derrick experimented with different shapes and sizes of handles. 
Finally, he decided on a thin 
shaft of wood as ideal for the purpose. Since it was difficult to balance a cigarette-tip on the wood, 
he discarded the tobacco and paper 
and made use of the chemicals with 
which the cigarette tip had been 
impregnated. These chemicals he 
coated on the tip of the shaft. 
At first, he lost considerable time 
trying to make the shaft hollow so 
that it could be sucked or blown 
through to ignite the chemicals. The 
resulting fire might then be applied to the cigarette. This, however, revived the original problem. 
What if one put the wrong end of 
the shaft in the hand? 
Derrick then got his crowning 
idea. It would only be necessary to 
increase the temperature of the 
chemicals by friction, by rubbing 
the tip of the wood against a rough 
surface. This was absolutely safe 
for if, in the course of bestowing 
a fatherly kiss on the lips of a girl 
student intent on an A in her course 
at any hazard — a typical event 
in every scientist’s life — one 
should rub the wrong end of the 
wood on a rough surface, nothing 
at all would happen. It was a perfect fail-safe mechanism. 
The discovery swept the world. 
Who, today, is without his package 
of igno-splints, which can be lit 
at any time in perfect safety, so 
that the day of the blistered lip is 
gone forever? Surely this great invention is a match for any other 
this great Century has seen; sc 
much a match, in fact, that some 
wags have suggested the igno-splints 
be called "matches”. Actually, 
that name is catching on. 
Derrick received his Nobel 
Prize in Physics almost at once and 
the world applauded. 
I returned then and tried to reenroll in his class, pointing out that 
but for me he would never have 
earned that Nobel Prize. He kicked 
me out with harsh expletives, 
threatening to apply an igno-splint 
to my nose. 
After that my one ambition was 
to win a Nobel Prize of my own, 
one that would drown out Derrick’s 
THE HOLMES-GINSBOOK DEVICE 
achievement. I, John Holmes, would 
show him. 
But how? How? 
1 managed to get a grant that 
would take me to England in 
order to study Lancashire hemstitching, but I had no sooner got 
there than I pulled every string I 
could to get into Cambridge, with 
its famous covey of girl students 
and its almost equally famous 
Chumley - Maudlin (pronounced 
Cholmondeley - Magdalen) Technological Institute. 
The girl studentjrwere warm and 
exotic and I spent many an evening stitching hems with them. 
Many of the Cantabrigian scientists were struck with the usefulness of the pursuit, not having discerned earlier this particular advantage of sewing. Some of them 
tried to get me to teach them to 
hemstitch but I followed that old 
First Law of Scientific Motivation: 
".What’s in it for me?” I didn’t 
teach them a thing. 
Mike Ginsbook, however, having 
watched me from a distance, quickly picked up the intricate fingermanipulations of hemstitching and 
joined me. 
"It’s my talent,” he said with 
charming immodesty. "I have a 
natural aptitude at manipulation.” 
He was my man! I recognized 
at that moment that he would help 
me to the Nobel Prize. There remained only to choose the field of activity that would get it for us. 
For a year our association produced nothing except for a sultry 
brunette or two; and then one day I 
said to him lazily, "I can’t help 
but notice, Mike, that your eyes 
are extraordinately limpid. You’re 
the only one on campus who doesn’t 
have bloodshot sclera.” 
He said, "But the answer is simple. I never view micro-films. They 
are a curse.” 
"Oh?” 
"I’ve never told you?” A somber 
look crossed his face and a clear 
Stab of pain furrowed his brow. 
I had clearly activated a memory 
almost too sharp to bear. He said, 
"I was once viewing a micro-film 
with my head completely enclosed 
in the viewer, naturally. While I 
was doing that, a gorgeous girl 
passed by — a girl who won the 
title of Miss Teacher’s Pet the next 
two years running, I might say — 
and I never noticed her. I was told 
about it afterward by Tancred 
Hull, the gynecologist. He spent 
three nights with her, the cad, explaining that he was giving her a 
physical checkup. Had pictures taken to prove it that were the talk 
of Cambridge.” 
Mike’s lips were quivering. 
"From that time on,” he said in 
a low, suffering voice, "I have 
vowed never to view a film again.” 
T was almost faint with the sud^ den inspiration that struck me. 
“Mike/’ I said. “Might there not be 
some way in which microfilms can 
be viewed more simply? Look, films 
are covered with microscopic print 
That print has to be enlarged for 
us to see it That means bending 
over an immobile screen or encasing the head in a viewer. 
“But — ” and I could hardly 
breathe with the excitement of it — 
“what if the material on the film 
were enlarged until it could be seen 
with the naked eye and then a photograph of the enlarged print were 
taken? You could carry the photograph with you, looking at it at 
your leisure whenever you chose. 
Why, Mike, if you were looking at 
such a photo and a girl passed by, 
it would be the work of a moment 
to lift your head. The photo would 
not take up your attention as a 
viewer would.” 
“Hmm,” said Mike, thoughtfully. 
I could see his giant mind spinning 
over every ramification of the subject “It really might not interfere 
with girl-watching; less important, 
it might prevent bloodshot eyes. Oh, 
but wait, all you would have would 
be about five or six hundred words 
and you would be bound to read 
that through before the day was 
over. Then what?” 
It was amazing to watch him 
pick unerringly the flaw in the 
project 
For a moment, I was daunted. 
I hadn’t thought of that Then I 
said, “Perhaps you could make a 
THE HOLMES-GINSBOOK DEVICE 
large series of small photographs 
and paste them together in order. 
Of course, that might be more difficult to carry.” 
“Let’s see — ” Mike’s mind 
continued to work. He leaned back 
in his chair, closed his eyes, straightened suddenly and looked piercingly 
about in every direction to make 
sure there were no girls in the vicinity, then closed them again. 
He said, “There’s no question 
but that magnification is possible; 
photography is possible. If all of a 
typical microfilm is expanded and 
photographed, however, so that it 
could be read with the unaided 
eye, the resultant series of photographs would cover an area of — ” 
Here he whipped out his famous 
girlie slide-rule, designed by himself,, with the hairline neatly and 
stimulatingly bisecting a buxom 
blonde. He manipulated it caressingly. “ — an area of ISO square 
feet in area at least We would have 
to use a sheet of paper ten feet by 
fifteen feet and crawl around on it.” 
“That would be possible,” I 
muttered. 
“Too undignified for a scientist 
unless, of course, he were pointing 
out something to a girl student And 
even then she might get interested 
in reading whatever it was he was 
pointing out and that would kill 
everything.” 
We were both down in the dumps 
at that We recognized that we 
had Nobel material here. Films had 
the virtue of being compact, but 
that was their only virtue. 
Oh, if only you could fold a tenfoot-by-fifteen-foot piece of paper 
in your hand. You would require 
no electronic or photonic equipment 
to read it. You could read any part 
of it at will. You could go backword or forward without having to 
manipulate any controls. You 
would merely shift your eyes. 
The whole thought was incredibly exciting. The technological advance involved in using eye muscles in place of expensive equipment was enormous. Mike pointed 
out at once that glancing back and 
forth over a large sheet of paper 
would exercise the eye muscles and 
equip a scientist better for the important task of not failing to observe the feminine parade. 
Tt remained only to determine 
how best to make a large sheet 
of paper portable and manipulable. 
I took a course in topology in 
order to learn folding techniques 
and many was the evening my girlfriend of the day and I would design some order of folding. Beginning at opposite ends of the sheet 
of paper, we would come closer 
and closer as we folded according 
to some intricate formula, until we 
were face to face, panting and flushed with the mental and physical 
exertion. The results were enormously exciting but the folding 
procedures were never any good. 
How I wished I had studied 
more mathematics. I even approached Prunella Plug, our harshvoiced laundress, who folded bedsheets with aplomb and dignity. 
She was not about to let me into 
the secret, however. 
I might have explained what 
I wanted the folding for, but I 
wasn’t going to let her in on it. I 
meant to share the Nobel Prize 
with as few people as possible. The 
famous phrase of the great scientist Lord Clinchmore — "I’m not 
in science for my health, you know” 
— rang through my mind. 
One morning I thought I had it. 
Oh, the excitement of it! I had to 
find Mike, for only his keen analytical mind would tell me if there 
were flaws in the notion. I tracked him down to a hotel room at 
last but found him deeply involved with a young lady — or popsie, 
to use the scientific term. 
I banged away at the locked 
door until he came out, rather in a 
bad humor for some reason. He 
said, "Darn it, Jack, you can’t 
interrupt research like that.” Mike 
was a dedicated scientist. 
I said, “Listen. We’ve been thinking in terms of two dimensions. 
What about one dimension?” 
"How do you mean, one dimension?” 
"Take the photos,” I said, "and 
make them follow one after the 
other in a single line I” 
"It would be yards and yards long.” He worked out the figures 
with his finger on his colleague’s 
abdomen, while I watch closely 
to make sure that he made no mistakes. He said, "It could easily be 
200 feet long. That’s ungainly.” 
"But you don’t have to fold,” I 
said. "You roll. You place one end 
on one plastic rod, and the other 
end on another. You roll them together!” 
"Great Scott,” said Mike, shocked into profanity by the thought. 
"Maybe you have it” 
Tt was that very day, however, 
^ that the blow struck. A visiting professor from California had 
news. Paul Derrick, he said, was 
rumored to be working on the 
problem of a non-electronic film. 
He didn’t seem to know what that 
meant, but we did and our hearts 
sank again. 
I said, "He must have heard of 
what we’re doing here. We’ve got 
to beat him.” 
And how we tried! We took the 
photographs ourselves, pasted them 
side by side, rolled them on rods. 
It was a job of unimaginable complexity and delicacy that might 
well have used skilled artisans, but 
we were intent on allowing no outsider to see what we were doing. 
It worked, but Mike was uncertain. He said, "I don’t think 
it’s really practical. If you want 
to find a particular place in the 
film, you have to roll and roll and 
roll, one way or another. It is very 
hard on the wrists.” 
But it was all we had. I wanted 
to publish, but Mike hdd back. 
"Let’s see what Derrick has worked out,” he said. 
"But if he has this, he will have 
anticipated us.” 
Mike shook his head, "If this is 
all he’s got, it doesn’t matter. This 
isn’t going to win the Nobel Prize. 
It isn’t good enough — I just fed 
it, here.” 
He placed his hand on the girlie 
stitched on his shirt pocket so sincerely that I did not argue. Mike 
was a great scientist and a great 
scientist just knows what will get 
a Nobel Prize and what wfil not 
That’s what makes a scientist great 
D errick did announce his discovery — and it had a flaw in 
it that an average high-school student would have spotted at once. 
His non-electronic film was simply our old two-dimensional sheets, 
but without even our efforts to fold 
them. It just hung down the side 
of a large walk A movable ladder 
was supplied that was attached to 
a runner near the ceiling. One of 
Derrick’s students climbed the ladder and read aloud into the microphones. 
Everyone ooh-ed and ah-ed at 
the sight of someone reading with 
the unaided eye, but Mike, watching on television, slapped his thigh 
in amusement. 
THE HOLMES-GINSBOOK DEVICE 
“The idiot,” he said. “What 
about people with acrophobia?” 
Of course! It leaped to the eye 
when Mike pointed it out. Anyone 
afraid of heights couldn’t read under the Derrick system. 
But I seized Mike’s wrist and 
said, "Now wait a while, Mike. 
They’re going to laugh at Derrick 
and that’s dangerous. As soon as 
this point about acrophobia comes 
out, Derrick will feel humiliated 
and he will turn with every fiber 
of his magnificent brain to the project. He will then solve it in weeks. 
We’ve got to get there first.” 
Mike sobered up at once. “You 
are right, Jack,” he said simply. 
"Let’s go out on the town. A girl 
or two apiece will help us think.” 
It did, too, and then the next 
morning we thought about other 
things and got back to work. 
I remember I was walking back 
and forth, muttering, "We’ve tried 
two dimensions; we’ve tried one 
dimension; what’s left?” And then 
my eye fell upon Mike’s girlie shirt 
with the nude on the breast pocket 
so cleverly hem-stitched that strategic areas were distinctly raised. 
"Heavens,” I said, "we haven’t 
tried three dimensions.” 
I went screaming for Mike. This 
time I was sure I had it and I 
could hardly breathe waiting for 
his judgment. He looked at me, 
eyes luminous. “We have it,” he 
said. 
It’s so simple, looking back on 
it. We simply piled the photographs 
in a heap. 
The heaps could be kept in place 
in any number of ways. They could 
be stapled, for instance. Then Mike 
got the idea of placing them between stiff cardboard covers to 
protect individual photographs 
from damage. 
Within a month, we had published. The world rang with the discovery and everyone knew that the 
next Nobel Prize in physics would 
be ours. 
Derrick, to do him justice, congratulated us and said, "Now the 
world can read without electronics 
and by the use of the unaided eyes, 
thanks to the Holmes-Ginsbook device. I congratulate those two dirty 
rats on their discovery.” 
That handsome acknowledgment was Science at its best. 
'T'he Holmes-Ginsbook device is 
now a household item. The 
popularity of the device is such 
that its name has been shortened to 
the final syllable and increasing 
numbers of people are calling them 
simply “books.” 
This eliminates my name, but I 
have my Nobel Prize and a contract to write a book on the intimate details surrounding the discovery for a quarter-million-dollar 
advance. Surely that is enough. 
Scientists are simple souls and once 
they have fame, wealth and girls, 
that’s all they ask. END 
IF 
IF • Novelette 
THE 
STARMAN OF 
PRITCHARD'S CREEK 
by JULIAN F. GROW 
Illustrated by WOOD 
It was a mother's star-crossed 
love that kept Magdi/s steam up 
and her flywheel ever turningl 
I 
i C A mother,” Young Widder 
^ Poplowski said, “has as many 
hooks to hang hearts on as a hatrack.” She sounded like warm apple 
pie. 
But her kid Sid wept by the 
window just then and I happened 
to spit through it and she tossed 
me out of the kitchen. She wasn’t 
a flighty female generally, but a 
regular she-cougar when it came 
to that confounded sprat. 
Going down off the back stoop, 
I spat again but the kid Sid, he 
dodged and flung a rock back at 
me. We just never have hit it off. 
He’s the horsefly in my particular 
ointment, if you don’t mind a medical term from a bona fide mailorder M.D. and the best damn doctor this town’s ever had — sole and 
only one too, of course. 
Anyways, though, the kid Sid 
has been the bug in my broth ever 
since I moved into Young Widder 
Poplowski’s Elysian Field Boarding 
House, which is also the best and 
only one in town. Purity Poplowski’s her Sunday name, but Purity 
Osgood as was, before she married 
this Polish count or whatever down 
in Boston and come West, where 
he tipped into a well and drowned. 
Wet year that year. Any other time 
wouldn’t have bothered him none. 
Any rate, she’s Boaz Osgood’s 
second eldest girl, from Bethel 
‘Lympus, just down the North 
Branch and up a couple hills from 
East Randolph, Vermont, where I 
was whelped. 
I’m Doctor Hiram Pertwee, by 
the way. I have got this notion that 
Young Widder Poplowski’d just as 
soon be Missus Doctor Pertwee, 
what with a professional man being 
the closest we come to royalty hereabouts, outside of the borax mine 
superintendent, and he’s crosseyed. 
Purity Osgood Poplowski Pertwee? 
I dunno. 
And then there’s the kid Sid. A 
man shouldn’t start his very first 
marriage by strangling his wife’s 
nine-year-old son, but sure as shooting that’d be the way of it. And like 
I said, Young Widder is kind of 
touchy on the topic. 
She is forever trying to get us together and friendly, her having 
more or less set her cap for me like 
I said. That was pretty much how 
come we had the adventure I’m going to tell you about, so I could 
learn to dote on what she called 
Sidney and he’d get to know me, 
on the order of paw and son. Jehoshaphat, I’d rather gargle hot 
lard. But you know women. 
S o this day we went on a picnic, 
her and me and the kid Sid. 
IF 
We clopped off in the buggy behind 
Poor Harry the Morgan gelding 
that cost me $25. That was four 
years ago I bought him, and I figured he still owed me $24.50. 
Young Widder sat on the off side; 
natural enough, I sat on the nigh. 
The little scorpion sat in the middle 
and dug at my leg with a sharp 
stick. 
We went about eight miles out 
of town, to Pritchard’s Crick. There 
wasn’t no water in it this time of 
year, of course, but it had sort of 
a tree and is a favorite picnic spot 
around here. I beat the twigs and 
small animals out of the buffalo 
robe and we set on it in the shade 
of the tree, swatting flies and eating chicken legs and watching Poor 
Harry chew at the dried old tree. 
“A mother’s love,” commented 
Young Widder Poplowski, “is a 
soft pillow for souls to sleep on.” 
“Yes’m,” I told her, watching the 
kid Sid hog his pockets full of English walnuts his maw got him all 
the way from Denver and then go 
haring off up a draw. I guess I 
haven’t mentioned that Young Widder isn’t rightly a bad-looking woman. Soft brown hair forever coming 
out of the bun, blue eyes pretty 
enough, except she don’t see none 
too good, nice pleasant face, and 
probably limbs sufficient to get by. 
Only real trouble is, she has this 
tendency to be sort of single-minded. 
“Motherhood is the unfolding of 
THE STARMAN OF PRITCHARD'S CREEK 17 
nature’s finest bloom,” she observed, nodding to herself. “Once she 
has blossomed as a woman, her 
spirit is soft enough to cradle the 
tiny babe, yet strong enough to 
sustain her husband in even the 
most arduous calling — even a 
physician who charges all out of 
doors to take a dried pea out of an 
innocent child’s nose. Where in 
tunket’s that Sidney gone?” 
“Yonder,” I told her, and she settled back on the buffalo robe. 
“Pray, what were we discussing?” 
she said, in her head flipping pages 
in Mrs. Leonora Pemberton Dodie’s Motherhood, the Sweetest of 
Life's Labours, and How to Treat 
Numerous Complaints of Childhood, Copiously Illustrated, That 
was her weekday Bible, but by gorry she’d never have got that dried 
pea out with it. She found her 
mental page. “Wise mothers . ” 
she began. 
“Widder,” I said. 
" . will always keep ...” she 
said. 
“ . oil of the castor bean plenteously on hand.” Damn if she 
hadn’t got the wrong page. 
" Widder,” I said, "you downright got to face the fact that 
there ain’t a doctor in six 
states and the Indian Territory 
that’d even talk to that cub of 
yours, much less get a pea out 
of his nose for a dollar. I wouldn’t 
of tried it myself except for my 
veterinary experience.” 
"Sidney is a deeply sensitive 
child, a delicate nature housed in 
a none too robust physique,” 
Young Widder Poplowski said. “He 
inherited the vigorous, inquiring 
mind of my father, who, as you 
may know, is the proprietor of a 
prosperous shuttle mill in Vermont.” I did know it, what with her 
mentioning it several times a day, 
seems like. “Alas,” she went on, 
“his frail constitution is the melancholy legacy of generations of Polish 
nobility. The result, I believe, of 
the use of heavy spices in their 
cooking. My late husband, the 
Count — ” 
I t was going to be a long siege 
if she started in about her late 
husband, the Count. Lucky for me, 
the kid Sid came flying down out 
of the tree just then, lit spang on 
the hunting-case repeater watch in 
my vest pocket — I’m happy to 
say I’d laid the vest with my frock 
coat on a log — rolled over four 
times howling, and lit out like a 
turpentined tomcat. 
Neither of us’d even heard the 
little imp of Satan shinny up the 
tree nor hide there listening, like a 
winter-gaunt puma at first thaw, 
but he made up for it now. 
He cut out, like I said. He ducked between Poor Harry’s legs and 
out the other side, tripped and rolled and shot up another draw, 
trailing noise behind him like a 
comet’s tail. Poor Harry, he reared 
up out of his wits, pulling the 
buggy wheel he’d been tied to right 
off the hub: I never did find the 
damn hubnut. Naturally the buggy 
tipped over onto him, and just as 
natural, that hammerhead horse 
stomped the whole kit and caboodle 
into kindling. 
After all that healthful exercise, 
Poor Harry snorted and just stood, 
his chest heaving. So (did I, thinking about that eight miles home in 
the heat, and the $45 for the rig, 
and, more cheerful, about using the 
kid Sid to club Poor Harry insensible with. I was going to broach 
this proposition to Young Widder 
Poplowski, but it turned out she’d 
been sitting there on the buffalo 
robe, shrieking like a banshee ever 
IF 
II 
since her lamb come out of the tree. 
Then she shut up and scrambled 
to her feet, displaying a turn of limb 
that in time could of softened my 
heart toward her son. She started 
off and I turned to see it was him, 
coming back down the draw slow, 
not looking like he was wounded, 
but a little like a normal scared 
tad. 
Oh, she rushed up and carried on 
over him enough to sicken a pig. 
It was O My Poor Baby, and Tell 
Mother If You’re Mortally Hurt, 
and If Your Neck Is Broke Don’t 
Talk Just Point To Where You’re 
Bleeding, and I don’t know what 
all. After a while the kid Sid got 
mad and pushed his maw away. 
“I’m all right, goldang it I” he hollered. “And I seen something up 
there 1” 
Young Widder paid him no mind, 
of course, just kept caterwauling 
and carrying on. Finally I bellered, 
“Widder!” at her loud enough to 
hurt my neck and she gentled down 
some. “You young pipwit,” I remarked to her lamb, “you got any 
idea how much a buggy costs? How 
we going to get home, your maw 
and me, with the buggy wrecked? 
Forty-five silver dollars, that’s what 
a buggy costs. And what you mean, 
cussing at your maw? I got half a 
mind to — ” 
“‘I don’t care,” the kid sid 
yelled. “‘I seen something up there. 
I did, you ole gasbag sawbones. 
Something funny.” 
THE STARMAN OF PRITCHARD'S CREEK 
T uckily, I guess, Young Widder 
' Poplowski come flying between us at that point and clutched 
at him, glaring at me and wailing 
O My Poor Baby, over and over. 
Finally he stamped his foot and 
screeched, “But I seen something!” 
I commenced to think maybe he 
had. I pried his maw off his neck 
and held her squirming and asked, 
kindly as could be, “What’d you 
see, brat?” 
“Well, goldang it, I’ll show you,” 
he yelped, and set off plodding up 
the draw. Young Widder wriggled 
loose and lit out after him. He broke 
into a trot and I went along after 
them, hauling Poor Harry by the 
bridle. When I caught up, they was 
standing quiet, staring into a pinon 
pine clump at what was an oddment, sure enough. 
It was the best-organized trash 
heap I ever saw. To this day I 
couldn’t tell you what-all was in 
it — sticks, rawhide, old bottles, a 
coal-oil can upside down, a rat’s 
nest of copper wire in a Mason 
jar, a battered cavalry canteen, 
twists of rag and knotted rope, odds 
and ends, copper tubes and spools, 
a cracked telegrapher’s galvanic cell 
patched with mud — oh, a genuine 
bona fide hodgepodge, sure enough. 
The thing was, though, it did 
seem like it had a purpose. Like it 
was heaped that way deliberate. The 
three of us just looked at it — 
four, counting Poor Harry, who 
had in mind eating it — and then 
at each other, and back at it. “I 
tole you I did,” the kid Sid, blubbered, starting to cry now. 
His maw was clucking at him 
when I heard something, and clapped a hand over both their mouths. 
There was a far-off creaking. 
Then a hissing. Then a voice like a 
steamboat whistle, moaning: "Bad, 
bad, bad, bad. Mokwun ss-so bad, 
bad, bad.” It was getting close. I 
dragged Young Widder Poplowski, 
her whelp, and Poor Harry into a 
jumble of rock back the way we 
came, and we watched. 
After a tolerable wait, we saw it. 
First the cloud of steam, then it. 
It was a regular enough copper
walled, brass-riveted vertical steamengine with a flywheel and all, puffing vapor out of the top of its head, 
rolling along the ground on four 
little red wheels, wringing its hands 
and moaning: "Bad, bad, bad, bad. 
Profess-ss-ssor ss-so mad, mad, 
mad.” It tended to hiss on the esses. 
Boys, even imps of perdition like 
the kid Sid, go for locomotives pretty hard, and he stared at it starryeyed. Young Widder Poplowski, for 
her part, more or less fell to shuddering and trying to wring my arm 
off at the elbow, which she just * 
might’ve done, being a passable j 
powerful woman. As for me, I « 
hadn’t never seen the like, not even 
in White River Junction or Saint > 
Joe. 
'T'he thing trundled up to the 
-*■ trash heap, mourning, and 
stood for a time facing it — facing, 
that is, if you judge the flywheel to 
be on the back of its head. Way it 
looked to me, anyways. 
Then, spurting vapors and hissing, it tapped the canteen in the 
trash heap with one of the two fingers on its right hand. The canteen 
tunked, like it was near full. Then 
the thing tapped the coal-oil can in 
the trash heap and the can tinked, 
empty. The thing nodded its flywheel and took off the top of its 
head, unscrewed a little cap, and 
poured from it into the coal-oil can. 
It screwed the cap back on and 
replaced the top of its head, and 
reached down for a dead pinon pine 
branch on the ground. Then it opened the fire-door in its belly, stuck 
the stick in to set it ablaze, and with 
it lit a bunch of little gas jets, like, 
here and there in the trash heap. 
It looked like the start of a firstclass bonfire, but it wasn’t. First 
thing you knew there was kind of a 
lazy stirring in the trash heap, and 
then damn if it didn’t start to get 
up. Very slow, understand, and 
creaking to beat the band, with 
sparks playing in that Mason jar 
full of wire. We watched it. 
Now, I got sharp eyes. And I 
could see that pairs of wires went 
into the trash heap from that jar, 
and that each wire ended in a little 
spool at the end of a tube. One set 
of tubes come from the canteen, and 
THE STARMAN OF PRITCHARD'S CREEK 
the other, that come from the coaloil can, led to those jets the steam 
engine had lit. 
If you knew what to look for — 
if you was, say, a trained medical 
man — you might almost say it was 
a circulation system of some kind. 
Damn if it wasn’t. As the trash 
heap stirred and shook, it began to 
shape up sort of like a skeleton, 
made of wood. What happened is 
that sparks would dance around one 
of the spools and water would drip 
out of that tube onto a length of 
twisted rawhide tied to either end 
of a jointed rod. Soon as the rawhide got wet it’d stretch, of course, 
and the joint would open up just 
like an elbow. 
Or the sparks’d fly around the 
other spool of the pair and the 
little coal-oil flame’d swing under 
the rawhide, drying it out and tightening it up again. That’d make the 
elbow bend. Well, this squirting and 
drying was going on all through the 
trash heap, and it was pulling itself 
together slow — about an inch an 
hour, seemed like. And the steam 
engine was rolling back and forth, 
wagging its flywheel and wringing 
its hands, and hooting mournful 
like a sidewheeler Vay downriver 
losing a race. But the trash heap 
was making it up. 
At least I guess it was, for just 
then the kid Sid ducked out to 
watch from up closer; Young Widder Poplowski yipped and lit out 
after him, Poor Harry whinnied and 
reared up, kicking me in the head, 
and I went down like a pole-axed 
steer. 
When I come to, there was nobody around but me. 
etting kicked by a horse is bad, 
^ but getting up after you got 
kicked by a horse is worse. I remember thinking, as I got up, that 
some picnics just don’t work out 
as good as some others. 
I staggered a ways down-trail, 
and there stood Poor Harry, trailing harness and gnawing on the 
oilcloth hood of the busted buggyj 
If I’d of had a gun I’d of shot him 
and if I’d of had a knife I’d of stabbed him, but it was eight miles in-> 
to town and I had to ride him. So 
I was nice to him. i 
"Good old Poor Harry,” I said, 
sweet as pie. He ran off. 
Well, I ran after him. The benighted hammerhead didn’t have 
the decency to stampede toward 
town, naturally — he charged off 
in six different directions, all the 
wrong ones. Finally his harness 
looped around a stump and he stopped long enough for me to come 
panting up and grab him. 
After maybe three-quarters of an 
hour I’d convalesced sufficient to 
think about climbing up on his 
back. Now, this particular gelding, 
Poor Harry, didn’t like much to be 
drove. But he purely hated to be 
rode. He must of bucked me off 
eighty-seven, eighty-eight times beIF 
Ill . 
tween there and town, him shooting me off his back every few yards 
or so and me crawling doggedly 
back on. 
The eighty-ninth time was at the 
stage depot, next to my office. Into the water trough. 
Kind of a crowd gathered when I 
climbed out dripping, and some of 
the comments were on the thoughtless side. But I wanted to address 
my noble animal. "Poor Harry,” I 
said, "you have got me to town 
when I needed to get to town, to 
raise a posse to rescue Young Widder Poplowski and her infernal pup, 
and I am grateful. Truly I am. 
"When they are safely back,” I 
told Poor Harry, "I am going to 
send all the way to the silversmith 
in Denver. I don’t care none about 
the cost. I am going to have him 
make you a solid silver-mounted 
bridle, with a solid silver bit. And 
I will have him make solid silver 
rosebuds for the tips of the buggy 
thills. There will be solid silver 
buckles on your harness and solid 
silver conchos on your reins, and I 
will have him engrave P and H, your 
initials, in solid silver on the blinders for your soft brown eyes. For I 
am grateful. 
"But I will have him make a 
solid silver mallet too, Poor Harry,” 
I told him, "and with it I will beat 
your head in, first sunny day! ” 
One or two of the drunks applauded. But that wasn’t why I 
came. 
THE STARMAN OF PRITCHARD'S CREEK 
/^vur day marshal enjoyed delicate 
^ health, so there wasn’t np point 
in bothering him. I stomped to the 
Owl Hoot Saloon, squishing every 
step and being hoorahed most of the 
way, and pushed my way in the batwings to round up a rescue party 
willing to take on a small locomotive. There was about seven men in 
the Owl Hoot, and one more if you 
count the swamper, Jubal Bean, 
which I don’t. 
Four were playing Red-dog, and 
the wildest bet I saw made was 
three cents. Two men were egging 
the big-time gambler on. 
The seventh was a fellow calling 
himself an arteest from Europe, 
name of Maestro Fuccelloni. He was 
on his way to San Francisco, as he 
told it, when his monkey jumped 
out of the window of the stage 
and clean disappeared, and that was 
the end of Maestro Fuccelloni’s act. 
He stopped the stage and scouted 
around for days searching for the 
monkey, and finally come staggering into town carrying his carpetbag 
and his crank-organ. He gave the 
organ to the church, never minding 
it was Protestant, and got drunk. 
Said he was destroyed as an arteest. 
Maestro Fuccelloni’d been drunk 
ever since, and that was better than 
two years now. Sundays he used to 
come around the church and stand 
outside, listening to Santa Lucia, 
but he’d never once come in. He 
wasn’t no real use to me now. 
Neither were the others, come to 
that. Leander Shaw had a bad back, 
Sam Griswold claimed his horse 
came up lame, Hubie Torrence was 
due back at the livery stable in 
half an hour to watch a shoeing. 
Deuce-High Magowan had a serious 
. catarrhal condition and besides it 
was his deal. Asa Hinchley was, he 
said, unable to sit a saddle because 
the salve I gave him didn’t work, 
and I wouldn’t trust Walleye Waggoner to watch a stump. 
That left Jubal Bean, which 
meant I went alone. I swear I don’t 
know how them sheriffs in the Wild 
West penny-dreadfuls are always 
corraling a posse on short notice. 
My experience is that the only ones 
that are idle enough to be available are loafers and bums too pimple-witted to spit and hit dirt. 
However. 
I did tell Jubal Bean to unharness Poor Harry and slap a saddle 
on him, figuring he’d probably 
get bit in the process. Did, too, it 
turned out. Both of them. Poor 
Harry chewed Jubal on the arm, 
and Jubal bit him back on the fetlock. 
A VTeanwhile, though, I run up to 
the Elysian Field and 
changed my wet duds. I fetched the 
late Count’s fowling-piece down 
from over the fireplace, and grabbed up a .32 rimfire Slocum Frontloader I took in trade from a faro 
dealer with three busted fingers and 
no plans for the future — nor, it 
occurred to him, much need for selfprotection any more. 
Considering the nature of the enemy, I suppose a pipewrench and a 
crowbar would’ve been a better 
choice of weapons. Still, I figured 
the noise just might do some good 
— that locomotive hadn’t seemed 
particularly brave. Jubal Bean and 
Poor Harry were glaring at each 
other when I got back, so I hoisted 
myself up without ado and cantered 
off to redeem Young Widder. , 
Mind you, I didn’t have an idea, 
how to go about it, never having, 
taken on a steam engine and a trash , 
heap simultaneously before. But 
you get to play a lot by ear in my 
trade, medicine, and so where there 
wasn’t much profit in plotting strategy I concentrated on staying on 
Poor Harry. Did, too, mostly. 
I tied him in the pinon grove and 
moved up the draw afoot The 
amount of clatter a reasonable careful man can make sneaking around 
never ceases to amaze me. They say 
Indians move about quiet, but I 
dunno. I never saw them at it. Only 
Indians I ever saw being quiet were 
asleep, which is not to say drunk. 
Which is what they were. Both of 
them. 
Anyhow, the crashing around did 
not appear to rouse nobody, Indians, locomotives or otherwise. So I 
thought First thing I knew, skulking along, there was this hiss and 
IF 
puff of steam from behind, my 
arms were pinned tight and I was 
being packed off by that infernal 
boiler with the flywheel on its 
head. Wasn't no use struggling, 
either. I decided to go where it 
took me. 
Which was to a rock that looked 
like it was part of a cliff but wasn’t. 
The locomotive toted me up around 
behind and into the mouth of a 
cave, hissing and billowing steam 
on the upgrade, and then rolling 
like the 3:45 down a long tunnel 
into a sizable cavern. There, right 
in the middle, stood the trash heap, 
looking in the gloom like a Christmas tree with all its little coal-oil 
flames going. 
And there behind it was Young 
Widder Poplowski, pale, scared half 
out of her wits. I didn’t see the 
kid Sid. 
"Oh, Doctor Pertwee!” Young 
Widder yelped. 
I tried to get down, but the locomotive hissed, "Pleass-ss be 
ss-still,” in my ear and like to scalded it off. Young Widder made as 
if to come to me, but the trash 
pile moved at her — not fast, of 
course, but enough to make her 
scream a little and settle back. Then 
there was a bustling in an opening on the far end of the cave. 
"Heighly, heighdy!” said the little feller that come out, followed by 
the kid Sid. His maw moaned and 
ran to her cub, trash heap or no 
— like I said, it wasn’t too fast. 
THE STARMAN OF PRITCHARD'S CREEK 
"I do hope,” the little feller said, 
"that my machines haven’t caused 
you any discomfort. Here, Magdu, 
put the good doctor — Pertwee, 
isn’t it? — down immediately, and 
bring some tea for our guests.” 
myself,” said the runt. "My name 
is Troy, Professor Mark Troy. The 
absent Magdu you already have 
met, though in circumstances of a 
lamentable informality. And Mokwun — ” He nodded to the trash 
heap, which nodded back ponderous as dephant bones. " — you 
have also, I believe, seen during one 
of his infrequent lapses from discipline.” 
Damn if he didn’t talk odd, this* 
Professor Troy. He was short, like 
I told you, and bald as an egg, and 
had on little gold-rimmed eyeglasses. He wore a frock coat like me, 
but his shirt was ruffled and he 
had on a high stock and fancy 
cravat — somewheres between a 
yard-goods drummer and a temperance lecturer, or maybe an Episcopalian, I figured. But it turned out 
he was a mad scientist, an inventor. 
Young Widder Poplowski, it goes 
without saying, couldn’t have cared 
less. She was busy taking inventory 
of her whelp. He didn’t seem to me 
to have anything missing. He was 
chattering away like a red squirrel, 
in fact. 
Any case, we got interrupted 
around then by Magdu coming 
back, carrying a flat board like a 
tray. On it was a dented tin cup, 
a small skillet, the bottom half of 
a busted bitters bottle, and an old 
Army canteen without a cork. "Ah, 
tea,” the Professor said. "Thank 
you kindly, Magdu.” He turned to 
Young Widder Poplowski. "And 
now, madame,” he said, "if I may 
impose — what exactly is tea, and 
how do I build it?” 
Well, we goggled at him popeyed, 
for you’d have sure taken the Professor for a jasper schooled in the 
social graces. Just then, though, the 
kid Sid squirmed out of his maw’s 
clutch and ran over to the Professor 
and kicked him hard in the ankle. 
"I want a walnut,” the whelp said. 
The Professor never even winced. 
"I do not believe, young person, 
that we have any of that in our 
larder,” he said, pleasant as you 
please. But Young Widder Poplowski allowed as to how she still did, 
and dredged up a handful from her 
reticule. She gave them to her brat 
and he went off to squat against 
a wall, splitting the nuts with two 
flat rocks and watching us with 
squirrel-bright eyes. 
It was a relief to be shut of him. 
The Professor, though, seemed kind 
of horrified. 
turned to Young Widder Poplowski. "You all right, Young Widder?” I asked her. Her color was 
high now, but beyond that she look
IF 
ed fit enough, except her hair was 
a mess, as usual — I judged so far 
she wasn’t no more than only scared 
half to death. 
"Pm only scared half to death,” 
she said. Score one for Dr. Gideon 
Faustus’s Correspondence College of 
Internal, External & Lower Animal 
Medicine, Post Office Box 52, St. 
Louis, Mo., where I took my degree. "That there thing,” she said, 
jerking her head at the trash heap, 
"never touched me, and that there 
other thing — ” she nodded at 
Magdu " — carted me and Sidney 
just like she did you. Sidney,” she 
said, proud, "fought against those 
arms of steel like a knight errant 
of old, but to no avail.” 
I was going to make some sort 
of humorous remark about night 
errands, kind of to enlighten the atmosphere which, to tell the truth 
was getting rather steamy, but 
didn’t. The Professor spoke up. 
"I assure you, madame,” he said, 
"Magdu would not hurt a single 
hair of your head.” He glanced at 
her mop like maybe he wished he’d 
put it some other way. "Magdu was 
built to be a servant, to faithfully 
carry out the wishes and commands 
of her master and — ahem! — 
his guests. Mokwun is, I fear, rather more primitive, in both its mechanical articulation and — ah — 
intellectual faculties. Mokwun’s 
brain is only a receptor of my mental impulses — and, of course, Magdu’s. But Mokwun, too, is a servitor, 
and is built to protect its master 
and, with equal ability, those whom 
its master wishes protected. 
"Its master,” the* Professor said, 
bowing again right courtly, "wishes 
no harm to come to you.” . 
I cut in. "Built, you say,” I said. 
"You mean to tell us you strung together that infernal machine out of 
kindling your own self, as well as 
the other there — Magdu, or whatever? Well, I never.” 
"Indeed,” the Professor answered. "I should think not. Mokwun is, 
as I said, quite crude, but Magdu, 
for all her multitude of faults, is a 
nearly perfect apparatus. I daresay 
none like her exists under this sun, 
considering the local dearth of raw 
materials and intelligence. Magdu is 
very close to being a perfect servant, 
albeit only a machine.” 
The subject of this was off a ways, 
watching the Professor with as close 
to adoration as a steam engine can 
get, I expect. Every time the Professor lifted a finger or twitched, 
Magdu’d churn her flywheel and 
hiss, eager to get into action serving, and then bleed steam kind of 
disappointed if there was nothing 
to do. When the Professor snapped 
his fingers at Magdu and asked us 
if we’d like to see her innards, Magdu highballed over, fit to pop a 
valve. 
First the Professor opened the 
fire-door in Magdu’s belly and 
showed us the coal-oil burner that 
kept the pressure up. Then he un
THE STARMAN OF PRITCHARD'S CREEK 
latched Magdu’s chest and swung 
that open. 
IV 
♦ 
sphere was more machinery in 
^ there than you could shake a 
stick at. Over the firebox was a 
regular-enough little engine, with a 
belt up through Magdu’s neck to 
the flywheel I told you about, and 
another belt down to the gear-box 
that ran Magdu’s wheels. There 
were four of them — red, you remember I said. 
Above all that was two dingusses 
the like of which I’d never seen 
before. Then it came to me, maybe 
I had. Before my Paw died, back 
in East Randolph, Vermont, he took 
me over the mountain once to 
Brandon for a laugh at Crazy Tom 
Davenport, that being a popular activity then thereabouts. Everybody’d stand around and giggle 
whilst old Crazy Tom fussed with 
his fool contraptions. He said they’d 
make the waterwheel obsolete. 
Well, mebbe. We laughed at him 
anyways, of course, that being the 
popular thing to do. But the dingusses in Magdu’s chest looked like 
some of old Crazy Tom’s electrical 
foolery. 
Meantime, of course, the Professor was explaining all about Magdu’s giblets, but it might as well 
have been in chinee or Creek Indian, for all of me. Oh, he undid 
Magdu’s right arm and showed us 
how steam pipes and copper wires 
came down and made things make 
her arm wiggle and her fingers wobble. But I didn’t get hardly a word, 
and Young Widder Poplowski, she’d 
just give a little shriek and totter 
every time the Professor took Magdu apart some more. 
I made like I was catching on to 
what he said, because looking smart 
and knowing is in my experience 
about two-thirds of being a doctor. 
And while the Professor was putting 
Magdu back together, an idea hit 
me. Now, I was a surgeon’s helper 
in the late War of the Rebellion, 
and held down a sight of poor devils 
that were getting their arms and 
legs sawed off. They were pretty upset about it, most of them. 
Well, I thought to myself there 
in the cave, why not hitch one of 
the machinery arms on some feller 
that had got his arm sawed off, or 
a tin leg to replace one that was 
missing? Of course, the poor devil’d 
be kind of fat with all that gear in 
his gut to make the leg or whatever to work, but wouldn’t it beat 
a crutch? 
I was minded to speak to the 
Professor about it. "Professor,” I 
said, "I was a surgeon’s helper in 
the late War of the Rebellion, 
and ...” 
Hphe Professor was just putting 
Magdu’s head back together. 
The coal-oil and water reservoirs 
fitted like doughnuts around MagIF 
dii’s smokestack, over the part 
where her eyes — electrical cameras, the Professor said, and I nodded right profound — and her 
mouth hole were. Magdu’s voice was 
some kind of calliope which the 
Professor explained all about, but 
I didn’t get. 
Incidentally, what passed for 
Magdu’s brain and made all the 
stuff work and did the thinking 
was located in the lower rear portion of her body, just above her 
hind wheels. We all knew people 
situated like that. Anyways, though, 
I just began telling the Professor 
about how I was in the late War 
of the Rebellion and he cut in on 
me. 
"The what?” he said. 
Well, I never. A grown man that 
didn’t know about the late War 
of the Rebellion? Then I thought 
what with how he was a mad scientist he might of been in a lunatic 
asylum during the hostilities, and 
the keepers might never have mentioned it. 
"Oh, that was just a little old 
skirmish between the North and 
the South to see about sedition, secession and slavery,” I told him. 
"What is slavery?” the Professor asked. 
"Oh, that’s just one man telling 
another to do whatever, without 
the one that’s supposed to do it 
having any say about whether he 
does it or not,” I told him. 
He appeared shocked. “Do such 
conditions really exist?” he asked. 
"Are there really situations in which 
someone given a command can question the rightful authority of his 
master?” 
My, the Professor’d surely been 
out of touch. So I told him about 
the Declaration of Independence 
and the American Revolution and 
how Ethan Allen and General John 
Stark won it, and about how the 
War of 1812 was settled on Lake 
Champlain, and about poor Old 
Osawatomie John Brown just for 
the hell of it. And I told him about 
the heroic part played in the Rebellion by Colonel Redfield Proctor’s 
Fifteenth Regiment of Vermont Valunteers, Army of the Potomac. 
Which is the outfit I happened to 
have been in. 
Professor Troy, he soaked it up, 
especially about how fatal wars are 
to so many people, and about slavery. Seemed kind of distressed the 
Secesh lost, but I took that to be 
normal enough, him being demented 
and all. By the end of the recital, 
though, my neck felt like it was 
paved with corncobs and I was 
hungry to boot. 
“It sure has been a pleasure telling you all these things any gr ow n 
man in his right mind would know 
but to tell the truth I am bone dry 
and could eat a horse,” I said. 
"A horse,” the Professor said, sort 
of dubious. "I will see what Magdu 
can do.” He looked around. “Where 
is Magdu?” 
THE STARMAN OF PRITCHARD'S CREEK 
T^vamn if Magdu wasn’t with 
^ Young Widder Poplowski. 
They were both standing over the 
kid Sid, who was squatting on the 
floor playing with the stuff that 
Magdu’d brought for tea. The 
whelp already had busted the rest 
of the bitters bottle, but the two 
of them, Young Widder and the 
steam engine, were watching him 
fondly. "A mother’s love,” Young 
Widder Was saying, "is rain upon 
the desert, sun upon the snow, sustenance for every growing thing. It 
makes the seedling grow straight 
and tall, and the mature tree bear 
bounteous fruit.” 
Magdu nodded, apparently unfamiliar with the nature of fertilizer, 
and I came to see that for all of 
her being an apparatus Magdu 
tended toward the maternal in her 
inclinations. Any case, the Professor 
hustled over past the hulking brush 
heap, Mokwun, and had low words 
with Magdu. She hung her flywheel, 
shamed, and rolled out. 
The kid Sid ran along with her. 
Professor Mark Troy watched him 
go. "Very interesting articulation,” 
he muttered to himself. "And the 
smaller pattern would be more efficient in terms of fuel weight and 
water supply, while still as capable 
of accomplishing the objectives as a 
larger model. Ideal. 
"Madame,” he said to Young 
Widder Poplowski, "if it is not presuming too much, could I have Sidney?” 
Oh, I grant you it was kind of 
an irregular request, albeit I’d have 
shaken hands on it, done-and-done, 
in a minute. But there really wasn’t 
hardly any need for Young Widder 
to carry on so. First she went pale, 
and then, when she understood he 
meant to keep the whelp permanent, 
she went red. 
My, didn’t the wind blow wintry chill. I never did hear the like, 
her such a genteel female, and a 
widder, and the daughter of the 
proprietor of a prosperous shuttle 
mill. Her tongue marched up the 
Professor and down the other side, 
stomping all the way; I never heard 
a tongue lash and snap so; she must 
of been breathing through her ears. 
The Professor, he just stood there 
looking patient. 
Young Widder went some ways 
beyond the limits of human endurance and finally ran out of vocabulary. Just at that moment, Magdu 
come chuffing in, leading Poor Harry by the bridle, white-eyed but 
too stupid to buck. "I have the 
horss-ss,” Magdu said. "Howss-shall 
I cook it?” 
'IX7ell sir, yielding up the kid Sid 
* ^ was one thing, but my horse, 
even Poor Harry, was another. I 
squared off and was just about to 
follow the widder’s footprints up 
and down the Professor and derail 
Magdu to boot, when the whelp 
showed up again, coming from a 
different direction. Young Widder 
IF 
Poplowski fled to him shrieking, 
and clutched him hard enough to 
break his bones. It was O My Poor 
Baby all over again. 
"Goldang it, I’m all right,” the 
kid bellered. "Lemme go, goldang 
it, you’ll bust my skull!” 
Young Widder drew back at that, 
and the kid unlimbered his arm, and 
damn if he didn’t have a skull and 
a bone in his grubby little fist. 
Young Widder let out a squawk 
and jumped back like her baby’d 
just gone lizard. I took the headbone out of his hand, having to 
squeeze his wrist only the least bit 
to get it away, and looked at it. 
There was something funny about 
it 
It wasn’t the sort you find as a 
regular thing. No more than the 
size of a Yellow Delicious apple, it 
was too small by some to be a 
calf’s, if there were any calves 
around, which there weren’t, nor 
even a lamb’s, if there were any of 
them around either. And it was too 
short in the muzzle to be a dog or 
coyote or cub wolf. And the teeth 
were wrong for a cat. 
The other bone was plain enough 
— a human femur. 
I held the skull in one hand, 
studying on it, and held the kid 
Sid off with the other. Good little 
kicker, I’ll give him that. Then the 
Professor spoke up, like nothing had 
happened. 
“I really must have Sidney,” he 
told Young Widder Poplowski, ear
nest as all get out. "I have to insist. There is more involved here 
than whatever transient emotional 
attachment you may have for him. 
He is needed here.” 
Well, when it came right down to 
it, I guess maybe things had gone 
far enough. The widder, pale again, 
was pressing the writhing whelp to 
her bosom, so I stepped in front of 
them to reason with the Professor, 
just between us two men of science. 
"Hold on, bub,” I told him. "I 
ain’t saying whatever you got in 
mind mightn’t be a more useful purpose than that limb of Satan is likely to serve, everything considered. 
But the fact is, his maw wants to 
hang onto him a while, and so that’s 
that. You, DeWitt Clinton,” I said, 
to Magdu, "you turn loose of Poor 
Harry. He ain’t to eat/’ 
"I have got to have that specimen!” the Professor said, lunging 
at the kid Sid who was cowering in 
the widder’s arms. 
"Not likely,” I hollered, pushing 
the Professor away and like to 
busting my wrist doing it. He was 
sure solid for such a runt. 
"I will have that specimen,” the 
Professor said, making another grab. 
"No, you won’t,” I said, and pulled that .32 rimfire Slocum FrontLoader from my belt, where it had 
been all this time. 
The Professor, he never even noticed. He came toward Young Widder Poplowski and her kid Sid, 
so I aimed dead center at the Pro
THE STARMAN OF PRITCHARD'S CREEK 
fessor’s chest and gave him all five 
chambers, two of which misfired. 
The Professor hissed and stopped 
short, looking sort of abstracted, his 
arms swinging back and forth; then 
he went over in a heap. 
Magdu hooted like a mine whistle 
and highballed over to him, letting 
go of Poor Harry. I scooped up the 
bridle with one hand and collared 
Young Poplowski with the other, 
and hustled the three of them the 
hell out of there. 
V 
'T'rouble is, I picked the wrong 
tunnel. It didn’t lead to the 
mouth of the cave, but deeper inside the mountain to what I took 
to be the Professor’s workshop, full 
of foundry tools and junk. And 
there was no other way out. There 
wasn’t any choice but to go back 
(the way we came, taking our 
chances with Magdu — and Mokwun. 
I had the widder and the kid 
Sid wait just around the bend 
before the main chamber. I looked 
around the corner real judicious, 
and saw Magdu cradling the Professor’s body like a grieving mother. Only the Professor’s head wasn’t 
on his body. His head was lying on 
the floor, staring straight at me. 
"Heighdy,” the head said. 
"Um,” I said. "No hard feelings, then?” 
"Certainly not,” the Professor’s 
head said. "You opposed the course 
of action proposed by me, and carried out that opposition by means at 
your disposal. I would have done 
the same, had our roles been reversed. Indeed, I shall.” 
"Yeah,” I said to the Professor’s head. "Well, it’s been nice 
chatting with you, but we got to 
go now. Uh, don’t get up — we’ll 
find the way.” 
"That,” the head said, "will not 
be possible. I .must have Sidney. 
Magdu is foolishly concerned with 
my body and unfortunately is not 
subject to telepathic control, but 
will respond to my articulate command. Excuse me. Magdu — ” 
There wasn’t time for small talk. 
I ran out and booted the Professor’s head. It flew and bounced off 
the far wall; it fell to the floor and 
popped open, and a little brown 
thing that looked like a nut come 
out. 
"That will do you no good,” the 
Professor’s smashed head said, kind 
of faint. "My vocalization apparatus is still operative. Magdu, immobilize Doctor Pertwee and seize 
the Sidney!” 
Magdu, still holding that headless body, turned. "I am ss-sorry, 
I cannot, ’’.jslig, said. "I cannot see 
harm com||lgi another mother’ss 
creation.* 
The head sputtered, in faraway 
voice, "Another mother? You imbecile machine, I order you to — ” 
"Do not order,” Magdu said. "It 
IF 
was-ss bad to do what was done to 
the ss-small brown beas-sst, and to 
the little man. I ss-shall obey no 
more ss-such orders-ss. You are a 
bad ss-son.” 
The head said, faint but angry, 
"I have failed in you, Magdu. I 
would prefer not to do this, but it 
is imperative.” The head shut up; 
but over on the other side of the 
cave Mokwun’s little flames begun 
to get brighter and it began slowly 
to move. It was coming at me. 
Magdu laid the body down. She 
huffed a minute, building up a head 
of steam, and tore across the floor 
right into Mokwun, knocking it into a million pieces. She stopped, 
her flywheel slowing, then spoke to 
the strewn kindling. “I am very 
ss-sorry, Mother,” she said. 
'T'hings were happening a little 
fast. I was standing with my 
mouth open when Young Widder 
Poplowski came up soft and grabbed my right arm, and Poor Harry 
chawed me on the left elbow. The 
kid Sid kicked me in the back of 
the leg, so I knew everybody was 
O.K. 
"Then I have failed,” the Professor’s head was saying, faraway 
and like it really didn’t matter a 
whole lot. "This time I have failed. 
But I shall begin again, and in time 
I shall succeed, for much depends 
on my success. Doctor Pertwee, 
would you like to know what has 
been destroyed here?” 
"Sure,” I said. 1 
"I was one of an advance party 
sent to your solar system from my 
home, far from this star,” the Professor’s head said. "Ours is a race 
of beings greatly unlike your own, 
elect beings who evolved over the 
aeons into almost quintessential intellect, housed in a brain small by 
your gross standards, protected 
from harm by a hard carapace. 
"Possessed of no limbs with 
which to accomplish the works out 
intellects devised, we developed a 
symbiotic relationship with a breed 
of lesser brutes on our planet, 
which we telepathically induced to 
ingest us. Once swallowed and safely encysted in the brute’s body, we 
could direct its every thought and 
move and, with its body, perform 
our will. 
"Recently, however, our vehiclehosts began to die of an unfathomable and incurable disease, threatening our useful existence. The scouting expedition of which I was part, 
in a ship piloted by a creature 
whom I piloted in turn, was sent 
out to find new planets, new vehicle-hosts. 
"Mine, already ill, was killed in 
the landing near here. Whether any 
one of my fellow-scouts survived 
their landings I cannot know. We 
are almost indestructible within onr 
carapaces, but the actual range of 
our telepathic communication i s limited. 
"Almost I despaired of finding 
THE STARMAN OF PRITCHARD'S CREEK 
a new vehide who would swallow 
me , establishing symbiosis so I 
could accomplish my mission. None 
of your local animals has, evidently, 
a throat of suffident size to pass me 
whole, though I was gnawed by 
several of your gophers. Quite useless for my purpose. 
" Finally a small, brown-furred 
primate happened along, and put 
me in his mouth. I was able to establish control before he enacted 
his intent of cracking my shell. 
Staying pouched in his cheek was 
hardly as secure as the customary 
internal cyst, but it served.” 
"Wait a minute, Professor,” I 
said. "Would that have been a small 
Italian monkey, fairly musical?” 
*nphe Professor went on like I 
-*■ never spoke. "The small primate, under my control, built Mokwun from materials nearby and 
light enough to be managed by the 
Inferior strength of its body. It 
took a great deal of experimentation with the inadequate materials 
available, and even more of an effort to keep the primate alive until 
that first primitive model of automaton was completed. 
"I was, you understand, virtually 
helpless until that was done. I allowed 'the primate to die immediately afterward. Its skull is the one 
Sidney found. 
"Mokwun was cumbersome and 
excruciatingly slow-moving, but its 
receiver under my control, managed 
to assemble a suitable collection of 
tools and, finally, the second model, 
the traitorous Magdu. I chose to 
make Magdu self-reasoning, using 
navigational computing elements 
from my wrecked star-ship. It was 
an error I now have cause to regret. 
"And, with the techniques refined 
in making both prior models, and 
with Magdu’s vastly improved speed 
and dexterity, I produced the Mark 
III model — the one it pleased me 
to call Mark Troy.” 
It wasn’t until then, I guess, that 
I really came to see it wasn’t the 
head talking. It was that little 
brown nut on the floor, making 
some kind of machinery in the head 
make sounds, from a distance. Well, 
I never. 
"The pattern,” it was saying, 
"for Mark Troy was a small fat 
man who wandered, lost, into this 
cave quite providentially — except 
for him, of course, if that is of any 
concern. Magdu, at my command, 
eventually disassembled him and 
duplicated his external appearance 
in Mark Troy, which still wears 
the little fat man’s clothing. We had 
already studied his speech and habits, and later learned more from 
the books he carried. He was a temperance lecturer, he said.” 
Didn’t I know it? And those' 
books explained how come he’d 
known about serving tea but not 
how to make it. He’d got the words 
pretty good but he didn’t have no 
way of knowing the tune. 
IF 
"So now,” the head went on, 
"You have disabled Mark Troy 
temporarily, and caused the destruction of Mokwun. Magdu, after 
this lapse of discipline, will repair 
Professor Mark Troy and we shall 
begin again. And we will win your 
world.” 
"No.” That was Magdu. "I ssshall not help you any more,” she 
said. "I ss-shall take these people 
away and never come back here 
to you. Good-by ss-son.” And she 
steamed right past him, grand as 
a duchess on her little red wheels. 
She guided the four of us, Young 
Widder Poplowski, the kid Sid, 
Poor Harry and me, right out of 
that cave without looking back. 
TV /T agdu’s living at the Poplowski’s 
now. Of course, she has to 
stay pretty much in the house, so’s 
not to cause talk, but she seems 
happy enough. Fixes up like a stove 
during the day. 
There’s that whelp, the kid Sid, 
to play with, and her and the widder like to swap quotations about 
maternal love. Seems one of the 
books the late temperance lecturer 
had was that Motherhood one by 
Mrs. Leonora Pemberton Dodie. 
Oh, one other thing. Once we got 
out of the cave and into the open 
again, the kid Sid turned up missing. I went cussing back to look for 
him and never laid eyes on him, 
but when I got to the main chamber where Professor Mark Troy was 
laying around, that little brown 
nut was gone from the floor. 
I felt real fear then. Thought 
maybe Poor Harry had swallowed it 
whole. The notion of Poor Harry 
taking over the world would make 
jelly out of any man. 
Then I remembered I’d held Poor 
Harry tight by the bridle all the 
way out, so he couldn’t of done it. 
But when I got about halfway back 
down the tunnel, I saw what looked 
like two halves of a walnut shell 
by the wall, near a couple of flat 
rocks. Empty. 
The kid Sid was looking smug 
alongside his maw when I came out, 
having somehow found another way. 
Young Widder’s real pleased with 
the way we get along, because nowadays I treat him a mite more careful. 
Whatever else you can say about 
him, he’s got to be just about the 
smartest whelp, for his years, in 
our world. END 
W'llllllllllllllllHIIIIIHIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIlllllllllllllllllllUlllllllllllimUlllllltllllilllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllMIIIIII^ 
For the best in fantasy and adventure 
WORLDS OF FANTASY 
Don't miss it! 
featuring Robert E . Howard , Un Carter, 
L . Sprague do Camp, Mack Reynolds and 
many others. 
At your newsstand nowl 
ixrmmTnmtTiTTnriiiiniiiuiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiMiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiiiimniinTTTTiii m mi imimmmmmi mil im imiiimii mum mm m mmimmmmmmmmMmmr 
THE STARMAN OF PRITCHARD'S CREEK 
IF • Feature 
IF... and WHEN 
by LESTER DEL REY 
V 
Catching up on the treadmill l 
TT'ver so often I’m asked what 
' science fiction can do, now that 
science has. caught up with it. 
There seems to be a mental picture of a science-tortoise plodding 
along in a straight line to win the 
race. Nothing could be less true, 
however, even for such an ancient 
and exact science as astronomy. 
Men had been studying the planets for centuries, and our modern 
writers simply took the old pictures that science offered. Venus 
was a hot, steaming world, filled 
with lush life; since the planet was 
twenty-five million miles nearer 
the Sun than Earth, it had to be 
hot; and the dense clouds that 
covered it clearly indicated steaming swamps and seas — the mother 
of life. 
Then the spectroscope failed to 
show the lines that would indicate 
water vapor in those clouds. And 
later observations showed very slow 
rotation, if any. So Venus became 
a dust-bowl planet, baking on one 
side and frozen on the other, with 
poisonous gases that meant no life 
could exist there. 
For the next decade, the theories went in all directions, however. Getting a reliable spectroscopic analysis through our dense 
atmosphere proved far more difficult than we’d first thought. 
But then the Russians landed a 
probe on the planet. Now we had 
the facts. Venus’ atmosphere was 
mostly carbon-dioxide, with only 
1.5% oxygen and water vapor. The 
temperature was up to 536° F., 
and pressure was fifteen times ours 
at sea-level. No life possible! 
Well, a little less than a year 
has gone by, and more careful analysis of the results has again changed the picture. Impossible or not, 
it seems some form of plant life 
must exist on Venus. 
At a gravity slightly less than 
ours, fifteen times the pressure 
means more than fifteen times as 
much total gas. If only 1 % of that 
is oxygen, the total is equivalent 
to 15% of all Earth’s air — not 
too far from out actual 21% of 
oxygen. But at 536°, this gas is 
a highly active chemical; even on 
Earth, the free oxygen would all 
be used up by chemical reaction 
in four thousand years if there were 
no plants to replace it. So — there 
must be plants on Venus! 
And since such plant life can’t 
exist at very high temperatures, 
Dr. Willard F. Libby is suggesting 
that the poles of Venus must be 
cool enough to make living possible there. 
By coming around to where it 
started, science has caught up with 
science fiction again. We can have 
men living on Venus and perhaps 
breathing the air without space 
suits. Shades of Arthur K. Barnes’ 
1937 story entitled “Hothouse 
Planet”. 
'T'he existence of probable life on 
such diverse planets as Venus 
and Mars presents a challenge to 
the biologists, too. They have pretty well established a way in which 
life could come about on Earth; 
sunlight acting on nitrogen and 
carbon compounds that existed in 
our early atmosphere can create 
amino acids — the basic buildingblock chemicals of life. When these 
fall into the oceans, they have a 
tendency to clump together in more 
and more complex arrangements 
that eventually make living cells. 
But nobody seriously thinks that 
there were ever real seas on Mars 
or that the atmosphere there was 
right for such a chain of events. 
And on Venus, the high level of 
solar energy should break down the 
early compounds, even though life 
might exist there if it could somehow get past this stage. 
Apparently the tendency toward 
the formation of life is a lot greater than our theories can explain. 
There have even been serious reports of finding organic compounds 
and particles resembling fossil algae in certain carbon-bearing meteorites (known as carbonaceous 
chondrites) that fall from space, 
though, there is still a good deal of 
argument about this. 
Fortunately, we can find one 
good theory that gets around some 
AND WHEN 
of the difficulties. According to this, 
all the life for which we find evidence may have originated on Earth. 
When our planet was half a billion years younger, it was struck 
by a great many huge meteorites. 
Some of these must have hit at 
very high velocities, according to 
the evidence we can find. Like pebbles hitting water, some of their 
energy created a great splash that 
must have thrown bits of Earth’s 
surface violently upwards — some 
at high enough a velocity to escape 
permanently from Earth. Maybe 
the chondrites are bits from those 
splashes, finally falling back. And 
maybe other bits hit Venus and 
Mars and found it possible to start 
life there with the living spores 
they contained. 
In that case, Earth may have 
been seeding much of space with 
life, since the Sun circles the entire galaxy once every two hundred million years. 
This would greatly increase our 
chances of finding life throughout 
the galaxy. We are pretty sure 
that planets exist around a large 
percentage of stars. And with life 
capable of existing under such 
wildly differing conditions as on 
Venus, Mars and Earth, it may be 
that at least a quarter of such solar systems have planets where life 
can and does exist. 
Bram Hall’s story in this issue, 
"The Canals of Santa Claus”, suggests that men will find scarcely a 
star-system that does not have 
life of some kind. There’s a good 
chance he’s right. 
In the early days, science fiction 
used Svante Arrhenius’ theory of 
life spreading by spores throughout space — mostly because we 
wanted to find life everywhere. 
Now science is suggesting a sort 
of variation on the same universal 
spread of life. Again, science and 
science fiction are catching up with 
each other. 
H owever, nobody seems to be 
catching up in at least one 
area of astronomical theory. When 
it comes to the question of the origin and nature of the universe, 
there are two completely different 
guesses, mutually contradictory 
and alternately seeming to make 
points. 
For a time, when science fiction 
was doing its most sweeping conceptualizing, we had to fall back 
on the theory popularized by Dr. 
George Gamow. According to that, 
every bit of mass and energy was 
once concentrated into a great 
"super-atom”, which exploded outwards some billions of years ago 
and has been expanding ever since. 
One school held that the expansion 
would go on forever, and the other 
main school felt gravity would eventually slow down the expansion and 
pull everything back into the same 
"super-atom” again, to start another explosion, and so on. In either 
IF 
form, this was appropriately called 
the big-bang theory. 
Then a man who doubles as top 
scientist and science fiction writer 
— Dr. Fred Hoyle — popularized 
another theory, called the steadystate theory. In this, the universe 
is being steadily created. Hydrogen atoms appear in space constantly, forcing the older matter 
outwards and causing the expansion. This can go on forever, and 
may already have gone on forever. 
It requires the constant creation 
of energy-matter, but that is no 
harder to explain than the initial 
creation in the big-bang theory. 
For a time, things looked good 
for Hoyle’s group. The age of 
the universe turned out to be 
greater than the big-bang advocates expected, which took some 
fancy juggling with the theory. 
And the creation of some of the 
very heavy elements couldn’t have 
occurred in the brief explosion; 
they had to be the result of reactions taking place in older stars, 
as might be expected in a steadystate universe. 
A year ago, however, the steadystate idea was dealt a body blow a 
few miles from my house by work 
at Bell Labs, where they detected 
what seemed to be evidence of the 
original radiation of the great initial explosion. Even Dr. Hoyle 
conceded that the steady-state theory might be dead. 
He was a bit premature, it 
seems. One of the best tests for the 
theories is the distribution of matter in the universe — uniform for 
a steady-state universe, but not for 
the big-bang one. Early surveys 
by radio astronomy indicated a 
lack of uniformity. But now Dr. 
John Bolton, of Sydney, Australia, 
has completed new surveys, using 
what he feels are more appropriate 
radio frequencies. The new evidence is so strongly in favor of 
the constant-creation idea that the 
two theories are again fighting it 
out neck and neck. Tune in again 
next week for another thrilling climax on how our universe really began — maybe I 
\ nd finally, there’s a wild new 
angle on the theory that there 
may be particles which exceed the 
speed of light. As I covered earlier, 
the suggestion has been made that 
particles may exist which act opposite to what we know; they must 
have velocities greater than c (the 
symbol for constant, used to designate light speed), and they gain 
mass as they slow down toward c. 
Since then, I’ve talked to Dr. 
Gerald Feinberg of Columbia University, who was most widely quoted in the press. And Richard Wilson has sent more details from 
Syracuse University, where the 
idea was first suggested by Dr. E. 
C. G. Sudarshan. Quite a few serious particle physicists are interested * and are making efforts to 
AND WHEN 
find such particles, which have been 
named tackyons. 
Obviously, if we can learn to 
create and modulate — or impress 
messages upon — these particles, 
it would make a tremendous difference in our ability to signal across 
vast distances of space. It may 
turn out that so far every effort 
to detect messages from other stars 
has been futile because advanced 
races naturally send such messages 
by tachyon beam, obviating the 
years of waiting before they can be 
answered. 
But now there’s evidence that 
these tachyons not only exceed 
light speed but also travel backwards in time! 
That might complicate things. If 
a space ship arriving on Centaurus III sends back a message, it 
would be awkward to answer, because the answer would come 
before the original message had 
been sent — before the ship could 
get there to receive it, in fact. 
We can imagine a postal system 
in the future where Special Delivery 
is used to insure ultra-slow delivery. Messages will be marked for 
holding months or years before delivery, according to the distance of 
their origin. A birth announcement to grandma from the edge of 
the galaxy gets put in the hundredyear-hold box to make sure that 
grandma has a chance to get born 
before she receives it! 
I’m going to try to arrange to 
have my future issues of If relayed 
to Deneb and back by tachyon 
beam, if I can find the application 
blank. That way I should get next 
century’s magazines and find for 
sure whether science has finally 
caught up with science fiction — 
or with itself. END 
THIS MONTH IN GALAXY — 
ONE STATION OF THE WAY 
by Fritz Leiber 
A LIFE POSTPONED 
by John Wyndham 
SPYING SEASON 
by Mock Reynolds 
— and many more) Don't miss the big December Galaxy, on sale now! 
IF 
> ... 
IF • Short Story 
f nu: 
THE CANALS OF 
SANTA CLAUS 
by BRAM HALL 
Their landing on that planet 
imposed a sentence of death. 
M ai found the first of the canals 
on the third day after they 
landed. Tangled ghosts of mist 
broke lazily from its sluggish surface, and it should not really have 
been there at all, although Mai 
was the only one to attach any importance to the fact. 
The first two days had been 
spent on the ship. The Hannah P 
was an old second-hand freighter, 
and although the warp drive was 
new, the rest of the ship was not. 
There were sprung hull-plates to be 
welded, burnt-out valves to be 
spotted and replaced and the number three tube-lining had to be removed and entirely resurfaced. Mai, 
Mulligan and Miller worked fever
ishly for almost forty-eight hours, 
for one never knew, on a strange 
planet on this distant rim of the 
galaxy, when a quick lift-off might 
mean the difference between life 
and an exotic death at the hands of 
some new and therefore unenlightened life form. The memory of their 
narrow escape from the pink savages of Susskind B IV was still fresh 
in their minds. 
Their anxiety to have the ramshackle ship in constant readiness 
was heightened by the knowledge 
that the nearest help in an emergency was several light-years nearer 
the hub of the galaxy, and. only just 
within reach of their out-of-date 
subetheric radio. They had intended 
% 
to install a new unit with the proceeds of their last trip, but a sudden drop in the price of fissionable 
materials had cut their profits to 
the point where they could only 
just cover their expenses. Despite 
the glamorous image presented by 
the video shows at home, life for 
such small, freelance prospecting 
outfits was a hand-to-mouth affair. 
Their only advantage over the big 
mineral combines was their willingness to accept the risk of ranging 
far from the space-lanes in their 
decrepit little ships, landing on and 
exploiting any unexploited planet 
which offered the prospect of a 
strike. There was no shortage of 
recruits; there were plenty of starstruck young men, like Mai himself, 
only too willing to exchange the 
ease and monotony of life on the 
civilized worlds for the risks and 
hardships of small-time prospecting; 
which was just as well, for while 
the rewards for a successful trip 
were high, the mortality rate was 
high also. 
The Hannah P had dropped into 
normal space quite close to this star 
system — as yet unmapped and 
therefore without a name — and 
Mulligan in his role of navigator (he 
was pilot and cook as well) had 
elected to land, although with its 
four tiny planets the prospect of a 
strike seemed small. The choice of 
planet had been taken out of their 
hands by a smoking valve in the 
control panel, which had threatened 
An IF First 
Each month/ H brings you a new 
writer, never before published. This 
month's is Bram Hall, a 26-year-old Londoner who composes and teaches musk, 
in which he received his Bachelor of Arts 
degree. So far, he's also a bachelor in 
life as well as in education. His chief 
interests are sailing small boats and driving , sports cars. He considers Tolkien's 
Lord of the Rings one of the greatest 
books ever written and prefers honest escape literature. We hope to see more such 
escapes from himl 
to blow and take the rest of the 
panel with it. The panel, maintained 
by Miller with small blobs of solder 
and a large amount of taciturn faith, 
was hardly designed for such 
alarms, and the Hannah P hastily 
settled on the nearest of the four 
planets, the only one which boasted 
an atmosphere, though even that 
was less than four miles deep. As 
the three prospectors hurriedly 
strapped themselves to their shock 
couches, the silver planet rushed 
up at them. The servos cut in the 
main rockets at the last minute and 
the ship was swallowed up. 
TV/Tal, still young and capable of 
-*■*•*■ wonder at the sight of a virgin planet, had been first to the 
viewport. 
“Fog!” he said disgustedly, 
“That silver we saw was just fog! 
What’s the atmosphere?” 
Miller, geologist and engineer, 
unfolded his long shanks from the 
IF 
couch and ambled to the instrument 
panel. 
“Thin,” he grunted, and scratched his carrotty head. A shower of 
dandruff fluttered like doves to 
roost on the shoulders of his filthy 
tunic. 
“Mainly inert gases, but some 
oxygen. And lots of water vapor. 
That’s your fog.” 
Mai had already gone in search 
of the light suits, but Mulligan gruffly called him back. 
“Hold it, hophead! Ship first.” 
And ship first it was: the Hannah 
P was a venerable old lady and 
demanded constant attention. 
At last the ship was ready, and 
their attention could be turned to 
less pressing matters. Miller, whose 
lean frame had proved itself, on 
this as on many other occasions, 
admirably adapted to crawling in 
and through and around the complex guts of the spaceship, scraped 
at least half-an-inch of grease and 
grime from his sour features, and 
grudgingly pronounced himself 
satisfied. 
It was decided that while the 
engineer remained aboard to do a 
final check on the delicate servomechanisms, Mulligan and Mai 
would make the first foray and 
maybe do a couple of preliminary 
sample drillings by themselves. It 
was with ill-concealed excitement 
that Mai made preparation for the 
trip; all the repairs and maintenance had been carried out from 
THE CANALS OF SANTA CLAUS 
within the hull, for spacemen 
habitually expose themselves to the 
unknown as little as possible, and 
soon they would be seeing a new 
planet for the first time. Mai had 
joined the team as deckhand and 
general dogsbody only four months 
previously, and was now a veteran 
of two trips and nine planetary 
landings. Soon enough, he knew, the 
wonder of new places would leave 
him and he would become hardened 
and cynical like Mulligan and Miiller; for the time being he coaxed 
and nurtured his excitement carefully, maintaining his feeling for the 
romance of space as long as possible. 
Nevertheless, his first sight of 
the new planet was disappointing. 
'T'hick white mist obscured everything and from the airlock, 
fifty feet up, even the ground was 
invisible. The two men pushed their 
feather-light gravsleds out of the 
hatch, stepped aboard and began to 
sink slowly down. The journey took 
only twenty seconds, but seemed 
endless to Mai, poised beside the 
silver hull, sight and sound deadened by the fog. When they touched 
down, Mai stepped off and looked 
around. 
“Christmas trees!” he grunted. 
“Rows and rows of flaming black 
Christmas trees!” 
The black, conical bushes stretched in all directions into the mist, 
which seemed thicker at ground 
level. The hard soil, save where it 
had been scorched by their rocket 
blast, was dull and sandy. 
“What shall we call this place?” 
Mulligan asked. 
"Yule,” suggested Mai. 
“No, that’s been used before. 
How about Santa Claus?” 
“Suits me. I don’t see us having 
a very merry time here, though. 
Let’s pick a nice hot planet next 
time. Shall we stay together or 
split up?” 
Mulligan looked round. 
“Seems fairly harmless,” he said. 
“We’ll split up. You go south, I’ll 
go north. Keep in touch.” 
As the pair split up and moved 
off, Mai glanced back nervously, 
only to find that already the mist 
had swallowed up all trace of the 
ship and the circle of blackened, 
rocket-blasted rubble on which it 
stood. Used as he was to solitude 
and confinement, a feeling of claustrophobic loneliness swept over him. 
He guided the sled two feet above 
the flat, sandy ground between the 
“Christmas trees.” Tree after tree, 
all six feet or thereabouts in height, 
swam into view on either side, slid 
past, and vanished in the mist. 
They all seemed to grow the same 
distance apart, in fairly straight 
lines. “Like an orchard,” he 
thought, and wondered, with a start, 
if he would meet the gardener. That 
life should be found in such a thin 
atmosphere — so thin and cold that 
heated pressure suits were neces
sary — amazed him not at all. 
Life, in this galaxy at least, was. 
persistent, and space travelers soon 
grew blase about its hardihood and 
diversity. The arguments and speculation of the twentieth century on 
the likelihood of finding life on 
other planets had been confounded 
when, with the invention of the 
space-warp in 2157, man had exploded through the center of the 
galaxy and found that there 
was scarcely a star-system that did 
not have life of some kind, and that 
intelligent life was by no means 
scarce, although so far no life form 
had appeared to challenge man’s 
supremacy in the space-lanes. 
A shrill buzzing in the earpiece 
of his helmet told Mai that 
Mulligan was on the blower. He 
nudged the intercom switch with 
his chin and immediately felt less 
alone as Mulligan spoke, although 
the skipper was probably two or 
three miles away by now. 
“Mai, have your young eyes 
spotted anything strange about 
these trees?” 
“Well, they’re black, for a start. 
But that only means they don’t 
photosynthesize, which isn’t unusual. There’s a planet somewhere in 
this quadrant where the plants 
break down their food by a kind of 
electrolysis. Not much direct sunlight can filter through this mist 
anyway. Perhaps they absorb other 
radiation?” 
IF 
“The black color would make 
them absorbent, I suppose,” There 
was a short silence, broken only by 
the sound of Mulligan’s breathing 
in the mouthpiece, “Their conical 
shape gives them plenty of surface 
area. You could be right. Mai, get 
off your sled and have a closer look 
at them! I’ve just thought of something else.” 
Mai stopped the sled and lowered 
it gingerly to the ground. Stepping 
off, he walked to the nearest tree. 
The foliage was rubbery to the 
touch and pushed aside easily. In 
such light gravity and thin atmosphere little strength was needed. 
“All I can see is smooth branches 
and flat leaves. What am I supposed to be looking for?” Mai asked. 
“No buds or flowers?” Mulligan’s 
voice in his ear was casual. “How 
do they reproduce?” 
“Perhaps this is the wrong season,” Mai replied. 
“Atmosphere’s too thin, orbit’s 
too regular. No seasons.” 
“Could they be immortal?” 
Mulligan laughed. “You’ve been 
reading too many fantasies. Unique 
if they are. Perhaps we’d better try 
and take one home — the boffins 
might be interested. I’m going on. 
See you.” 
There was a click as Mulligan 
flicked off his intercom, and Mai 
glanced over his shoulder at the 
sudden silence. An uneasy feeling 
had been growing on him ever since 
leaving the ship. Not being able 
to see more than twenty feet in 
front of him did not help. He felt 
that if anything that wasn’t a 
Christmas tree suddenly loomed out 
of the mist he would scream. 
egaining the sled, he felt easier, 
^ and moved off again. The 
journey took on a dreamlike quality as the constant succession of 
black rubber trees slipped out of the 
mist, solidified, and dissolved again 
behind him. He found himself looking once more over his shoulder, 
and shook himself angrily. A good 
spaceman doesn’t get the jitters 
this easily, he told himself, and 
speeded the sled up a little. The 
sandy ground sped under the blunt 
nose of the sled, which was little 
more than a ten-foot tray with a 
seat and controls at the front. He 
had set the controls at an altitude 
of two feet above the ground, and 
had glanced at the dial several times 
before he realized that there was no 
need to do so. The terrain was as 
flat as a billiard table, and as 
smooth and unbroken. The sled left 
no trace of its passing, and Mai 
would need the direction finder to 
make his way back to the Hannah 
P. At the thought of being lost in 
this misty maze, his nervousness increased, but his next thought made 
him jab at the intercom switch with 
such haste that he hit the wrong 
button and received an unwanted 
mouthful of vitamin and glucose 
THE CANALS OF SANTA CLAUS 
concentrate. The ideal spaceman 
needed a prehensile chin to operate 
all the controls in a Mark IX helmet. 
When Mulligan finally answered, 
Mai had to make a conscious effort 
to remain calm and not to allow his 
tongue to trip him up in his haste. 
“Mulligan, we’ve been going 
about half an hour, so we’ve each 
covered about ten miles, right?” 
" Right.” 
“So far, has there been any variation in the landscape — any hills 
or valleys?” 
“Nope. Flat as a pancake. I’m 
going to turn back soon.” 
"Then how come, with an atmosphere this shallow, there are no 
meteor craters?” Mai finished with 
an air of triumph. 
“Well, heck! You know there 
aren’t usually many meteors this far 
out. Perhaps there just haven’t been 
any recently.” Mulligan was a practical man, and had little time for 
unproductive speculation. 
“Oh, come on! There must have 
been a few at least. And yet the 
ground isn’t even pockmarked. This 
atmosphere is no protection at all, 
and yet there are no plants broken 
down and no holes in the ground or 
anything.” 
“Well, what’s your explanation?” 
“I haven’t one. But I’ll tell you 
something else.” 
“Must you?” The older man 
mocked, but Mai was stubborn. 
“Yes.” 
“Then I suppose I’ll have to 
listen. What is it, O imaginative 1 
one? Blue spiders fifty feet high?” 
“No, it’s the mist.” Mai ignored 
the pleasantry with an ease born of 
a thousand ribbings. “To produce 
mist, there must be a temperature 
differential, mustn’t there? There 
must be warm air and cold air, or 
warm water and cold air, or something like that. Yet everything’s 
freezing here.” 
“Perhaps the fog is the noxious 
breath of those blue spiders, spawned by the venomous drool from their 
fangs!” suggested Mulligan drily. 
Mai snapped, “The only blue spiders we’re likely to see will be coming out of those bottles you’ve got 
hidden under the chart table!” He 
flicked off the blower before Mulligan could retort. 
'T'his exchange did not answer the 
question, however, and Mel 
was so absorbed in the puzzle that 
when he did find the answer he very 
nearly fell in it. Awakening with a 
start, he slammed the sled to a halt 
and looked around. He had come to 
rest on the very brink of a canal. 
The sides were almost sheer, and 
very regular, and the channel 
stretched as straight as a die into 
the mist to right and left of him. 
Twenty or thirty feet away on the 
far bank, scarcely seen through the 
mist, the black forest resumed its 
march to the invisible horizon. 
Seven or eight feet below him the 
IF 
oily, dark water slid slowly past, 
and skeins of white mist rose lazily 
from it. 
Mai snapped off a black leaf 
from the nearest tree and, clumsily 
because of the heavy gauntlets of 
his suit, tossed it down. Before it 
sank, it had' traveled almost out of 
sight. He turned towards the sled, 
preoccupied. One puzzle was solved, 
only to give rise to another much 
more mystifying. The fog obviously 
came from the canal, whose temperature must be many degrees 
higher than that of the surrounding 
air. Volcanic action could explain 
that — hot springs were found on 
many planets, including Terra itself. 
But how does a river flow in an 
apparently featureless plain? Rivers 
flow from a high place to a low 
place, yet they had seen no evidence 
of any hills or mountains as they 
had landed, and not even a molehill had disturbed the flight of the 
sled in the last ten miles. The canal 
could not be natural, for the laws 
of nature are universal. If it was 
not natural, it must be artificial. 
So who built it? 
Mai suddenly whirled round, almost losing his footing, but the shadow at the corner of his vision was 
only another dark tree, standing 
motionless. The helmet of his suit 
restricted vision, and it was easy to 
imagine that something might be 
lurking just behind him, beyond the 
field of his vision. 
Before he reached the sled, the 
intercom buzzed angrily. It was 
Miller back on the ship, apparently 
stirred by some anxiety to heights 
of verbosity entirely out of character. 
“Mai, where are you? Mulligan’s 
nearly here — get back as quick 
as you can!” 
“Miller, wait! I’ve found a river, 
and . .” 
“You’ve no time for swimming 
now! Get back, we’re lifting offl” 
Exhausted by this unparalleled 
feat of oratory, Miller sharply cut 
off. Mai, disturbed, ran to the sled 
and took off. He set the altitude at 
twenty feet, well above the trees, 
and switched the automatic homing 
device onto the ship; then, as the 
sled rushed through the mist and 
the trees darted underneath for all 
the world like the sleepers of an oldfashioned railway, he glanced nervously about. He had a strange sensation, as though someone, or something, might be keeping pace with 
him in the mist on either side, 
watching. 
nphe sled beeped to warn him of 
-*• the approach to the ship, and 
automatically slowed. The Hannah 
P loomed gigantic out of the mist, 
and Mai’s heart sank. The slim nose 
of the ship, 150 feet above him, 
was canted alarmingly to one side. 
Below, the area of ground where 
the fiery maelstrom of the landing 
jets had charred the rubbery plants 
and fused the sand into blackened 
THE CANALS OF SANTA CLAUS 
glass, was now a glittering, wet bog. 
One slender landing-leg was engulfed for half its length, while the 
other two seemed for the moment 
to stand on firmer ground. Even 
there, however, the water glistened; 
as Mai watched, a bubble broke to 
the surface and the ship settled a 
sickening six inches. 
Mulligan waited at the airlock as 
Mai shot in and stepped off 
the sled. 
“Quick, get upstairs and into 
your couch. We’re moving ship. Just 
our goddam luck to land on some 
goddam bogl” 
Mai clattered up the steel ladder 
to the control room with Mulligan 
pressing on his heels. As they climbed, Mai tried to explain about the 
river and the mist, but Mulligan was 
concerned only with the safety of 
the ship and would not listen. 
Miller was already on his couch, 
and snapped, “Orbit?” 
“No,” grunted Mulligan as he 
stumped stickily to the control position. “We haven’t done any drilling yet, and we’re not going to let 
any blasted bog stop us; we came 
to prospect, so we’ll prospect! I’ll 
set her down a couple of miles 
away.” His cropped head bristled 
with indignation as he slammed one 
podgy fist on the firing button. 
The ship paused for a moment, 
straining, and then the legs broke 
free suddenly. Mai was thrown 
against his straps as the Hannah P 
lurched into the air. 
Otars glittered momentarily 
^ through the black viewport at 
the corner of Mai’s vision, only to 
be eclipsed by brighter stars within 
the cabin as three overloaded control valves blew at once. The cabin 
slewed to one side, then steadied as 
Mulligan’s chunky hands danced 
on the controls that were left, 
maintaining thrust here, cutting to 
compensate there, firing the steering 
tubes to eliminate side movement, 
cutting and thrusting like a fencer 
as the stars twisted and lurched 
outside and the silver mist rushed 
up to engulf the stricken ship, Mulligan’s hands danced up and down 
the rows of buttons, thrusting and 
parrying each new component of 
movement, each twist and fall as 
the tortured hullplates squealed and 
the main beams groaned and flexed. 
Then the ship hit, bounced twice on 
her hydraulic legs, miraculously 
stayed upright, and Mulligan cut 
the engines and slumped wetly in 
his couch. Silence flooded the cabin; 
the lights suddenly seemed dull and 
yellow and they lay sweating to the 
tick and twang of cooling metal 
below. 
Mai stared up at the ceiling. 
“Mulligan, I’ll never make another crack about those bottles under the chart table,” he said. 
“I bet they’re all broken anyway,” replied Mulligan flatly. 
Miller sat up and shook his head, 
scattering a new snowcap on his 
shoulders. 
IF 
“Do you know where we are?” 
he asked. 
“I know where we were” 
grunted Mulligan, “but the instruments are knocked haywire.” 
“Does it matter?” asked Mai. 
“One part of this planet seems 
much the same as any other part 
to me.” 
“It matters a little. We need to 
know where we are, to calculate a 
good trajectory for take-off, if we’re 
not to waste fuel buzzing around 
before we warp into hyper-space.” 
“Well, astro-navigation will . .” 
“How in hell’s name do you astronavigate through this fog?” asked 
Miller rudely. “So far as I can see, 
the best thing would be to find 
our old place in the swamp and calculate our present position from 
that.” 
Mulligan agreed. “One of us can 
spiral out from the ship and search 
while the others do a couple of 
quick drillings. I doubt if we’ll find 
anything worth claiming, but we 
can try.” 
A yTal, as the least skilled and 
most curious of the three, 
elected to search for their old position. From there, he could line up 
the direction finder on the sled and 
calculate their present position on 
the planet. On a planet the size of 
Earth’s moon, the search could be 
quite protracted, but the sleds were 
fast and economical. Stifling an 
ever-increasing feeling of being 
watched, Mai helped the others unload the portable drilling rig and 
the Geiger counters, then took a 
sled and began his search. Instantly 
the clinging fog closed behind him 
and swallowed up the familiar shape 
of the Hannah P and his spacesuited companions. He was alone 
once more with the unending 
columns of black, still trees and the 
silent mist which opened before him 
and closed behind him, muffling 
sight and sound and offering concealment to he knew not what. 
A Marshall gravsled Mk. IIA — 
price 999 credits Terran, guaranteed 
for five years against faulty materials and workmanship — consumes one power cell per one hundred hours use and can lift loads 
of up to one ton to heights of approximately fifty feet at speeds of 
up to two hundred miles per hour. 
It is a fast and efficient means of 
transport and Mai had nothing to 
do but sit, watch the ground, and 
worry. When he returned to the 
Hannah P twelve hours later, he had 
travelled 2,400 miles, had covered 
the ground quite systematically over 
a circle approximately one hundred 
miles in circumference, had found 
nothing and was very worried indeed. 
Pilot, navigator, cook, engineer 
and geologist greeted him with long 
faces; the two men had drilled sixteen very deep holes and also found 
nothing. 
“I just don’t understand this 
THE CANALS OF SANTA CLAUS 
place at all,” gloomed Mulligan. 
“There’s nothing under here except a large amount of mineral salts 
and other rubbish that’s no use to 
us. Not a single mineral concentration worthy of the name. We’ve 
analyzed the film the auto-recorder 
took as we came down, and there 
isn’t a geological formation in the 
place; it’s flat and featureless as a 
baby’s bottom.” 
“No meteor craters, then?” 
“The hell with your meteor craters! If you spent a little less time 
dreaming about meteor craters that 
don’t exist but should, and rivers 
which shouldn’t exist but do, instead of keeping your eyes open, at 
least we’d know roughly where we 
are on this God-forsaken bristly 
billiard ball! As it is, we’ll probably 
take off on a bad trajectory and 
have to waste half our rocket-fuel 
getting far enough out to warp.” 
A yTal, nettled, said sharply, “Fm 
not dreaming! If you thought 
a little more about the things 
around you, instead of getting your 
ideas out of a bottle, you’d realize that there are a lot of things 
wrong with this place. Plants that 
can’t reproduce, craters which 
should be there and you can’t deny 
it, apparently solid ground which 
suddenly goes soggy for no obvious 
reason and then vanishes without 
trace, a planet with no mineral 
deposits at all, and last of all, the 
rivers !” 
“Rivers! How many are there 
for God’s sake?” Mulligan sat up, 
and alarm creased his stolid features. “Have you found more?” 
“Yes, lots of ’em. They’re all the 
same, quite straight, at about thirty 
mile intervals, all warm and all 
flowing in the same direction. I 
took a sample from one of them — 
it’s in the analyzer now. On present 
form, it’ll probably turn out to be 
pure Scotch whisky, which’ll please 
someone I could mention. It 
wouldn’t surprise me if those drillings you made didn’t vanish during 
the night, either.” 
“They already have!” Miller, unnoticed, had drifted into the control room and draped himself over 
the console. “I’ve just been out 
there to bury the garbage. That 
ground’s as hard as flint, by the 
way. So I decided to shove the 
waste down one of the drillings instead of digging a hole. Only — 
there aren’t any drillings — they’ve 
gone.” 
Mulligan snorted uncertainly, 
“Are you sure?” 
“Sure I’m sure. / know where we 
drilled.” 
Encouraged, Mai broke in. “Do 
you get the feeling we’re being 
watched?” 
Before Mulligan could utter a rebuff, Miller answered, “Yes.” He 
said it flatly and ambled out. Mai, 
fearing Mulligan’s caustic tongue, 
followed him out, and caught him 
up at the bottom of the ladder. 
IF 
“Miller, did you mean that?” 
: “I|said it, didn’t I? This place 
spools me; mist and trees, trees 
and mist, row upon row.” 
“Come and see what the analyzer makes of that water.” 
Miller groaned but followed, trailing clouds of white glory behind 
him. The prolonged weightlessness 
of space does unpredictable things 
to a man’s metabolism, and dandruff was the cross Miller had to 
bear. Mulligan had once confided to 
Mai that he believed that in trying 
to get rid of the dandruff, Miller 
had shampooed his brains away. 
Mai wondered if Mulligan’s own 
weakness for whisky was attributable to weightlessness as well. 
The analysis room was tiny, and 
the automatic analyzer, or Annie, 
took up so much room that the 
two men had virtually to stand in 
the companion-way and poke their 
heads through the door. As the results reeled across the scanner, Mai 
whistled. 
“Soup!” he said. “It’s a soup — 
you could can that and sell it!” 
The scanner told the tale of a 
multitude of small organisms, ranging from the microscopic to those 
visible with the naked eye. All, 
however, were simple in construction and all were very alien indeed. 
Apart from that, the water was a 
strong, warm solution of mineral 
salts. Mai felt an idea tickling the 
back of his mind but could not 
grasp it. 
THE CANALS OF SANTA CLAUS 
T ater that evening, lying on his 
back in the tiny cubicle he 
called a cabin, he pondered the 
problem. Although man had visited 
thousands of planets and had found 
life in incredible profusion and 
variety, the same general rules applied wherever you were. On no 
planet visited in recorded history 
had the rules of logic been broken. 
A thin atmosphere provides little 
protection from meteors and other 
debris of space. Therefore, there 
should be craters. 
On Aldebaran XII, on an airless 
world so far out that its parent 
sun looked no bigger than a pinhead in the inky sky, lived a race 
of crystalline beings who took centuries to grow a single thought and 
with whom it would be as impossible to communicate as it would for 
a mayfly to hold a conversation 
with a human being. 
Yet even on Aldebaran XII, 
liquid oxygen flowed from up to 
down and would remain still on an 
infinite flat surface. 
On Susskind B IV, their last port 
of call, the crew of the Hannah P 
had seen a self-propelled Geiger 
counter come to a particularly nasty 
end at the hands — and teeth — 
of a race of pink hominids who 
could not suffer anything to live 
that was not pink also — indeed, 
the three men had barely escaped 
the same fate themselves. 
Yet even on Susskind B IV when 
a hole was dug, it stayed dug. 
Somewhere in the Hammond 
system, there was a planet the 
dominant species of which spent 
their entire lives fluttering in the 
air, descending to the ground only 
to breed, which they did with astonishing rapidity and, it seemed 
to the human observers, without 
gaining very much satisfaction 
therefrom. 
Yet even there, bogs did not 
suddenly appear where there had 
previously been arid desert, nor did 
they accurately position themselves 
directly under a very heavy, very 
vulnerable spaceship. 
Mai, suddenly alarmed, sped up 
the companion-way to the airlock. 
Fumbling with the fasteners in his 
anxiety, he pulled on a suit and 
exhausted the airlock. What he saw 
when he opened the outer door and 
looked down confirmed his worst 
suspicions; the blackened ground 
beneath the ship glistened and 
moved slightly, as the Hannah P 
settled imperceptibly deeper into 
the mud. The landing legs were 
already hidden as far as the hydraulic struts and had only to sink 
another three feet before the main 
jets were clogged and silenced for 
ever. 
Slamming the airlock, Mai raced 
for the control room, ripping off his 
helmet as he ran. He threw himself 
into the pilot’s couch and began 
flicking switches, meanwhile yelling 
for Mulligan and Miller. The two 
men, one stomping noisily and 
swearing under his breath, the other 
ambling with deceptive speed and 
leaving a trail of white flecks to 
mark his passage, threw themselves 
onto the spare couches as Mai’s 
hand hit the firing button. For a 
long moment, the ship hesitated; 
then, with a tremendous sucking 
implosion which echoed throughout 
her length, she shook herself free 
and shot skywards. 
Tn a safe parking orbit seventy 
^ miles up, the three men recovered their three wits and showed 
three different reactions to their 
narrow escape. Miller, as usual, was 
taciturn; Mullligan, as usual, was 
scornful; Mai was triumphant — 
he had achieved every space cadet’s 
dream of saving the ship and solving a dilemma which had puzzled 
older and wiser heads than his. 
“It’s simple really,” he crowed, 
lolling in the pilot’s seat and waving an airy hand. “We were being 
eaten! That’s why there were no 
meteor-holes — the meteors are absorbed and the craters heal overl 
And that’s what happened to your 
drillings, too; they just healed, like 
a cut or a burn.” 
Mulligan stomped to the chart 
table, opened the locker underneath 
and began counting his bottles. 
“Are you sure you haven’t been 
at these? You’ll be telling us next 
that the whole damned planet was 
one big beastie, and that those heated rivers of yours were its blood 1” 
IF 
“Exactly I If you lived in a completely sterile atmosphere you 
could wear your bloodvessels on the 
outside tool” 
“And the trees?” Miller asked. 
“What about the trees? Parasites, 
I suppose.” 
“No,” said Mai, “they absorb 
radiation — how do you think . 
Mulligan moved to the control 
console and began punching co-ordinates. He turned, grinning, to Miller and said in a hushed voice, 
“Well, weightlessness affects us all 
in different ways, I suppose. But 
so young, and so promising 1” 
Shaking his head and switching 
in the autopilot, he went to the 
chart table and pulled out a bottle. 
Miller eased himself off the couch 
and went off to the bathroom to 
shampoo his hair. 
TTigh in the firmament, invisible 
** trom the mist of the planet’s 
surface, a single fitful star moved 
slowly off, winked once, and then 
vanished as the Hannah P slipped 
into hyper-drive. 
Midway between two of the black 
Christmas trees, where Miller had 
finally hacked out a small hole in 
the hard, sandy surface and buried 
the garbage, the ground glistened 
like an open wound, and bubbled 
slightly. Minute organisms, specially 
adapted for the purpose, began to 
eat through the polythene wrapping and its contents. Old tin cans, 
plastic containers, a half eaten 
steak and several empty bottles, 
among many other things, dissolved 
and were carried away by tiny absorbent corpuscles. With them went 
an old toothbrush of Mulligan’s, 
several pairs of disgusting socks 
which had once adorned the thin 
legs of Miller, and a few of the 
paper handkerchiefs Mai had used 
when he’d had a slight headcold 
the week before. All carried a profusion of micro-organisms totally 
alien to their new host. 
Slowly, the canals grew sluggish. 
A thin skin formed on their black 
surface, their edges crinkled slightly 
and eventually they stopped flowing and began to freeze over. The 
black trees, rank upon rank, grew 
brittle, drooped and broke. The flat, 
even surface heaved itself into furrows and ridges, for all the world 
like the wrinkles on the face of an 
old woman close to death. Soon even 
these corrugations cracked, split and 
crumbled to dust. 
As the warm pulsations of its interior cooled and stopped, the mist 
thinned and turned to a rime of 
frost. Alone, as it had lived, save 
for the brief visit of its unconscious executioners, slowly the planet sickened, saw the stars, and died. 
END 
REMEMBER: 
New subscriptions and changes o! address 
require 5 weeks to process! 
THE CANALS OF SANTA CLAUS 
IF * Short Story 
The 
Comsat Angels 
by J. G. BALLARD 
Unto us a child is born — 
and another and another • . 
Now I know who sits on the left part of Horizon’s new series that I 
of Kosygin and Johnson, who sets was scripting, "The Expanding 
the courses above Cape Kennedy Mind”, about the role of communiand waits in the Vatican behind the cations satellites and data-processPapal throne. 1 know, too, what ing devices in the so-called informathey are waiting for . tion explosion. What annoyed me 
was this insertion of irrelevant and 
'ITThen I first heard about the sensational material into an other^ * assignment I did my best to wise serious program, 
turn it down. Charles Whitehead, “Charles, you’ll destroy the whole 
producer of BBC-TV’s London- thing,” I protested across his desk 
based science program, Horizon, that morning. “These child prodiasked me to fly over to France gies are all the same. Either they 
with him and record a press con- simply have some freak talent or 
ference being held by a 14-year-old they’re being manipulated by amchild prodigy, Georges Duval, who bitious parents. Do you honestly 
was attracting attention in the Paris believe this boy is a genius?” 
newspapers. The film would form “He might be, James. Who can 
say?” Charles waved a plump hand 
at the contact prints of orbiting 
satellites pinned to the walls. “We’re 
doing a program about advanced 
communications systems — if they 
have any justification at all, it’s 
that they bring rare talents like 
this one to light.” 
“Rubbish — these prodigies have 
been exposed time and again. They 
bear the same relation to true 
genius that a cross-channel swimmer does to a lunar astronaut.” 
In the end, despite my protests, 
Charles won me over with his bland 
producer’s charm, but I was still 
skeptical when we flew to Orly Airport the next morning. Every two 
or three years there were reports of 
some newly discovered child genius. The pattern was always 
the same: the prodigy had mastered chess at the age of three, Sanskrit and calculus at six, Einstein’s 
General Theory of Relativity at 
twelve. The universities and conservatories of America and Europe 
opened their doors. 
For some reason, though, nothing 
ever came of these precocious talents. Once the parents, or an unscrupulous commercial sponsor, had 
squeezed the last drop of publicity 
out of the child, his so-called 
genius seemed to evaporate and he 
vanished into oblivion. 
“Do you remember Minou Drouet?” I asked Charles as we drove 
from Orly. “A child prodigy of a 
few years back. Cocteau read her 
poems and said, ‘Every child is a 
genius except Minou Drouet.’ ” 
“James, relax . Like all scientists, you can’t bear anything that 
challenges your own prejudices. 
Let’s wait until we see him , He 
might surprise us.” 
He certainly did, though not as 
we expected. 
eorges Duval lived with his 
widowed mother in the small 
town of Montereau on the Seine 
thirty miles south of Paris. As we 
drove across the cobbled square past 
the faded police prefecture, it seemed an unlikely birthplace for another Darwin, Freud or Curie. However, the Duvals’ house was an expensively built, white-walled villa 
overlooking a placid arm of the 
river. A well-tended lawn ran down 
to a vista of swans and water-meadows. 
Parked in the drive was the location truck of the film unit we 
had hired, and next to it a radio 
van from Radio-Television Francaise and a Mercedes with a Paris Match sticker across the rear window. Sound cables ran across the 
gravel into a kitchen window. A 
sharp-faced maid led us without 
ado towards "le press-conference.” 
In the lounge, four rows of gilt 
chairs brought in from the Hotel 
de Ville faced a mahogany table 
by the windows. Here a dozen cameramen were photographing Madame Duval, a handsome woman 
THE COMSAT ANGELS 
of 35 with calm gray eyes, arms circumspectly folded below two 
strands of pearls. A trio of solemnfaced men in formal suits protected 
her from the technicians setting up 
microphones and trailing their 
cables under the table. 
Already, fifteen minutes before 
Georges Duval appeared, I felt 
there was something bogus about 
the atmosphere. The three darksuited men — the Director of 
Studies at the Sorbonne, a senior 
bureaucrat from the French Ministry of Education, and a representative of the Institute Pascal, a 
center of advanced study — gave 
the conference an overstuffed air 
only slightly eased by the presence 
of the local mayor, a homely figure 
in a greasy suit, and the boy’s 
schoolmaster, a lantern-jawed man 
hunched around his pipe. 
Needless to say, when Georges 
Duval arrived, he was a total disappointment. Accompanied by a 
young priest, the family counsellor, 
he took his seat behind the table, 
bowing to the three officials and 
giving his mother a dutiful buss on 
the cheek. As the lights came on 
and the cameras began to turn, his 
eyes stared down at us without embarrassment. 
Georges Duval was then 14, a 
slim-shouldered boy small for his 
age, self-composed in a gray flannel 
suit. His face was pale and anaemic, 
hair plastered down to hide his huge 
bony forehead. He kept his hands 
in his pockets, concealing his overlarge wrists. What struck me immediately was the lack of any emotion 
or expression on his face, as if he 
had left his mind in the next room, 
hard at work on some intricate 
problem. 
T)rofessor Leroux of the Sorbonne 
* opened the press conference. 
Georges had first come to light 
when he had taken his mathematics degree at 13, the youngest since Descartes. Leroux described Georges’s career : reading at 
the age of two, by nine he had 
passed his full matriculation exam 
— usually taken at 15 or 16. As a 
vacation hobby he had mastered 
English and German, by 11 had 
passed the diploma of the Paris 
Conservatoire in music theory, by 
12 was working for his degree. He 
had shown a precocious interest in 
molecular biology, and already corresponded with biochemists at Harvard and Cambridge. 
While this familiar catalog was 
being unfolded, Georges’ eyes, below that large carapace of a skull, 
showed not a glimmer of emotion. 
Now and then he glanced at a 
balding young man in a soft gray 
suit sitting by himself in the front 
row. At the time I thought he was 
Georges’s older brother — he had 
the same high bony temples and 
closed face. Later, however, I discovered he had a very different 
role. 
IF 
Questions were invited for 
Georges. These followed the usual 
pattern — what did he think of 
Viet Nam, the space-race, the psychedelic scene, miniskirts, girls, 
Brigit Bardot, Ronald Reagan? In 
short, not a question of a serious 
nature. Georges answered in good 
humor, stating that ouside his 
studies he had no worthwhile 
opinions. His voice was firm and 
reasonably modest, but he looked 
more and more bored by the conference, and as soon as it broke up, 
he joined the young man in the 
front row. Together they left the 
room, the same abstracted look on 
their faces that one sees in the insane, as if crossing our own universe at a slight angle. 
While we made our way out, I 
talked to the other journalists. 
Georges’s father had been an assembly worker at the Renault plant in 
Paris; neither he nor Madame Duval were in the least educated, and 
the house, which the widow and 
son had moved into only two 
months earlier, was paid for by a 
large research foundation. Evidently there were unseen powers standing guard over Georges Duval. He 
apparently never played with the 
boys from he town. 
As we drove away, Charles 
Whitehead said slyly: “I notice you 
didn’t ask any questions yourself.” 
“The whole thing was a complete 
set-up. We might as well have been 
interviewing De Gaulle.” 
“Perhaps we were.” 
"You think the General may be 
behind all this? As publicity for La 
Belle France?” 
“It’s possible. Let’s face it, if 
the boy is outstanding, it makes 
it more difficult for him to go off 
and work for Du Pont or IBM.” 
“But is he? He was intelligent, 
of course, but all the same, I’ll bet 
"you that three years from now noone will even remember him.” 
A fter we returned to London my 
■*** curiosity came back a little. In 
the Air France bus to the TV Center at White City I scanned the 
children on the sidewalk. Without 
a doubt none of them had the maturity and intelligence of Georges 
Duval. Two mornings later, when I 
found myself still thinking about 
Georges, I went up to the research 
library. 
As I turned through the clippings, 
going back 20 years, I made an interesting discovery. Starting at 
1948, I found that a major news 
story about a child prodigy came 
up once every two years. The last 
celebrity had been Bobby Silverberg, a 15-year-old from Tampa, 
Florida. The photographs in the 
Look , Paris-Match and Oggi profiles might have been taken of 
Georges Duval. Apart from the 
American setting, every ingredient 
was the same: the press conference, 
TV cameras, presiding officials, the 
high school principal, doting mother 
THE COMSAT ANGELS 
— and the young genius himself, 
this time with a crew-cut and nothing to hide that high bony skull. 
There were two college degrees already passed, post-graduate fellowships offered by MIT, Princeton 
and CalTech. 
And then what? 
“That was nearly three years 
ago,” I said to Judy Walsh, my 
secretary. “What’s he doing now?” 
She flicked through the index 
cards, then shook her head. “Nothing. I suppose he’s taking another 
degree at a university somewhere.” 
“He’s already got two degrees. 
By now he should have come up with 
a faster-than-light drive or a method 
of synthesizing life.” 
Judy gazed at me with her 
licorice eyes, bangs flaring outrageously. “He’s only 17. Wait until 
he’s a little older.” 
“Older? You’ve given me an 
idea. Let’s go back to the beginning — 1948.” 
Judy handed me the bundle of 
clippings. Life magazine had picked up the story of Gunther Bergman, the first post-war prodigy, a 
17-year-old Swedish youth whose 
pale, over-large eyes stared out 
from the photographs. An unusual 
feature was the presence at the 
graduation ceremony at Uppsala 
.University of three representatives 
from the Nobel Foundation. Perhaps because he was older than 
Silverberg and Georges Duval, his 
intellectual achievements seemed 
prodigious. The degree he was collecting was his third; already he 
had done original research in radioastronomy, helping to identify the 
unusual radio-sources that a decade 
later were termed “quasars.” 
“A spectacular career in astronomy seems guaranteed. It should 
be easy to track him down. He’D 
be what? 37 now, professor at least, 
well on his way to a Nobel Prize.” 
We searched through the professional directories, telephoned Greenwich Observatory and the London 
Secretariat of the World Astronomical Federation. 
No one had heard of Gunther 
Bergman. 
“Right, where is he?” I asked 
Judy when we had exhausted aU 
lines of inquiry. "For heaven’s sake, 
it’s twenty years; he should be 
world-famous by now.” 
“Perhaps he’s dead?” 
“That’s possible.” I gazed down 
pensively at Judy’s quizzical face. 
“Put in a call to the Nobel Foundation. In fact, clear your desk and 
get all the international directories 
we can up here. We’re going to 
make the Comsats sing.” 
T iree weeks later, when I carried 
my bulky briefcase into Charles Whitehead’s office, there was an 
electric spring in my step. 
Charles eyed me warily over his 
glasses. “James, I hear you’ve been 
hard on the trail of our missing 
geniuses. What have you got?” 
IF 
“A new program.” 
\ “New? We’ve already got 
Georges Duval listed in the Radio 
Times .” 
“For how long?” I pulled a 
chair up to his desk and opened 
my briefcase, then spread the dozen 
files in front of him. “Let me put 
you in the picture. Judy and I 
have been back to 1948. In those 
twenty years there have been eleven 
cases of so-called child geniuses. 
Georges Duval is the twelfth.” 
I placed the list in front of him. 
1948 Gunther Bergman (Uppsala, Sweden) 
1950 Jaako Litmanen (Vaasa, Finland) 
1952 John Warrender (Kansas City, U.S.A.) 
1953 Arturo Bandini (Bologna, Italy) 
1955 Gesai Ray (Calcutta, India) 
1957 Guiliano Caldare (Palermo, Sicily) 
1958 Wolfgang Herter (Cologne, Germany) 
1960 Martin Sherrington (Canterbury, England) 
1962 Josef Oblensky (Leningrad, U.S.S.R.) 
1964 Yen Hsi Shan (Wuhan, China) 
1965 Robert Silverberg (Tampa, U.S.A.) 
1968 Georges Duval (Montereau, France) 
Charles studied the list, now and 
then patting his forehead with a 
floral handkerchief. “Frankly, apart 
from Georges Duval, the names 
mean absolutely nothing.” 
“Isn’t that strange? There’s 
enough talent there to win all the 
Nobel Prizes three times over.” 
“Have you tried to trace them?” 
I let out a cry of pain. Even the 
placid Judy gave a despairing shudder. “Have we tried — ? My God, 
we’ve done nothing else. Charles, 
apart from checking a hundred 
directories and registers, we’ve contacted the original magazines and 
news agencies, checked with the universities that originally offered them 
scholarships, talked on the overseas 
lines to the BBC reporters in New 
York, Delhi and Moscow.” 
“And? What do they know about 
them?” 
“Nothing. A complete blank.” 
Charles shook his head doggedly. 
“They must be somewhere. What 
about the universities they were 
supposed to go to?” 
“Nothing there, either. It’s a 
curious thing, but not one of them 
actually went on to a university. 
We’ve contacted the senates of nearly fifty universities. Not a mention 
of them. They took external degrees while still at school, but after 
that they severed all connections 
with the academic world.” 
C harles sat forward over the list, 
holding it like a portion of 
some treasure map. ''James, it 
looks as if you’re going to win your 
bet. Somehow they all petered out 
in late adolescence. A sudden flaring of intelligence backed by prodigious memory, not matched by any 
real creative spark . that’s it, I 
suppose — none of them was a 
genius.” 
“As a matter of fact, I think they 
all were.” Before he could stop me 
I went on. “Forget that for the moment. Whether or not they had 
genius is irrelevant. Certainly they 
THE COMSAT ANGELS 
had intellects vastly beyond the average, IQ's of 200, enormous scholastic talents in a wide range of subjects. They had a sudden burst of 
fame and exposure and — ” 
“They vanished into thin air. 
What are you suggesting — some 
kind of conspiracy?” 
“In a sense, yes.” 
Charles handed me the list. 
“Come off it. Do you really mean 
that a sinister government bureau 
has smuggled them off, they're slaving away now on some super-weapon?” 
“It's possible, but I doubt it.” I 
took a packet of photographs from 
the second folder. “Have a look at 
them.” 
Charles picked up the first. “Ah, 
there’s Georges. He looks older here, 
those TV cameras are certainly 
aging.” 
“It’s not Georges Duval. It’s Oblensky, the Russian boy, taken six 
years ago. Quite a resemblance, 
though.” I spread the twelve photographs on the table top. Charles 
moved along the half-circle, comparing the over-large eyes and bony 
foreheads, the same steady gaze. 
“Wait a minute I Are you sure 
this isn’t Duval?” Charles picked 
up Oblensky’s photograph and 
pointed to the figure of a young 
man in a light gray suit standing 
behind some mayoral official in a 
Leningrad parlor. “He was at 
Duval’s press conference, sitting 
right in front of us.” 
I nodded to Judy. “You’re right, 
Charles. And he’s not only in that 
photo.” I pulled together tie photographs of Bobby Silverberg, Herter and Martin Sherrington. In each 
one the same balding figure in the 
dove-gray suit was somewhere in 
the background, his over-sharp eyes 
avoiding the camera lens. “No university admits to knowing him, nor 
do Shell, Philips, General Motors 
or a dozen other big international 
companies. Of course, there are 
other organizations he might be a 
talent scout for . .” 
Charles had stood up, and was 
slowly walking around his desk. 
“Such as the C.I.A. — you think 
he may be recruiting talent for 
some top-secret Government thinktank? It’s unlikely, but — ” 
“What about the Russians?” I 
cut in. “Or the Chinese? Let’s face 
it, eleven young men have vanished 
into thin air. What happened to 
them?” 
Charles stared down at the photographs. "The strange thing is that 
I vaguely recognize all these faces. 
Those bony skulls, and those eyes 
. somewhere. Look, James, we 
may have the makings of a new 
program here. This English prodigy, 
Martin Sherrington, he should be 
easy to track down. Then the German, Herter. Find them and we 
may be onto something.” 
W e set off for Canterbury the 
next morning. The address, 
IF 
which I had been given by a friend 
who was science editor of the Daily 
Express , was on a housing estate 
behind the big General Electric 
radio and television plant on the 
edge of the cathedral city. We 
drove past the lines of gray-brick 
houses until we found the Sherringtons’ at the end of a row. Rising 
out of the remains of a greenhouse 
was a huge ham operator’s radio 
mast, its stay-wires snapped and 
rusting. In the eight years since 
his tremendous mind had revealed 
itself to the local grammar-school 
master, Martin Sherrington might 
have gone off to the ends of the 
world, to Cape Kennedy, the Urals 
or Peking. 
In fact, not only were neither 
Martin nor his parents there, but 
it took us all of two days to find 
anyone who even remembered them 
at all. The present tenants of the 
house, a frayed-looking couple, had 
been there two years; and before 
that was a large family of criminal 
inclinations who had been forced 
out by bailiffs and police. The 
headmaster of the grammar-school 
had retired to Scotland. Fortunately the school matron remembered 
Martin — “a brilliantly clever boy, 
we were all very proud of him. To 
tell the truth, though, I can’t say 
we felt much affection for him; he 
didn’t invite it.” She knew nothing 
of Mrs. Sherrington, and as for the 
boy’s father, they assumed he had 
died in the war. 
Finally, thanks to a cashier at 
the accounts office of the local electric company, we found where Mrs. 
Sherrington had moved. 
As soon as I saw that pleasant, 
white-walled villa in its prosperous 
suburb on the other side of Canterbury, I felt that the trail was 
warming. Something about the crisp 
gravel and large, well-trimmed garden reminded me of another bouse 
— Georges Duval’s near Paris. 
From the roof of my car parked 
next to the hedge we watched a 
handsome, strong-shouldered woman strolling in the rose garden. 
“She’s come up in the world,” I 
commented. “Who pays for this 
pad?” 
The meeting was curious. This 
rather homely, quietly dressed 
woman in her late thirties gazed 
at us across the silver tea-set like a 
tamed Mona Lisa. She told us that 
we had absolutely no chance of interviewing Martin on television. 
“So much interest in your son 
was roused at the time, Mrs. Sherrington. Can you tell us about his 
subsequent academic career? Which 
university did he go to?” 
“His education was completed 
privately/’ As for his present whereabouts, she believed he was now 
abroad, working for a large international organization whose name 
she was not at liberty to divulge. 
“Not a government department, 
Mrs. Sherrington?” 
She hesitated, but only briefly. 
THE COMSAT ANGELS 
“I am told the organization is intimately connected with various 
governments, but I have no real 
knowledge.” 
Her voice was over-precise, as if 
she were hiding her real accent. As 
we left, I realized how lonely her 
life was; but as Judy remarked, she 
had probably been lonely ever since 
Martin Sherrington had first learned to speak. 
O ur trip to Germany was equally futile. All traces of Wolfgang Herter had vanished from the 
map. A few people in the small 
village near the Frankfurt autobahn remembered him, and the village postman said that Frau Herter 
had moved to Switzerland, to a 
lakeside villa near Lucerne. A 
woman of modest means and education, but the son had no doubt done 
very well. 
I asked one or two questions. 
Wolfgang’s father? Frau Herter 
had arrived with the child just after the war; the husband had probably perished in one of the nameless prison-camps or battlegrounds 
of World War II. 
The balding man in the light gray 
suit? Yes, he had definitely come 
to the village, helping Frau Herter 
arrange her departure. 
“Back to London,” I said to 
Judy. “This needs bigger resources 
than you and I have.” 
As we flew back Judy said: “One 
thing I don’t understand. Why have 
the fathers always disappeared?” 
“A good question. Putting, it 
crudely, love, a unique genetic 
coupling produced these twelve 
boys. It almost looks as if someone 
has torn the treasure map in two 
and kept one half. Think of the 
stock bank they’re building up, 
enough sperm on ice in a eugenic 
cocktail to repopulate the entire 
planet.” 
This nightmare prospect was on 
my mind when I walked into Charles Whitehead’s office the next 
morning. Charles was in his shirt 
sleeves for the first time I had seen 
him. To my surprise, he brushed 
aside my apologies, then beckoned 
me to the huge spread of photographs pinned to the plaster wall 
behind his desk. The office was a 
clutter of newspaper cuttings and 
blown-up newsreel stills. Charles 
was holding a magnifying glass 
over a photograph of President 
Johnson and McNamara at a White 
House reception. 
“While you were gone we’ve 
been carrying out our own search,” 
he said. “If it’s any consolation, we 
couldn’t trace any df them at first.” 
“Then you have found them? 
Where?” 
"Here.” She gestured at the 
dozens of photographs. "Right in 
front of our noses. We’re looking 
at them every day.” 
He pointed to a news agency 
photograph of a Kremlin reception 
for Premier Ulbricht of East GerIF 
many. Kosygin and Breshnev were 
there, Soviet President Podgorny 
talking to the Finnish Ambassador, 
and a crowd of twenty party functionaries. 
“Recognize anyone? Apart from 
Kosygin and company.” 
“The usual bunch of hatchetfaced waiters these people like to 
surround themselves with. Wait a 
minute, though.” 
/Charles’s finger had paused over 
^ a quiet-faced young man 
with a high dolichocephalic head, 
standing at Kosygin’s elbow. Curiously, the Soviet Premier’s face was 
turned towards him rather than to 
Breshnev. 
"Oblensky — the Russian prodigy. What’s he doing with Kosygin? He looks like an interpreter.” 
“Between Kosygin and Breshnev? Hardly. I’ve checked with the 
BBC and Reuter correspondents in 
Moscow. They’ve seen him around 
quite a bit. He never says anything 
in public, but the important men 
always talk to him” 
I put down the photograph. 
“Charles, get on to the Foreign Office and the U.S. Embassy. It makes 
sense — all eleven of them are 
probably there, in the Soviet 
Union.” 
“Relax. That’s what we thought. 
But have a look at these.” 
The next picture had been taken 
at a White House meeting between 
Johnson, McNamara and General 
Westmoreland discussing UJS. policy in Viet Nam. There were the 
usual aides, secretaries and Secret 
Service men out on the lawn. One 
face had been ringed, that of a 
man in his early thirties standing 
unobtrusively behind Johnson and 
Westmoreland. 
“Warrender — the 1952 geniusl 
He’s working for the U.S. Government.” 
“More surprises.” Charles guided 
me around the rest of the photographs. “You might be interested 
in these.” 
The next showed Pope Paul on 
the balcony of St. Peter’s, making 
his annual “Urbis et Orbis” — city 
and the world — benediction to the 
huge crowd in the square. Standing 
beside him were Cardinal Mancini, 
chief of the Papal Secretariat, and 
members of his household staff. Obliquely behind the Pope was a man 
of about thirty wearing what I 
guessed to be a Jesuit’s soutane, 
large eyes watching Paul with a 
steady gaze. 
“Bandini, Arturo Bandini,” I 
commented, recognizing the face. 
“Oggi did a series of features on 
him. He’s moved high in the papal 
hierarchy.” 
“There are few closer to II Papa, 
or better loved.” 
After that came a photograph of 
U Thant, taken at a U.N. Security 
Council meeting during the Cuban 
missile crisis. Sitting behind the 
Secretary General was a pale
THE COMSAT ANGELS 
skinned young Brahmin with a fine 
mouth and eyes — Gesai Ray, the 
high-caste Indian who was the only 
well-born prodigy I had come 
across. 
“Ray is now even higher up on 
U Thant’s staff,” Charles added. “There’s one interesting photograph 
of him and Warrender together 
during the Cuban crisis. Warrender 
was then on J.F.K.’s staff.” He 
went on casually: “The year after 
Oblensky reached the Kremlin, 
Khrushchev was sacked.” 
“So they’re in contact? I’m beginning to realize what the Moscow-Washington hot line is really 
for.” 
C harles handed me another still. 
“Here’s an old friend of yours 
— our own Martin Sherrington. 
He’s on Professor Lovell’s staff at 
the Jodrell Bank Radio-Observatory. One of the very few not to 
go into government or big business.” 
“Big science, though.” I stared 
at the quiet, intense face of the 
elusive Sherrington, aware that 
someone at Jodrell Bank had deliberately put me off. 
“Like Gunther Bergman — he 
moved to the United States IS years 
ago from Sweden, is now very high 
up in the NASA command chain. 
Yen Hsi Shan is the youngest, barely 17, but have a look at this.” 
The photograph showed Mao Tse 
Tung and Chou En Lai on the reviewing platform in Peking during 
the cultural revolution, an immense 
concourse of teen-agers passing* below, all holding copies of Mao’s 
Thoughts and chanting out slogans. Standing between Mao and 
Chou was a boy with a fist in the 
air who was the chief Red Guard. 
“Yen Hsi Shan. He’s started 
early,” Charles said. “One or two 
of the others we haven’t been able 
to trace as yet, though we hear 
Herter is with the giant ZurichHamburg banking trust. Jaako Litmanen, the Finnish prodigy, is rumoured to be working for the Soviet space program.” 
“Well, one has to admit it,” I 
commented, “they’ve certainly all 
made good.” 
“Not all.” Charles showed me 
the last picture, of the Sicilian genius Guiliano Caldare. “One of them 
made bad. Caldare emigrated to the 
United States in 1960, is now in 
the inner circle of the Cosa Nostra, a coming talent from all one 
hears.” 
I sat down at Charles’s desk. 
“Right, but what does this prove? 
It may look like a conspiracy, but 
given their talents one would expect them to rise in the world.” 
“That’s putting it mildly. Good 
God, this bunch only has to take 
one step forward and they’ll be 
running the entire show.” 
“A valid point.” I opened Charles’s note-pad. “We’ll revise the program — agreed? We start off with 
the Georges Duval conference, folIF 
low up with our own discoveries of 
where the others are, splice in old 
newsreel material, interviews with 
the mothers — it’ll make quite a 
program.” 
r so we hoped. 
Needless to say, the program 
was never started. Two days later, 
when I was still organizing the 
newsreel material, word came down 
from the head of features that the 
project was to be shelved. We tried 
to argue, but the decision was absolute. 
Shortly after, my contract with 
Horizon was ended, and I was given 
the job of doing a new children’s 
series about great inventors. Charles was shunted to “International 
Golf.” Of course, it was obvious to 
both of us that we had come too 
close for someone’s comfort, but 
there was little we could do about 
it. Three months later, I made a 
trip to Jodrell Bank radio-observatory with a party of scientific journalists and had a glimpse of Martin Sherrington, a tall, finely featured man watching with his hard 
gaze as Professor Lovell held his 
press conference. 
During the next months I carefully followed the newspapers and 
TV newscasts. If there was a conspiracy of some kind, what were 
they planning? Here they were, 
sitting behind the world’s great 
men, hands ready to take the levers 
of power. But a global dictatorship 
sounded unlikely. Two of them at 
least seemed opposed to established 
authority. Apart from Caldare in 
the Cosa Nostra, Georges Duval 
put his musical talents to spectacular use, becoming within less 
than a year the greatest of the 
French “Ye-Ye” singers, eclipsing 
the Beatles as a leader of the 
psychedelic youth generation. In 
the forefront of the world protest 
movement, he was hated by the 
police of a dozen countries hut 
idolized by teen-agers from Bangkok to Mexico City. The uniquely 
tough and uncompromising gaze 
stares at us all now from record 
labels. 
Any collaboration between 
Georges and Bandini at the Vatican seems improbable. Besides, 
nothing that happened in the world 
at large suggested that members of 
the group were acting in anything 
but a benign role: the nuclear confrontation averted during the Cuban 
missile crisis, the fall of Khrushchev 
and the Russo-American detente, 
peace moves in Viet Nam, the 
Vatican’s liberalized policy towards 
birth-control and divorce. Even the 
Red Guard movement and the chaos 
it brought could be seen as a subtle 
means of deflecting Chinese militancy at a time when she might 
have intervened in Viet Nam. 
nphen, three months later, Char**■ les Whitehead telephoned me. 
“There’s a report in Der Spiegel ,” 
THE COMSAT ANGELS 
he told me with studied casualness. 
“I thought you might be interested. 
Another young genius has been discovered.” 
“ Great,” I said. “We’ll do a program about it. The usual story, I 
take it?” 
“Absolutely. That same forehead 
and eyes, the mother who lost her 
husband years ago, our friend in 
the villa business. This boy looks 
really bright, though. An IQ estimated at 300. What a mind.” 
“I read the script. The only trouble is, I never got to see the movie. 
Where is this, by the way?” 
“Hebron.” 
“Where’s that?” 
“Near Jerusalem. In Israel.” 
“Israel?” 
I put the phone down. Somewhere in my mind a tumbler had 
clicked. Israeli Of course, at last 
everything made sense. The twelve 
young men, now occupying positions 
of power, controlling everything 
from the U.S., Russian and Chinese 
governments to satellite policy, international finance, the UN, big 
science, the youth and protest movement. There was even a Judas, 
Guiliano Caldare of the Cosa Nostra. It was obvious now. I had always assumed that the twelve were 
working for some mysterious organization, but in fact they were the 
organization. They were waiting for 
the moment of arrival. When the 
child came, he would be prepared 
for in the right way, watched over 
by the Comsat relays, hot lines 
open, the armies of the world immobilized. This time there would 
be no mistakes. 
After an hour, I rang Charles 
back. 
“Charles,” I began, “I know 
what’s happening. Israel . .” 
“What are you talking about?” 
“Israel. Don’t you see, Hebron 
is near Bethlehem.” 
There was an exasperated silence. 
“James, for heaven’s sake . 
You’re not suggesting that — ” 
“Of course. The twelve young 
men, what else could they be preparing for? And why did the ArabIsraeli war end in only two days? 
How old is this boy?” 
“Thirteen.” 
“Let’s say another seven years. 
Good, I had a feeling he would 
come.” 
When Charles protested I handed the receiver to Judy. 
As a matter of fact, I am quite 
certain that I am right. I have seen 
the photographs of Joshua Herzl 
taken at his press conference, a 
slightly difficult lad who rubbed 
quite a few of the reporters the 
wrong way. He vanished off the 
scene shortly afterwards, though 
no doubt his mother now has a 
pleasant white-walled villa outside 
Haifa or Tel Aviv. 
And Jodrell Bank is building an 
enormous new radio-telescope. One 
day soon we shall be seeing signs in 
the skies. END 
IF 
sss! 
'* • , < Vi 
by A. BERTRAM CHANDLER 
Across hundreds of light-years he 
raced — to keep a rendezvous at 
the bqttom of a deadly alien sea l 
Illustrated by FINLAY 
I 
/Commodore John Grimes was pro^ ceeding homewards from Tharn 
the long way around — by way 
of Grollor, Stree and Mellise, by 
the route that he, in the old Faraway Quett, had opened and charted so many years ago. Now the 
Rim Runners’ ships ran the Eastern 
Circuit in both directions, and 
Grimes could have been home weeks 
sooner by waiting only a few extra 
days on Tharn — but Port Forlorn, on Lorn, lived up to its name 
as long as Sonya wasn’t there. She 
was still away from the Rim 
Worlds, still absent on her Galactic 
cruise. 
Grimes was off the leash in more 
ways than one. In his capacity as 
astronautical superintendent he hacj 
been sent to Tham to cope with a 
situation, a near mutiny, that had 
delayed the departure of a Rim 
Runners’ vessel from that planet. 
He had coped, both with the original crew trouble and the ensuing 
complications. After this, an exchange of Carlottigrams with Head 
Office had established the fact that 
things were running themselves 
quite nicely during his absence. 
Grimes then thought of a number 
of reasons why he should revisit 
the other planets of the Eastern 
Circuit, upon which he had been 
the first human being ever to set 
foot and upon which, with the exception of Stree, he had never set 
foot again. After a further exchange 
of Deep Space messages the management had approved his itinerary. 
On all the worlds he was still 
remembered. On Tham the spaceport was named after him. In Braardon, the planetary capital of Grollor, a huge statue of him stood in 
Council Square. 
Grimes stared up at the heroic 
monument with some distaste. Surely his ears didn’t stand out that 
much, and surely his habitual expression was not quite so froglike. 
He made allowances for the fact 
that the Grollans, although humanoid, are a batrachian people. But 
on his return to the ship in which 
he was a passenger, he inspected 
himself for a long time in a fulllength mirror. 
And then Rim Kestrel , in which 
Grimes had taken passage from 
Tharn, came to Mellise. 
Mellise is a watery world, fully 
four-fifths of its surface being 
covered by the warm, mainly shallow seas. The nearest approach to 
a continent is a long, staggering 
chain of islands almost coincident 
with the Equator. On one of the 
larger ones is the spaceport. There 
is no city, only a village in which 
live the human spaceport personnel 
and the Rim Confederacy’s ambassador and his staff. 
The Mellisans themselves are an 
amphibious race. Like the Earthly 
Cetacea they, after having reached 
quite a high stage of evolution 
ashore, returned to the sea. If they 
are obliged to, they can live and 
work on dry land. But they prefer 
the water. They dwell in submarine 
villages where they are safe from 
the jnolent revolving storms that at 
times ravage the surface. They tend 
their underwater farms. In some 
of these they rear giant molluscs, 
great bivalves that yield the lustrous pearls which are their main 
item of export. Their imports are 
the manufactured goods needed by 
an aquatic culture — nets, cordage, 
harpoon guns and the like. They 
could make these for themselves 
but, with the establishment of regular trade between themselves and 
the Confederacy, they have preferred not to. Why should an essentially water-dwelling being work 
with fire and metals when pearl 
IF 
siifi 
Sffii*«ilSKr' 
*>>&&* ,';-v-& : 
-* igr *&&&& .*2 
farming is so much more comfortable and pleasant? 
rimes rode down to the surface 
^ in Rim Kestrel 9 s control room. 
Captain Paulus, the ship’s master, 
was nervous. Obviously he did not 
like having his superior there to 
watch his ship-handling. But he was 
competent enough, although painfully cautious. Not for him the almost meteoric descent favored by 
other masters. His Inertial Drive 
delivered a thrust that nearly countered the planet’s gravitational pull. 
The Kestrel drifted surfacewards 
like a huge balloon with barely 
negative buoyancy. But Paulus reacted fast enough when a jet stream 
took hold of the ship; he canceled 
its effect by just the right application of lateral drive, reacted fast 
again when the vessel was shaken 
by clear air turbulence, pulling her 
out of the danger area with no delay. 
Nonetheless, Grimes was making 
mental notes. The efficiency of the 
spaceport’s meteorological observatory left much to be desired. Paulus 
should have been warned by radio 
of the disturbances through which 
he had passed. (But he, Grimes, had 
made his first* landing here before 
there was a spaceport, let alone 
spaceport facilities. In fact, he had 
brought the Quest down blind, 
through the beginnings of a hurricane.) 
The commodore looked at the 
vision screen that showed, highly 
magnified, what lay aft and below. 
There were the islands, each one 
raggedly circular, each one ringed 
by a golden beach that was ringed, 
in its turn, by white surf. There 
was the cloudy green of shallow 
water, the clear blue of the deeper 
seas. Inland was the predominant 
purple of the vegetation. 
Yes, it was a pleasant world, 
Mellise. Even here, out on the Rim, 
it could have been developed to a 
holiday planet, rivalling if not surpassing Caribbea. If the Mellisans 
had been obliged to deal with the 
Interstellar Federation rather than 
with the Rim Worlds Confederacy, 
this probably would have been the 
case. Grimes, whose first years in 
space had been as an officer in the 
Federation’s Survey Service, knew 
all too well that the major Terran 
Galactic power was far more concerned with the rights of other intelligent races in theory than in 
practice — unless there were some 
political advantage to be gained by 
posing as liberator, conservator or 
whatever. 
He could see the white spaceport buildings now, gleaming in the 
light of the afternoon sun, startlingly distinct against their backdrop of purple foliage. He could see 
the pearly gray of the apron, and 
on it the black, geometrical shadows 
cast by cranes and conveyor belts 
and gantries. He could even see the 
tiny, blinking, scarlet stars that 
IF 
were the three beacons, the markers 
of the triangle in the center of 
which Rim Kestrel was to land. He 
wished that Paulus would get on 
with it. At this rate it would be 
after sunset by the time the ship 
was down. 
After sunset it was, and the night 
had fallen with the dramatic suddenness to be expected in the low 
latitudes of any planet. Overhead 
the sky was dear. Save for the 
opalescent arc that was the upper 
limb of the Galactic Lens, low on 
the western horizon, the sky was 
almost empty. Paulus had ordered 
all ports throughout the ship opened. Through them flowed the warm 
breeze, with scents of growing and 
flowering things that would have 
been doyingly sweet had it not been 
for the harsh tang of salt water. 
There was the distant murmur of 
surf, and, even more distant, a 
grumble of thunder. 
“Thank you, Captain Paulus,” 
said Grimes formally. “A very nice 
set-down.” 
And so it had been. Merchant 
captains, after all, are not paid to 
put their ships in hazard. 
P ort formalities were few. The 
Mellisans cared little about 
such matters as health, customs and 
immigration regulations. 
The port captain, a Rim Worlder, took care of all such details for 
them. Insofar as vessels owned by 
the Confederacy were concerned 
there was not even the imposition 
of port dues. After all, the levying 
of such charges would have been 
merely robbing Peter to pay Paul. 
The rare outside ships — the 
occasional Interstellar Transport 
Commission Epsilon Class tramp, 
the infrequent Empire of Waverly 
freighter, the once-in-a-blue-moon 
Shakespearean Sector trader — 
were presumably another matter. 
Grimes sat with Captain Paulus 
and Stacey, the port captain, in 
Paulus’s day cabin. Cold drinks 
were on the table before them. 
The commodore was smoking his 
foul pipe, Paulus was nervously 
lighting one cigarette after another 
and Captain Stacey had between his 
fleshy lips a peculiarly gnarled cigar of local manufacture. It looked as though it had been rolled 
from dry seaweed. And it smelt like 
it. (“An acquired taste,” Stacey had 
told them. “Like to try one?” They 
had refused.) 
“Only a small shipment of pearls 
this time,” the port captain said. 
“The pearl farmers are having 
their troubles.” 
“Disease again?” asked Paulus. 
“No. Not this time. Seems to be 
a sort of predatory starfish. Could 
be a mutation. Whether it is or 
not, it’s a vicious bastardy.” 
“I thought, Captain Stacey,” 
said Grimes, “that the people here 
were quite capable of dealing with 
any of the dangerous life forms in 
their seas.” 
THE TIN FISHES 
"Not this new starfish,” Stacey 
told him. "It’s a killer.” He sipped 
his drink. "The natives knew that 
you were coming here almost as 
soon as I did, Commodore. Telepathy? Could be. But, sir, you are 
almost a local deity. Old Wunnaara — he’s the boss cocky in these 
parts — said to me only this morning, ‘Grimes Wannarbo’ — and a 
.Wannarbo is roughly halfway beIween a high chief and the Aljmighty — ‘will us help/ Really 
touched by his faith, I was.” 
"I’m not a marine biologist,” 
said Grimes. "But couldn’t you, 
with your local knowledge!, do 
something, Captain Stacey?” 
"I’m not a marine biologist either, Commodore. It takes me all 
my time to run the port.” 
And I recommended you for this 
appointment , thought Grimes, looking at the fat man. I thought 
that this would be an ideal job for 
anybody as notoriously lazy as 
yourself. I thought that you could 
not do any harm here , and that 
you’d get on well with the Mel lisans . But you can’t do either . 
Paulus said, "They must produce pearls if they’re to pay for 
their imports. They’ve nothing 
else we want.” 
Nothing else that we want , 
thought Grimes. But the Rim Confederacy is not alone in the Galaxy . He said, "Surely, Captain Stacey, you’ve found out what sort 
of weapons would be most effec
tive against these things. They 
could be manufactured back on 
Lorn or Faraway, and shipped out 
here. And what about protective 
netting for the oyster beds?” 
"Useless, Commodore,” Stacey 
told him. "The starfish just tear 
even the heaviest wire-rope nets. As 
for weapons — poison has always 
been effective in the past, but not 
any longer.” 
"We have to do something to 
help these people,” Grimes said 
definitely. "And, frankly, not altogether from altruistic motives. As 
you should know, both Waverly 
and the Shakespearean Sector are 
anxious to expand their economic 
spheres of influence. If they can 
help Mellise and we can’t . ” 
The unspoken words, you’ll be 
out of a soft job, hung in the air 
between them. 
"They seem to rely upon you 
fo help them, sir,” Stacey grumbled. 
"And perhaps I can,” Grimes 
told him. 
T>erhaps he could. But, as he had 
said, he was not a marine biologist. Even so, he knew of the 
parallel evolution of life forms on 
all Earth-type planets. In the 
course of his career he had tangled with unfriendly and hungry 
beasts on more than a century of 
worlds. He was still around. The 
hostile animals were not. Variations on familiar patterns or utterly 
IF 
w 
alien, all had fallen victim to hit* 
man cunning and human weaponry 
— and human savagery. Man, after 
all, was still the most dangerous 
animal. 
He said good night to Stacey 
and Paulus, told them that he 
was going outside the ship to stretch 
his legs. He made his way down to 
the after airlock, then down the 
ramp to the smooth, dean concrete 
of the apron. He walked away 
from the direction of the administration buildings and the human 
village, found a path that must 
lead down to the sea. On either 
side of it the feathery fronds of the 
trees rustled in the warm breeze. 
Overhead, Mellise’s single moon, a 
ruddy globe with an almost unmarked surface, rode high in the 
sky. 
Grimes came to the beach, to the 
pale, gently shelving stretch of 
coarse sand beyond which the surf 
was greedy luminescent He kicked off his sandals and, carrying 
them, walked slowly down to the 
edge of the water. He missed Sonya. 
He saw that a black humanoid 
shape, outlined by the phosphorescence, was waddling ashore, splashing through the shallows. From its 
dark head two eyes that reflected 
the ruddy light of the moon stared 
at Grimes. The teeth glinted whitely in the long muzzle as it spoke. 
"Meelongee, Grimes Wannarbo.” 
Its voice was like that of a Siamese cat 
"Meebngee,” replied Grimed. Ha 
remembered that this ins the son! 
of greeting. 
"You have come back.” [The 
English was oddly accented but 
perfectly understandable. 
"Yes. I have come back.” 
"You . help?” 
"I shall try.” 
The native was dose to Grimes 
now, and the commodore could 
smell the not unpleasant fishy odor 
of him. He could see, too, that he 
was old; in the moonlight the white 
hairs about the muzzle and the 
white patches of fur on the chest 
were plainly visible. 
"You me remember?” There was 
a short, barking laugh. "No? I was 
cub when first you come to Met 
lise, Grimes Wannarbo. Now I am 
chief. My name Wunnaara. And 
you too are chief, not of the one 
skyship but of many. I am chief 
but know little. You are chief but 
know much.” 
"The Rkn Kestrel lifts tomorrow,” said Grimes. 
"But you will stay, Wannarbo? 
You will stay?” 
Grimes made his decision. If 
there was anything that he could 
do he would be furthering the interests of the Confederacy as well 
as helping the natives of Mellise. 
Stacey, it was obvious, would not 
lift one fat finger. The ambassador, 
like the port captain, was a nohoper who had been sent to a 
planet upon which no emergencies 
THE TIN FISHES 
were ever likely to arise. Grimes had 
not yet met him, but he knew him 
by repute. 
"I will stay,” he told the chief. 
"Then I tell my people. There 
is much to make ready.” Wunnaara slipped back into the water, 
far more silently than he had 
emerged from it, and was gone. 
The commodore resumed his 
walk along the beach. 
II 
TTe came to a shallow bay, a 
crescent-like indentation in 
the shoreline. There was somebody 
out there in the water swimming — 
and by the flash of long, pale arms 
Grimes knew that it was not a 
native. Too, there was a pile of 
clothing on the sand. 
Quickly Grimes stripped. It was 
a long time since he had enjoyed a 
swim in the sea. He divested himself of his clothing without embarrassment. Even though he was no 
longer a young man his body was 
still compact, well-muscled, had not 
begun to run to belly. He waded 
out into the warm salt water. 
Suddenly he was confronted by 
the other swimmer. Only her head 
and her smooth, bare shoulders 
were visible above the surface. 
Her eyes and her wide mouth were 
very dark against the creamy pallor of her face. 
"Can’t you read,” she was asking indignantly. "Didn’t you see 
the notices? This beach is reserved 
for ladies only.” 
Her accent was not a Rim 
Worlds one; it was more Pan-Terran than anything. That would 
account for her indignation; only on 
parts of the Home Planet did the 
absurd nudity taboo still persist. 
But this was not the Home Planet. 
Grimes said mildly, "I’m sorry. 
I didn’t know.” He turned to leave 
the water. 
She said, "Don’t run away. At 
this depth, we can talk modestly 
enough.” 
"I suppose we can.” 
"You’re from the ship, aren’t 
you? But of course you must be. 
. Let me see, now. I’ve a good 
ear for accents, and you haven’t 
quite lost the good old Terran 
twang. Commodore Grimes, 
would it be?” 
"Guilty,” admitted Grimes. He 
was amused to note either that the 
tide was going out fast or that his 
companion had moved closer inshore. Her full breasts were fully 
exposed now, and there was more 
than a hint of the pale glimmer of 
the rest of her below the surface. 
She said, "It’s rather a pity that 
you’re leaving tomorrow.” 
"I’m not leaving.” 
"You’re not?” she asked sharp
ly
"No. I promised Wunnaara, the 
chief, that I’d stay to look into 
this plague of starfish.” 
"You promised Wunnaara.” Her voice was scornful. "But he’s only 
a native. He has to be kept in his 
place. That’s why I insisted on 
having this beach made private. I 
hated to think that those . • 
things were spying on me, leering 
at me while I was swimming.” 
" And what about me, leering and 
spying?” Grimes asked sarcastical
ly
"But you’re a Terran.” 
"Ex-Terran, young lady. Very 
ex.” 
"... and we Terrans should 
stick together,” she completed with 
a dazzling smile. 
"I’m a Rim Worlder,” Grimes 
told her severely. "And so must 
you be, if you’re employed at the 
spaceport, no matter where you 
were born.” He asked abruptly, 
"And what do you do, by the 
way?” 
"I’m in the Met Office,” she 
said. 
"Then I shall see you tomorrow,” 
stated Grimes. 
"Good!” Her smile flashed on 
again. 
"I shall be calling in to register 
a strong complaint,” the commodore went on. 
He attempted to step past the 
girl, intending to swim out to the 
first line of breakers. Somehow she 
got in his way, and somehow both 
of them lost their balance and went 
down, floundering and splashing. 
Grimes got to his feet first, pulled 
the young woman to hers. He was 
suddenly conscious, as she fell 
against him, of the firmness and 
the softness of the body against 
his own. It was all very nice — 
and all a little too obvious. But 
he was tempted, and tempted 
strongly. Then, but with seeming 
reluctance, she broke away from 
him and splashed shorewards, her 
slim, rounded figure luminous in the 
moonlight. 
Her voice floated back to him, 
"I still hope that it’s a pleasant 
meeting tomorrow, Commodore!” 
I t was not as unpleasant as it 
could have been. The girl, Lynn 
Davis, was second in charge of the 
spaceport’s meteorological office. 
By daylight, and clothed, she was 
still attractive. Her hair was a 
dark, dull-gleaming blonde and her 
eyes were so deep a blue as to be 
almost black. Her face was thin 
and intelligent, with both mouth 
and nose a little too pronounced for 
conventional prettiness. 
There was a resemblance to Sonya, his wife, that strongly attracted 
Grimes, and it was more than a 
physical one. It was a matter of 
essential quality. This at once put 
Grimes on his guard. Sonya had 
held the rank of commander in the 
Federation’s Survey Service, and in 
the Intelligence Branch at that. 
But now Federation and Rim 
Worlds Confederacy worked together, shared all information, kept no 
secrets from each other. 
THE TIN FISHES 
Even so. 
Lynn Davis had all the answers 
ready. Rim Kestrel had been given 
no information on jet streams and 
dear-air turbulence because there 
had been a breakdown of radar and 
other instruments. This, Grimes was 
made to feel, was his fault. The 
Rim Runners’ Stores Department 
should have been more prompt in 
dealing with requisitions for spare 
parts. "And after all, Commodore,” 
she told him sweetly, "you made 
the first landing here without any 
aid at all from the surface, didn’t 
you?” 
Grimes asked to see the instruments room. He thought that this 
request disconcerted her — but 
this was understandable enough. 
Any officer, in any service, likes 
to do things his own way and is 
apt to resent a superior’s intrusion 
into his own little kingdom, espedally when the superior is in a 
fault-finding mood. But she got 
up from behind her very tidy desk, 
led the commodore out of the office and up a short flight of stairs. 
At first glance the compartment looked normal enough; its 
counterpart could have been found 
at almost any human-operated 
spaceport throughout the Galaxy. 
The deviations from the norm were 
also normal. On many worlds with 
a lack of recreational facilities the 
instruments room, with its laboratory and workshop equipment to 
one side of it, is an ideal place for 
hobbyists to work. The practice 
is officially frowned upon. But 
it persists. 
There was a tank there, a small 
aquarium, brilliantly lit. Grimes 
walked over to it. The only animal denizens were a dozen or so 
small starfish, brightly colored, 
spiny little beasts, unusually active. 
These, unlike their kind on the 
majority of worlds, seemed to prefer swimming to crawling as a 
means of locomotion, although they 
possessed, on the undersides of 
their limbs, the standard equipment of myriads of suckers. 
"And who belongs to these?” 
asked Grimes. 
"Me,” she replied. 
"Is marine biology your hobby?” 
"I’m afraid not, Commodore. I 
just keep these because they’re ornamental. They add something to 
the decor.” 
"Yes,” he agreed. "Starfish.” He 
walked to a bench where there was 
an intricacy of gleaming wire. 
"And what the hell’s this?" 
"A mobile,” she told him. "Jeff 
Petersen, the Met Officer, has artistic ambitions.” 
"And where is Mr. Petersen?” 
"He’s away. The crowd who’re 
setting up the weather control station on Mount Llayilla asked Captain Stacey for the loan of him.” 
"H’m. Well, I can’t help feeling, 
Miss Davis, that if you and Mr. 
Petersen devoted more time to your 
work and less time to your hobbies 
IF 
you’d give incoming ships far better service.” 
She flared, "We never play 
around with our hobbies in our 
employers’ time. And there’s so 
little social life here that we must 
have something to occupy us when 
we’re off duty.” 
"I’m not denying that, Miss 
Davis.” 
She switched on that smile again. 
"Why don’t you call me Lynn, 
Commodore? Everybody else does.” 
He found himself smiling in reply. "Why not, Lynn?” 
"Isn’t that better? And, talking 
of social life, I’d like it very much 
if you came to my place some evening for dinner.” She grinned rather than smiled this time. "I’m a 
much better cook than Mrs. Stacey.” 
That wouldn't be hard , thought 
Grimes. The port captain’s wife, 
as he had learned that morning at 
breakfast, couldn’t even fry an egg 
properly. 
"Try to keep an evening open 
for me,” she said. 
"I’ll try,” he promised. He 
looked at his watch. "But I must 
go. I have an appointment with 
the ambassador.” 
Ill 
f"phe Confederacy’s ambassador 
was a thin, languid and foppish 
man. In spite of the disparity in 
physical appearance he was cut 
from the same doth as Captain 
Stacey. He was one of the barely 
competent — not quite bad enough 
to be fired but too lazy and too 
uninterested to be trusted with any 
major appointment. 
He drawled, "I can’t order you 
not to stay, old man, any more than 
than I can order you to stay. Let’s 
face it. You pile on a few more G’s 
(as you spacefaring types put it) 
than I do. But I still think that 
you’re wasting your time. The natives’ll have to pull their socks 
up, that’s all. And tighten their 
belts for the time being — not 
that they have any belts to tighten. 
Ha, ha! You may have been first 
on this world, Commodore, but 
you haven’t lived with these people as I have. They’re a lazy shiftless bunch. They won’t stir a finger 
to help themselves as long as the 
Confederacy’s handy to do it for 
them.” 
"And if the Confederacy won’t,” 
said Grimes flatly, "there’s the 
Empire of Waverly. Or the Shakespear eans. Or the Federation. Even 
the Shaara might find this planet 
interesting.” 
"Those communistic bumblebees? It might do the Mellisans a 
world of good if they did take 
over.” He raised a slim, graceful 
wrist and looked at his watch. 
"Old Wunnaara’s due about now. 
I don’t encourage him — it takes 
days to get the fishy stink out of 
the embassy — but he insisted.” 
THE TIN FISHES 
" You could,” pointed out Grimes, . 
"have a room specially fitted for 
the reception of local dignitaries, 
something that duplicates, as far 
as possible, the conditions that 
they’re used to.” 
"You don’t understand old man. 
It’s taken me years, literally, to 
get this shack fitted and decorated 
the way that it should be. The 
battles I’ve had to fight with appropriations! It’s all a matter of 
keeping up a front, old man, showing the flag and all that — ” 
A smartly uniformed Marine entered the elegant, the too elegant, 
salon. 
"The Chief Wunnaara, Your 
Excellency.” 
"Show him in, Sergeant. Show 
him in. And attend to the air conditioning, will you?” 
YXTunnaara was dressed for the 
* * occasion. His ungainly (on 
dry land) body was clad in a suit 
of what looked like coarse sacking. 
Riding high on a complicated, harness-like framework was a tank, 
the contents of which sloshed as 
he walked. From this tank depended narrow tubes, connected to his 
clothing at various points. They 
dripped, both upon the cloth and 
upon the Ambassador’s carpet. A 
goggled mask, water-filled, covered 
his eyes and the upper part of his 
face. The smell of fish was very 
evident. 
"Your Excellency,” he mewed. 
"Meelongee. Grimes Wannarbo. 
Meelongee.” 
"Greetings,” replied the ambassador, and, "Meelongee,” replied 
Grimes. 
"Your Excellency, Grimes Wannarbo has agreed us to help. He 
come with me now, I show him 
trouble.” 
"Do you want to go through 
with this, old man?” the ambassador asked Grimes. 
"Of course. Would you know of 
any scuba outfits on this island? 
Captain Stacey tells me that the 
only ones here are privately 
owned.” 
"That is correct, Commodore. I 
could ask the Sergeant to lend you 
his.” 
"Not necessary, Grimes Wannarbo,” interjected the chief. "Already waiting on beach we have 
ship, what you call submarine.” 
"Good,” said Grimes. 
"You’d trust yourself to that 
contraption?” demanded the ambassador in a horror-stricken voice. 
"It’ll be one of the things that 
they use to take stores and equipment down to their farms.” 
"They work, don’t they?” 
"Yes, old man. But — ” 
"But I’d have thought, on a 
world like this, that the ambassador would have his own, private 
submarine.” 
"I’m a diplomat, old man, not a 
sailor.” 
Grimes shrugged. He said for
IF 
mally, "With your permission, 
Your Excellency, I shall accompany 
Chief Wi 
mi 
laara." 
"Permission granted, old man. 
Don’t get your feet wet.” 
*T*he submarine had been pulled 
* up on the beach, on to a ramp 
that had been constructed there 
for that purpose, that ran from the 
water to a low warehouse. Apart 
from its wheeled undercarriage it 
was a conventional enough looking craft, torpedo shaped, with a 
conning tower amidships and rudder and screw propeller aft, with 
hydroplanes forward and amidships. A wooden ladder had been 
placed on the ramp to give access 
to the conning tower. Wunnaara 
gestured to Grimes to board first. 
The commodore clambered up the 
ladder with a certain lack of agility; the spacing of the rungs was 
adapted to the Mellisan, not the 
human frame. He had the same 
trouble with the metal steps leading into the submarine’s interior. 
When he was down in what was 
obviously the craft’s control room 
he looked about him curiously. It 
was easy enough to get a general 
idea of what did what to which. 
The Mellisans, with no written 
language of their own, had adapted Terran English to their requirements. There were depth gauges, 
steering, hydroplane and engine 
controls, a magnetic compass. Inside 
an aluminum rather than a steel 
hull it should, thought Grimes, 
function quite satisfactorily. What 
had him puzzled was a bundle of 
taut bladders, evidently taken from 
some sea plant. Beside them, in a 
rack on the bulkhead, ^was a sharp 
knife. And he did not quite approve of the flowerpot that was 
hanging to one side of the steering gear, in which was growing a 
vividly blue, fernlike plant. He recalled the conversation that he had 
had with Lynn Davis on the subject of hobbies. 
Apart from these rather peculiar fittings the little ship was almost as she had been when built, 
to Mellisan specifications, at the 
Seacraft Yard on Thule — the 
original electric motors, a big bank 
of heavy-duty power cells, a capacious cargo hold (now empty) and 
no accommodation whatsoever. He 
had noticed, on his way down 
through the conning tower, that 
the compartment, with its big lookout ports, could still be used as an 
airlock. 
Wunnaara joined him, accompanied by another native dressed 
as he was. The younger Mellisan 
went straight to the wheel, from 
which all the other controls were 
easily accessible. The old chief 
asked Grimes to return with him 
to the conning tower. The upper 
hatch was shut now, but there was 
an unrestricted view all around 
from the big ports. And although 
the lower hatch remained open there 
8 * 
was ample room, on the amralaa: 
platform, to walk around it. 
Wunnaara yelped some order 
down through the opening. Slowly 
at first, then faster, the submarine started to move, sliding astern 
down the ramp on her wheels. She 
slipped into the water with hardly 
any disturbance, and when she 
was afloat at least half of her hull 
was above the surface. Electric motors hummed and she backed away 
from the beach, her head swinging 
to starboard as she did so. She came 
round well and easily, and when 
die was broadside on to the short, 
starting to roll uncomfortably in 
the swell ,the coxswain put the engines ahead and the wheel hard 
over to complete the swing. Then, 
after surprisingly Kttle fuss and 
bother, she was headed seaward, 
pitching easily, her straight wake 
pearly white on the blue water under die noonday sun. 
r A red marker buoy indicated the 
location of the pearl beds. 
Quietly, without any fuss, the ship 
submerged, dropping down below 
the surface as her ballast tanks 
were filled. 
Grimes went back to the control 
room. Always keenly interested in 
ships — the ships of the sea as 
well as the ships of space — he 
wanted to see how this submersible 
was handled. He was alarmed when, 
as he completed his cautious descent from the ladder, the coxswain 
THE TIN FISHES 
snatched that nasty looking nife 
from the rack on the bulkhead. 
But the MeBisan ignored him, 
dashed swiftly and expertly at one 
of the seaweed- bladders. It 
deflated with a loud hiss. Behind Grimes. Wunnaara hooted 
with laughter. When he had 
the commodore’s attention he 
pointed to the absurd pot plant 
hanging almost over the compass. 
Its fronds had turned scarlet, but 
were already slowly changing back 
to blue. 
Grimes chuckled as he realized 
what was being done. This was 
air regeneration at its most primitive — but still effective. These 
submarines, when built, had been 
fitted with excellent air regeneration plants but, no doubt, the 
Mellisans preferred their own. The 
oxygen released from the bladder 
brought with it a strong smell of 
wet seaweed which, to them, would 
be preferable to the odorless gas 
produced by the oroginal apparatus. 
Grimes watched the coxswain until Wunnaara called him back to the 
conning tower. He was impressed 
by the Mellisan’s competence. He 
was doing things that in a humanoperated submarine would have required at least four men. Could it 
be, he wondered, that a real sea 
man must, of necessity, be also a 
vfkst class seaman? He toyed, half 
humorously, with the idea of lecruitmg a force of Mdlisant mer
01 
cenaries, to be hired out to those 
nations — on those few worlds 
where there was still a multiplicity 
of nations — which still relied upon 
sea power fo rthe maintenance of 
their sovereignty. 
Back in the conning tower he 
forgot his not-quite-serious moneymaking schemes. The submarine — 
as he already knew from his inspection of the depth gauges — 
was not running deep. But neither 
was she far from the sandy bottom, 
which she was barely skimming. 
Ahead, astern and on either side 
were the pearl beds, in orderly 
rows of giant bivalves. Among them 
worked Mellisans — who, like similar beings on other planets, including Earth, were able to stay under 
water for a very long time on one 
lungful of air. Some of them, explained Wunnaara, were planting 
the irritant in the mantle of the 
shellfish. Others were harvesting 
the pearls from molluscs that had 
been treated months previously. 
These were taken to the underwater depot for cleaning and sorting and eventually would be loaded into the submarine for carriage to 
the spaceport. But, said the chief, 
this would be a poor harvest. 
From his vantage point he conned the ship, yelping orders down 
to the coxswain. Finally they were 
drifting over a long row of the bivalves, the way almost off the ship. 
All of them had been opened, and 
considerable force had been em
82 
ployed in this opening. (The Mellisans could do it, and could extract the pearl, without inflicting 
permanent injury upon the creature inside the paired shells.) In 
many cases the upper valve had 
been completely shattered. In all 
cases no more than a few shreds 
of tattered flesh remained. And in 
all cases what had been a pearl was 
now only a scattering of opalescent dust. 
Now the submarine was approaching the high, wire net fence 
that had been erected to protect 
the pearl farm. It looked stout 
enough to stop a ship of this class. 
But something had come through 
it. Something had uprooted metal 
posts embedded in concrete; 
something had snapped wire rope 
like so much sewing thread. It was 
not something that Grimes was at 
all keen to meet, not even in the 
comparative safety of this well-designed and built submersible. 
“You see?” mewed the chief. 
“You see, Grimes Wannarbo?” 
“Yes. I see.” 
“Then what do, Grimes Wannarbo? What do?” Under stress, the 
old Mellisan’s English tended to 
deteriorate. 
“I ... I don’t know. I shall 
have to see some of the starfish. 
Have you any in captivity, or any 
dead ones?” 
“No. No can catch. No can kill.” 
There was a steady thumping 
sound, transmitted through the 
water, amplified by the hull plating. 
“Alarm!” Wunnaara cried. 
“Alarm! Alarm!” He shouted 
something in his own language to 
the coxswain. The submarine 
changed course, her motors screamed shrilly as speed was increased to 
full — or a little over. She skimmed over the flat, sandy bottom, 
raising a great coud of disturbed 
particles astern of her, 
A head there was a commotion of 
some kind — a flurry of dark, 
almost human figures, an occasional explosion of silvery air bubbles, 
a flashing of metallic-seeming tentacles, a spreading stain in the water that looked like blood. Just 
clear of the fight the submarine 
reared like a frightened horse as 
she came astern — and then she 
hung there, almost motionless, on 
the outskirts. 
There were half a dozen of the 
. things , the starfish, and a dozen 
Mellisans. Through the now murky 
water could be seen the wreckage 
of practically an entire row of bivalves — shattered shells, crushed 
pearls, torn, darkly oozing flesh, 
The odd things about it all was the 
gentleness of the marauders. They 
seemed to be trying to escape — 
and they were succeeding — but, 
at the same time, were avoiding 
the infliction of serious injury, upon the guardians of the beds. 
And they were such flimsy things. 
THE TIN FISHES 
Or they looked flimsy, as though 
they had been woven from fragile 
metallic lace. They looked flimsy, 
but they were not. One of them was 
trapped in a net of heavy wire 
handed by three Mellisans. Momentarily it was bunched up, and 
then it . expanded. The wires 
snapped in a dozen places. One of 
them received a direct hit from a 
harpoon — and the weapon, its 
point blunted and broken, fell 
harmlessly to the bottom. 
They were free and clear now, all 
of them , looking more like gigantic silvery snowflakes then living 
beings. They were free and clear, 
swimming towards the breached 
barrier, their quintuple, feathery 
arms flailing the water. They were 
free and clear, and although the 
Mellisans gave chase there was 
nothing that anybody could do 
about them. 
“You see?” said the chief. 
“I see,” said Grimes. 
He saw, too, what he would have 
to do. He would make his own 
report, of course, to Rim Runners’ 
head office, recommending that 
something be done on a governmental level to maintain the flow 
of cemmerce between Mellise and 
the Confederacy. And he would 
have to try to persuade that pitiful 
nong of an ambassador to recommend to his masters that a team 
qualified to handle the problem — 
say marine biologists and professional fishermen from Thule — be 
S3 
sent at once to Mellise. But it 
would not be at once, of course. 
Nobody knew better than Grimes 
how slowly the tide runs through 
officials channels. 
But. 
What could be, Grimes, do? Personally? With his own two hands, 
with his own brain? 
There had been something oddly 
familiar about the appearance of 
those giant Asteroidea, about their 
actions There had been something 
that evoked memories of the distant 
past, and something that had 
brought to the surface of his mind 
the memory of something much 
more recent. What was it? Lynn 
Davis’s gaudy pets in that brightly lit aquarium? They swam, of 
course, and these* giant mutants 
(if mutants they were) were swimmers, but there the similarity, 
seased. 
“What do. Grimes Wannarbo?” 
Wunnaara was insistent. “What 
do?” 
“I don’t know,” replied the 
commodore. “But I’ll do something.” 
But what? 
IV 
T hat night, back in his room in 
the port captain’s residence, 
he did his homework. He had managed to persuade Captain Stacey to 
let him have the files on all Rim 
Run ness personnel employed on 
84 
Mellise, and also had borrowed from 
the ambassador’s library all six 
volumes of Trantor’s very comprehensive Mellisan Marine Life. 
(Trantor should have been here 
now, but Trantor was dead, drowned two years ago in a quite stupid 
and unnecessary accident in the 
Ultimate Sea, on Ultimo, a body of 
water little larger than a lake.) He 
skimmed through Trantor’s work 
first, paying particular attention 
to the excellent illustrations. Nothing, nothing at all, resembled the 
creatures that he had seen, although 
most of the smaller starfish, like 
the ones he had seen in Lynn Davis’s tank, subsisted by making forcible entry into the homes of unfortunate bivalves. 
Then he turned to the files. 
About half the spaceport employees were true Rim Worlders 
born out on the Rim. The other 
half — like Grimes himself — were 
not, although all of them were naturalized citizens. Judging from the 
educational qualifications and service records of all of them, none of 
them would be capable of inducing 
a mutation. Grimes had hoped to 
turn up a biological engineer, but 
he was disappointed. And biological engineering is not the sort of 
thing that anybody takes up as a 
hobby. In addition to the years 
of study and training there is the 
quite expensive License to Practice 
to obtain, and the qualifications for 
that are moral rather than academic 
or practical. Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein is a permanent fixture in 
Man’s mythology. 
Feeling like a Peeping Tom — 
another permanent fixture — he 
leafed through Lynn Davis’s service 
record. She was Terran-born, of 
course. Her real education had been 
at M.I.T., where she had graduated as a Bachelor of General Physics. After that she seemed to have 
specialized in meteorology. There 
had been a spell with weather control, North American Continent, 
and another spell with weather 
prediction, satellite-based. After 
that she had entered the service of 
Trans- Galactic Clippers as a spaceport meteorological officer. She had 
seen duty on Austral, Caribbea and 
Waverly, all of them planets upon 
which T-G maintained its own 
spaceports. From Waverly she 
had gone to Caribbea — and on 
Caribbea she had blotted her copy 
book. 
So, thought Grimes, she’s a com pulsive gambler . She doesn’t look 
like one . But they never do. It was 
on Caribbea that she had become 
a regular habitue of the New Port 
of Spain Casino. 
She had, of course, worked out a 
system to beat the wheel. But the 
system hadn’t worked out for her. 
There had been the unhappy business of the cracking of the T-G 
Cashier’s safe — allegedly thiefproof, but (luckily) very few 
thieves hold a degree in physics. 
There had been the new banknotes, 
the serial numbers of which were 
on record, that had turned up in 
the safe of the casino’s cashier. 
After that — the Rim Worlds. 
A pity, said Grimes to himself. 
A pity . But it could have been 
worse. If she’d gone to Elsinore, in 
the Shakespearean Sector, where 
they’re notorious for their gambling, she’d really be in a mess by 
now. 
He turned up the file on Petersen. The absentee Met Officer was 
another ex-Terran, and also had 
been employed with Trans-Galactic Clippers. Grimes noted with interest that Petersen had spent a 
few weeks on El Dorado, popularly known as "the planet of the filthy rich.” (Grimes had been there 
himself as a young man, as a junior 
officer in the Federation’s Survey 
Service.) It seemed that a T-G 
ship had called there on a millionaires’ cruise, and T-G had insisted 
on sending its own spaceport personnel there in advance. 
Women, not money, had been 
Petersen’s trouble. Twice he had 
been named as co-respondent in an 
unsavory divorce case. If the ladies had not been the wives of 
prominent T-G executives it would 
not have mattered so much. But 
they were. 
There could be a connection , 
thought Grimes. There could be. 
Both of them from Earth , both of 
them ex T-G. ... He shrugged 
THE TIN FISHES 
away the idea. After all, it has been 
said that if one throws a half brick 
at random aboard any Rim Runners ship, the odds are that you will 
hit an ex-officer of the Interstellar Transport Federation’s vessels. 
So it went on — * case histories, 
one after the other, that made depressing reading and, insofar as 
the quite serious crisis on Mellise 
was concerned, a shortage of both 
motive and opportunity. But money could be a motive. Suppose, tomorrow, a foreign ship dropped in, 
and suppose that somebody aboard 
her said to old Wunnaara, " We’ll 
fix your starfish for you — in return for full trading rights. ” 
And whatever else I ant, thought 
Grimes tiredly, Vm not a starfish 
fixer . 
He poured himself a stiff drink 
— Stacey, with all his faults, was 
a considerate host — and went 
to bed. 
Qhe said, "I hear that you’ve 
^ been looking through the personnel files, John. That wasn’t 
very gentlemanly of you.” 
"How did you hear?” asked 
Grimes. "My doing so was supposed to be as secret as the files 
themselves.” 
"There aren’t any secrets on 
this bloody planet.” Her face, as 
she stared at him over her candlelit dining table, was hard and hostile, cancelling out the effects of 
an excellent meal. "And did you 
find what you were looking for?” 
"No.” 
"What were you looking for?” 
"Somebody who’s capable of doing a spot of biological engineering.” 
"Did you find anybody?” 
"No, Lynn.” 
"What about the spaceport 
quack?” 
"Frankly,” said Grimes, "I 
wouldn’t go to him with a slight 
head cold.” 
"Frankly, my dear, neither would 
I.” She laughed, and her manner 
softened. "So you’re still no closer 
to solving the Mystery of the Mutated Starfish.” 
"No.” 
"Then I’ll solve it for you. 
There was a bad solar flare about 
a year ago, and our atmospheric 
radiation count went up no end 
in consequence. There’s the answer. But I’m glad that you stayed 
on Mellise, John. You’ve no idea 
how hungry a girl gets for intelligent company.” 
"I’m glad that I stayed, Lynn. 
For personal reasons. But I really 
wish I could help Wunnaara.” 
She said, "I don’t like His Too 
Precious Excellency any more than 
you do, John, but I often feel that 
he’s on the right track as far as 
the natives are concerned. Let them 
help themselves.” 
He said, "I discovered this world. 
I feel, somehow, that it’s my direct 
responsibility.” 
IF 
She replied, a little bitterly, "I 
wish that you’d start shedding some 
of your feelings of responsibility, 
Commodore . Don’t worry so muck 
Start having a good time, while you 
jean. ” 
And I could , too , he thought. 
With a quite beautiful , available 
woman. But . 
She said, "It’s a wild night. Hurricane Lynn — I named it after 
me. You aren’t walking back to 
old Stacey’s place in this, surely?” 
He said, "It’s time I was going.” 
"You’ll get drenched,” she told 
him. 
"It won’t be for the first time,” 
he grinned. 
"All right. Then go. You can let 
yourself out.” 
For a tall girl she flounced well 
on her way from the little dining 
room to her bedroom. 
Grimes sighed, cursing his retentive memory, his detailed recollection of the reports from all 
planets to which Rim Runners 
traded. But he had to be sure, and 
he did not wish to make any inquiries regarding this matter on 
Mellise. He let himself out of the 
little, dome-shaped cottage, and 
was at once furiously assailed by 
the wind. 
Hurricane Lynn had not yet built 
up to its full intensity, but it was 
bad enough. There were great 
sheets of driving rain, and with 
them an explosion of spray whipped from the surface of the sea. 
It was on a night such as this that 
old Captain Engels, in Lorn Lady, 
had almost lost his disabled ship 
on Mellise. But there hadn’t been 
* 
a proper spaceport then, and the 
facilities, such as they were, had 
been on a much lower-lying island. 
T uckily the spaceport was downwind from the village. Grimes 
ran most of the way. He didn’t 
want to, but it was easier to scud 
before the gale than to attempt 
to maintain a sedate pace. He let 
himself into the port captain’s 
large house. The Staceys were abed 
— he had told them that he would 
be late — but Captain Stacey called out from his bedroom, "Is that 
you, Commodore?” 
"Who else, Captain? I shall be 
going out again shortly.” 
"What the hell for?” testily. 
"I have to send a message. An 
important one.” 
"Telephone it through to the 
Carlotti Communications Office 
from here.” 
"I want to make sure it goes.” 
Grimes faintly overheard something about distrustful old bastards as he went to his own room, 
but ignored it. 
There was a very cunning secret 
compartment built into his suitcase. The commodore opened it, 
took from it a slim book. Then, 
with scratch pad and stylus, he 
worked rapidly and efficiently, 
finishing up with eleven gibberish 
THE TIN PISHES 
groups. He put the book back in 
its biding place, pocketed the pad. 
Then he had to face the stormy 
night again. , 
The duty operator in the Carlotti Office was awake, but only 
just. Had it not been for the 
growing uproar of the hurricane, 
penetrating even the insulated 
walls, he would not have been. He 
reluctantly put down his luridly 
covered book and, recognizing 
Grimes, said, "Sir?” 
"I want this to go at once. To 
my office at Port Forlorn. Urgent.” 
He managed a grin. "That’s the 
worst of space travel. It’s so hard 
to keep track of dates. But my 
secretary will be able to lay on 
flowers for the occasion.” 
The operator grinned back. 
Judging by the way he was making a play for that snooty Lynn 
Davis the commodore must be a 
gay old dog. He said, a little enviously, "Your message will be 
winging its way over the lightyears in a jiffy, sir.” He handed 
the commodore a signals pad. 
Grimes put down the address, 
transcribed the groups from his 
own pad, filled in his name and 
the other details in the spaces provided. He said, "Let me know how 
much it is. It’s private.” 
The young man winked. "Rim 
Runners’ll never know, sir.” 
"Still, I prefer to pay,” said 
Grimes. 
He watched the miniature Car
Iotti Beacon — like a Mobius strip 
ft was, distorted to a long oval — 
turn on its mounting in the big 
star tank until it was pointing directly at the spark that represented the Lorn sun. He hoped that 
the big beacon on the roof of the 
building was turning, too. But it 
had to be. If it stopped, jammed, 
the little indicator would seize up 
in sympathy. In any case, it was 
shielded from the weather by its 
own dome. 
The operator’s key rattled rapidly in staccato Morse, still the best 
method of transmitting messages 
over vast distances. From the wall 
speaker blurted the dots and dashes of acknowledgement. Then the 
message itself was sent, and acknowedged. 
"Thank ySu,” said Grimes. "If 
there’s a reply phone it through to 
me, please. I shall be at the port 
captain’s house.” 
"Very good, sir.” 
Grimes was relaxing under a hot 
shower when he heard the telephone buzz. Wrapping a towel 
around himself, he hurried out of 
the bathroom, colliding with Captain Stacey. 
"It’s probably for me,” he said. 
"It would be,” growled Stacey. 
It was. It was a reply to Grimes’s 
signal, which when decoded, had 
read, "Urgently require information 
on solar flares MdUse sun last 
year local.” 
It said, after Grimes had used his 
: msmm 
little book, "No repeat no solar 
flares Mellise sun past 10 years.” 
Somebody? s lying, thought Grimes, 
and I don’t think it’s my secretary. 
V 
T Turricane Lynn, while it lasted, 
** -*■ put a stop to any further investigations by Grimes. Apart from 
anything else, the sea people were 
keeping to their underwater houses, 
each of which was well stocked 
with air bladders and the carbondioxide absorbing plants. He managed, however, to get back on 
friendly terms with Lynn Davis — 
or she with him, he was never quite 
sure which was the case. He found 
her increasingly attractive; she 
possessed a maturity that was lacking in all the other young women 
in the tiny human community. He 
liked her, but he suspected her — 
but of what? It was rather more 
than a hunch; there had been, for 
example, that deliberate lie about 
the solar flare. Grimes, who was an 
omnivorous reader, was well aware 
that fictional detectives frequently 
solve their cases by sleeping with 
the suspects. He wasn’t quite ready 
for that. Such a modus operandi 
he considered ungentlemanly. 
Then Hurricane Lynn blew itself 
out and normally fine weather returned to the equatorial belt. Flying was once again possible, and 
Petersen came back to the space
port from Mount Llayilla. 
Grimes didn’t like him. He was 
a tall, athletic young man, deeply 
tanned, with sun-bleached hair and 
startlingly pale blue eyes. His features were too regular, and his 
mouth too sensual The filed stories of his past amatory indiscretions made sense. And he was 
jealously possessive insofar as 
Lynn Davis was concerned. She’s 
mine, Commodore, was the unspoken message that Grimes received, loud and dear. She’s mine. 
Keep your dirty paws off her. 
Grimes didn’t like it, and neither did the girl. But he, now that 
the storm was over, was busy again. 
At least once daily he argued with 
the ambassador, trying to persuade 
that gentleman to request the services of a team of marine biologists 
and professional fishermen. He 
composed and sent his own report 
to Rim Runners’ head office. And, 
whenever conditions were suitable, 
he was out to the pearl beds with 
Wunnaara, at first in the little 
submarine and then in a skin-diving outfit that the spaceport’s repair staff had improvised for him. 
It was a bastard sort of a rig, 
to quote the chief mechanic, but 
it worked. There was a spacesuit 
helmet with compressed-air tanks, 
suitably modified. There was a pair 
of flippers cut from a sheet of thick, 
tough plastic. There was a spear 
gun and a supply of specially made 
harpoons, each of which had an 
IF 
explosive warhead, fused for impact. As long as these were not 
used at too close a range the person firing them should be reasonably safe. 
Lynn Davis came into the maintenance workshop while Grimes 
was examining one of the projectiles. 
" What’s that, John?” she asked. 
"Just a new kind of spear,” he 
replied shortly. 
"New — an’ nasty,” volunteered the chief mechanic, ignoring 
Grimes’s glare. "Pack too much of 
a wallop for my taste. If you’re 
too dose to the target when one 
o’ these goes off, you’ve had it.” 
"Explosive?” die asked. 
"Too right.” 
She turned back to Grimes. "Are 
these safe, John?” 
"Safe enough — as long as they 
are used carefully.” 
"But against starfish. Like using an dephant gun against a 
gnat!” 
"There are starfish and starfish,” he told her. "As everybody on 
this planet should know by this 
time.” 
"You think this will kill them?” 
"It’s worth giving it a go.” 
"Yes,” she admitted. "I suppose 
so.” Then, more briskly, "And 
when are you giving your secret 
weapon a trial?” 
"There are a few modifications 
to be made,” Grimes told her. 
"They’ll all be ready for you 
tomorrow morning,” said the chief 
mechanic. "As promised.” 
She turned on her dazzling smile. 
"Then you’d better dine with me 
tonight, John. If you will insist 
on playing with these dangerous 
toys there mightn’t be another 
time.” She laughed, but that odd, 
underlying note of seriousness persisted. She went on, "And Jeff will 
be out of our hair, I promise you 
that. There’s a party on in the Carlotti Operators’ Mess, and those 
he never misses.” 
"I’ve a pile of paper work, 
Lynn,” Grimes told her. 
"That can wait.” 
He made his decision. "AH right, 
then. What time?” 
"Whatever time suits you. 1800 
hours, shall we say? For a few 
drinks first. ...” 
"Good. I shall be there.” 
T T e dressed carefully for the 
dinner party, paying even 
more attention to the contents of 
his pockets than the clothes themselves. He had one of his hunches, 
and he knew that he would need 
the things that he was taking from 
the secret compartment of his suitcase. 
There was the Minetti automatic, 
with a spare clip, neither of which 
made more than a very slight bulge 
in the inside breast pocket of his 
jacket. There was the pack of cigarillos — and two of the slim, 
brown cylinders possessed very spe
THE TIN FISHES 
dal properties* and were marked 
in such a way that only Grimes 
would be able to identify them. 
Marriage to an Intelligence Officer, he thought, has its points. 
Something is bound to rub off. 
There was the button on his suit 
that was a camera, and the other 
button that was a miniaturized recorder. 
On the way from his room to 
the front door he passed through 
the lounge where Captain and Mrs. 
Stacey were watching a rather witless variety program on the screen 
of their playmaster. The port captain looked up and around, his 
fat, heavy face serious. He said, "I 
know that it’s none of my business, 
Commodore, and that you’re technically my superior, but we — 
Lucy and myself — think that you 
should be warned. Miss Davis is a 
dangerous woman.” 
“Indeed, Captain?” 
“Yes, indeed. She leads men on, 
and then that Jeff Petersen is apt 
to turn nasty.” 
“Oh?” 
An ugly flush suffused Stacey’s 
face. “Frankly, sir, I don’t give a 
damn if you are beaten up for 
playing around with a girl young 
enough to be your granddaughter. 
But because you’re Astronautical 
Superintendent of Rim Runners 
there’d be a scandal, a nasty scandal. And I don’t want one in my 
spaceport” 
“Very concisely put, Captain. 
But I can look after myself.” 
“I hope that you can, Commodore. Good night to you.” 
“Good night, Captain Stacey.” 
Grimes let himself out The 
pieces of the jigsaw puzzle were 
beginning to fall into place. His 
suspicions were about to be confirmed. He smiled grimly as he 
walked along the narrow street 
towards the row of neat little 
bungalows, in one of which Lynn 
Davis lived. Night was falling fast 
Already lights were coming on in 
the houses. From open windows 
drifted the sound of music. The 
scene was being set for a romantic — romantic? — assignation. 
Lynn Davis met him at her door. 
She was dressed in something 
loose and, Grimes noted as she stood 
with the lamp behind her, almost 
transparent. She took his hand, led 
him into her living room, gently 
pushed him down into a deep chair. 
Close by it was a tray of drinks, 
and a dish upon which exotic delicacies were displayed. Real Terran olives I A score of those would 
make a nasty hole in the weekly 
pay of an assistant met officer. 
Sea dragon caviar from Atlantia. 
Pickled rock frogs from DunartiL 
The playmaster was on, its volume turned well down. A woman 
was singing. It was an old song, 
dating back to the Twentieth Century, its lyrics modernized, its 
melody still sweet with lost, archaic lilt. 
IF 
Spaceman , the stars are calling , 
Spaceman, you have to roam . 
Spaceman, through light years 
falling, 
Turn back at last to home . 8 
C C Qherry, John?” asked Lynn 
^ Davis. She was sitting on 
the arm of his chair. He could see 
the gleam of her smooth flesh 
through the sheer robe. "Amontillado?” 
He said, "You’re doing me 
proud.” 
She said, "It’s not often I entertain such an important guest as 
you.” 
He sipped the wine from the 
fragile glass she had filled for 
him. She had measured her own 
drink from the same decanter. He 
did not think that there was anything wrong with it — any connoisseur would have told him, indignantly, that there was nothing wrong with it — but at the first 
hint of muzziness he would smoke 
a cigarillo. 
She was leaning closer to him, 
almost against him. Her robe was 
falling open in front. She was 
wearing nothing underneath it. She 
said, "Aren’t you hot? Why not 
take your jacket off?” 
"Later, perhaps.” He managed 
a quite creditable leer. "After all, 
we’ve all night.” 
"Why waste time?” 
Her mouth was slightly parted 
in frank admiration. What the 
hell 1 thought Grimes — and accepted it Her body was - pliant 
in his arms, her lips on his warm 
and moist But his mind, his caU, 
calculating mind, was still in full 
command of the situation. He heard 
the door open softly, heard feet 
sliding over the thick carpet. He 
pushed the girl away from him, 
from the corner of his eye saw her 
fall to the floor, a delectable sprawl 
of exposed, gleaming body and 
limbs. 
"Sol” snarled Jeff Petersen. "So. 
This is what you get up to, Mr. 
Commodore Dirty Old Man 
Grimes! What did you promise her, 
you swine? Promotion, and a transfer to a better station?” 
But Petersen, Grimes noted, was 
not a slave to his instincts any more 
than he, Grimes had been. Superficially his voice was that of the 
wronged, jealous lover. But there 
was an artificial quality in his 
rage. 
Grimes said equably, "I can 
explain — ” 
"Yes.” Petersen was advancing 
slowly. "You can explain after I’ve 
torn off your right arm and beaten 
out your brains with it.” 
Suddenly the tiny pistol was 
in Grimes’s right hand. It cracked 
once, and once only, a sound disproportionate to its dimensions. 
Petersen halted, staggered, staring stupidly. He swayed on his feet 
for long seconds and then crashed 
to the floor, oversetting the low ta
THE TIN FISHES 
ble, spilling wine over the sprawling body of the girl. She exploded 
up from the carpet like a tigress, 
all teeth and daws. Grimes was 
hampered by the chair in which he 
was confined but fought her off 
somehow. He did not want to use 
the gun again. 
“You bastard!” she was sobbing. 
“You ruthless bastard! You killed 
him! And we were careful not to 
kill — not even the natives 1” 
“I didn’t kill him,” Grimes managed to say at last, after he had 
imprisoned her hands behind her 
back, after he had damped her 
legs between his own. ff I didn't kill 
Mm. This pistol is loaded with anesthetic needles. He’ll be out for 
twdve hours — no more, no less.” 
“He’s not . dead?” 
“Do dead men snore?” asked 
Grimes practically. 
“I ... I suppose not” Her manner changed abruptly. “Well, he 
asked for it, John, and this time 
he got it. Poor Jeff.” There was 
little sympathy in her voice. 
“So. ...” 
“So what?” 
“You did say he’d be out of 
things for twelve hours, didn’t you?” 
He said admiringly, “You’re a 
cold-blooded bitch.” 
“Just realistic.” She lunged forward with her head, but it was not 
to bite. After the kiss Grimes released her. She pulled slowly away 
from him, walked undulatingly to 
the door of the bedroom, shedding the torn remnants of her robe as 
she went. 
Grimes sighed, then got up and 
followed. 
yi 
he said, “That was good. ” 
“It was.” 
“Stay there, darling. FH make 
us some coffee. We don’t want to 
waste time sleeping.” 
A sleep , thought Grimes, is just 
what / should like. The sleep of 
the just. ... Of the just after. 
He sprawled at ease on the wide 
couch, watched her appreciatively 
as she left him, as she walked 
gracefully to the door. In the subdued light she was all rosy bronze. 
In any sort of light she was, as he 
knew, beautiful. He heard a slight 
clattering from the kitchenette, imposed upon the still stertorous 
snores of the hapless Jeff. After a 
while he heard the hissing of the 
espresso machine. She came back 
with a tray on which were a pot 
and two cups. She poured. “Sugar, 
darling? Cream?” The steam from 
the coffee was delicately fragrant. 
He reached out for his cup, accidentally (?) put his fingers on 
the handle of hers. She gently 
pushed his hand away. “Mine has 
no sugar,” she told him. 
“You’re sweet enough as you are,” 
he said, asking himself, How corny 
can you get? 
So he took three sips of the cof
IF 
fee that was intended for him, 
and at once felt the onset of heavy 
drowsiness, even though there was 
no warning flavor. He mumbled, 
"Like a smoke. Would you 
mind, Lynn? In my pocket. 
She reached out to his clothing, 
produced the packet of cigarillos 
and his lighter. She, he already 
knew, did not smoke herself, which 
was just as well. She handed him 
the packet. In his condition, in 
the dim lighting, he could hardly 
make out the distinguishing mark. 
He hoped that he had the right 
one. Here and now, the special 
effects of the other one would be 
more spectacular than usual. 
She lit the cigarillo for him, 
smiling condescendingly down at 
him. He inhaled the smoke, retained it for long seconds before 
blowing it out. He took one more 
sip of coffee, then let a dribble of 
the hot fluid fall onto his naked 
chest. He was careful not to wince. 
He mumbled indistinctly, then fell 
back against the pillows. His right 
hand, with the little, smouldering 
cylinder between his fingers, fell 
limply on to his belly. He could 
smell the acridity of burning hair, 
felt the sharp beginnings of pain. 
With a great effort of will he remained in his relaxed posture. 
He heard her mutter, "I should 
let the old bastard burn, but — ” 
Her cool, slim fingers removed the 
miniature cigar from his hand. He 
felt very grateful to her. 
He heard her dressing. He heard 
her walk rapidly from the bedroom. 
He heard, eventually, the front door 
open and shut. He gave her time 
to get clear of the house. 
TTThen he got down from the 
* * bed he expected to feel sick 
and dizzy, with drug and antidote 
still at war within his system. But 
he did not, although he was conscious of the minor burns. He dressed rapidly, checked his possessions. 
He was pleased to find that the 
Minetti was still in his pocket. 
Probably whatever it was in the 
coffee was supposed to put him under for a longer period than the 
anesthetic needle-bullet that he had 
used on Jeff Petersen. 
The street outside the house was 
deserted. Everybody was indoors, 
and everybody seemed to be having 
a party. He grinned. He had had 
one too, and some of it had been 
fun. He walked briskly away from 
the spaceport, in the direction of 
the beach where he had first met 
Lynn Davis. The signs that had 
been affixed to the trunks of trees 
were a help. By what moonlight 
there was he could read, PRIVATE. 
And how would she have managed, he wondered, if the other human ladies on Mellise had shared 
her views on public, outdoor nudity? 
The beach was deserted. Backing the narrow strip of sand were 
the trees, and between their boles 
THE TIN FISHES 
was undergrowth, affording effective cover. Grimes settled down to 
wait. He dipped out the magazine 
from his automatic and exchanged 
it for the other one. The needlebullets in it were no more lethal 
than those of the first had been. 
But they differed from them in one 
or two respects. He took the remaining cigarillo from his packet, 
put it carefully into his breast 
pocket. This one had a friction fuse. 
At last she came, walking barefooted over the sand, her shoes in 
her left hand, a heavy case in the 
other. She dropped the shoes, put 
the case down carefully. She opened it, then pulled out a silvery 
telescopic antenna to its full extent She squatted down, making 
even this normally ungainly posture graceful, appeared to be adjusting controls of some sort. There 
was a high, barely audible whine. 
Something was coming in from 
the sea. 
It was not a native. It came 
scuttling ashore like a huge crab 
— like a huge, five-legged crab. 
Then there was another, and another, and another — until two 
dozen of the beasts stood there 
waiting. For orders — or programming? 
Grimes walked slowly and deliberately out from the shadows, his 
Minetti in his right hand. He N said 
quietly, “I’m sorry, Lynn.” 
She whirled grotesquely, like a 
Russian dancer. 
"Youl” she snarled, making it 
seem like a curse. 
“Yes. Me. If you come quietly 
and make a full confession I’ll see 
to it that things go easy for you.” 
“Like hell I will!” 
She toned swiftly back to tKei 
transmitter, kicking up a flurry of 
sand. The whining note abruptly 
changed to an irregular beat. And 
then the starfish were coming for 
him, slowly at first, but faster and 
faster. He swatted out instinctivdy 
at the leading one, felt the skin of 
his hand tear on metal spines. In 
his other hand was the gun. He fired 
— almost a full burst. The minute 
projectiles tore through the transmitter. Some of them, a few of 
them, were bound to sever connections, to shatter transistors. 
They did. There was a sputtering 
shower of blue sparks. The metal 
monsters froze into immobility. 
But she did not. She had her 
own gun out, a heavier weapon than 
Grimes’s. He felt the wind of her 
first bullet. And then, with one of 
the few remaining rounds in his 
magazine, he shot her. 
T Te stood there looking down at 
-*■ her. She was paralyzed, but 
her eyes could still move, and her 
lips, and her tongue. She was paralyzed — and when the drug took 
hold properly she would feel the 
compulsion to talk. 
She asked bitterly, “How long will 
this last?” 
IF 
"Days, unless I let you have 
the antidote.” 
She demanded, "How did you 
know?” 
"I didn’t know. And I added two 
and two to make a quite convincing 
and logical four. Suppose I tell you 
— then you can fill in the details.” 
"That’ll be the sunny Friday I” 
"Will it?” Grimes squatted 
down beside her. "You had things 
easy here, didn’t you? You and 
Jeff Petersen. Such a prize bunch 
of nongs and no-hopers, from the 
ambassador and the port captain 
on down. I shouldn’t have said 
» 
that; I forgot that this is being 
recorded. 
"Well, one thing that started to 
make me suspicious of you, especially, was that lie you told me 
about the solar flare. I checked 
up. There are very complete records of all phenomena in this sector of Space in my office at Port 
Forlorn. Then there was the shortage of spares for your equipment — 
I remembered that the requisitions 
for electronic bits and pieces have 
been abnormally heavy since you 
and Mr. Petersen were appointed 
here. There was that ornamental 
tank of little starfish — and that 
so-called mobile almost alongside 
it. Petersen’s hobby. The construction that, I realized later, looked 
very like the tin starfish I saw 
raiding the pearl beds. There was 
the behavior of these same tin starfish — the way in which they at
tacked the bivalves with absolute 
vidousness, the way in which they 
seemed very careful not to hurt 
the Mellisans. 
"That tied in with the few weeks 
that Petersen spent on El Dorado. 
"They have watchbirds there, 
Lynn, and similar semi-robots that 
function either on the ground or 
in the water. Animal brains in metal 
bodies. Absolute faithfulness and 
obedience to their human masters. 
As a skilled technidan, Petersen 
would have been able to mingle, 
to a certain extent, with the gifted 
amateurs who play around with 
that sort of thing on El Dorado. 
He must have picked up some of 
their techniques, and passed them 
on to you. The pair of you modified them, probably improved upon them. A starfish hasn’t any brain 
to speak of so probably you have 
the entire animal incorporated into 
your destructive servants. Probably, too, there’s an electronic 
brain built in somewhere, that gets 
its orders by radio and that can 
be programmed. 
"You were going to recall the 
local — flock, pack, school? what 
does it matter? — tonight, weren’t 
you? For reprogramming. Some 
pre-set course of action that would 
enable them to deal with xthe 
threat of spears with explosive 
warheads. It wouldn’t do to have 
tin tentades littering the ocean 
floor, would it? When the Mellisans 
brought in the evidence even the 
THE TTN RSHE5 
ambassador would have to do something about it. 
"And for whom were you working?” he asked sharply and suddenly. 
"T-G.” The answer had slipped 
out before she could stop it. 
"Trans-Galactic Clippers 
Why do they want Mellise?” 
"A tourist resort” She was 
speaking rapidly now, in obvious 
catharsis. "We were to destroy the 
economy, the trade with the Confederacy. And then T-G would step 
in, and pay handsomely for rights 
and leases.” 
"And you and Mr. Petersen 
would be suitably rewarded.” 
TTe paused, "Tell me Lynn. Did 
* ^ you enjoy tonight? Between the 
disposal of Jeff and the disposal 
of myself, I mean?” 
"Yes,” she told him. 
"I’m glad that you said that. It 
makes what I am going to do a 
lot easier. I was going to do it in 
any case.” 
As he spoke, he pulled the cigarillo from his breast pocket, 
scratched the friction fuse with his 
thumbnail. The thing ignited at 
once, fizzed, ejected a bright, blue 
pyrotechnic star. It was his signal 
to Wunnaara. 
"I’m letting you go free,” Grimes 
went on. "Both of you. You will 
have to resign, of course, from Rim 
Runner’s service, but as T-G are 
your real employers that shouldn’t 
mean any hardship.” 
"Haven’t much option, have I?” 
she asked. 
"No.” 
"There’s just one thing I’d like 
to say. That question you asked 
me, about my enjoying myself . 
I’m bloody sorry that this damned 
truth drug of yours made me give 
the right answer!” 
"I’m not,” said Grimes. 
END 
NEXT MONTH IN IF 
THE STEEL GENERAL 
by Roger Zelazny 
SIX GATES FROM LIMBO 
by J. T. McIntosh 
— and many morel Don't miss the January Issue of It, 
thrice voted world's favorite science-fiction magazinel 
IP 
CONCLUSION 
IF • Serial 
by MACK REYNOLDS 
Everyone was outspying Kosloff — 
until the revelations of Nostra 
damus taught him to use intuition 
Illustrated by 
WHAT HAS GONE BEFORE 
Professor PAUL KOSLOFF, son 
of a famed espionage-counter-espionage agent , is giving one of Ms 
weekly lectures on the Slavic languages over Tri-Vision . Although 
on the stodgy side, his hobbies indude mountain climbing, hunting 
and fishing in remote spots such as 
the Yukon, pistol and rifle shooting 
— and karate . On a mountain 
climbing jaunt he once saved the 
life of his Tri-Vision technician, 
JERRY. 
Following the broadcast in Greater Washington, he returns to his 
home in the pseudo-city of Princeton, dimly becoming aware of a 
stranger in the same vacuum-tube 
transport vehicle in which he rides . 
Upon entering the block of miniapartments where he resides, he is 
jumped by two assailants who are 
only driven off after ZACK CAS T RIOT A, the stranger who followed Mm from Greater Washington, 
enters the fray. Castriota accompanies Paul to his mini-apartment 
and reveals that the two footpads 
were trying to kill him. Castriota 
also reveals that he is connected 
with the Inter-American Bureau of 
Investigation and pressures Paul into a trip to Denver. 
In Denver, Paul is taken to the 
swank inner offices of DEMPSEY 
HARRISON, after meeting that 
high officiaTs beautiful secretary 
LISA STEBBINS . Harrison is possibly the most important man in 
the United States of Americas , being chief of the National Computer 
Data Banks. 
He explains to Paul that the nation has become completely dependent upon the system of computers, data banks , and the teevee 
phones which every citizen must 
wear. And also reveals that mysterious efforts are being made by 
unknowns both to tap the American 
data banks for their information, 
and possibly to wipe them clean. 
Such an eventuality would mean 
complete collapse of the American 
culture. 
Paul, who has relatives in Common Eur-Asia and also speaks all 
the Balkan languages, has been selected by the computers as the most 
suitable man to enter Eastern Europe as an agent to find whether 
or not the Common Eur- Asians are 
behind the efforts to sabotage 
American data banks. He refuses on 
the grounds that despite his father’s prominence in the field, he 
knows nothing about such matters. 
He returns to his home and several days later is approached again 
by Castriota who reveals that during 
the scuffling with the two wouldbe assassins of Paul a bug was 
planted in the pocket of one and 
the IABI has a fix on where the 
mysterious saboteurs are hiding. 
They are on Manhattan , wMch has 
been abandoned since the riots that 
destroyed the city years ago. He 
IF 
wants Paul to come along , since the 
others are suspected of being Rumanians and Paul speaks the language . 
Paul accompanies him to Manhattan where they meet MARK 
MARTINO, an IABI agent who 
pretends to be one of the " baboons ” 
who live in the ruins of the city , 
outcasts from society and rebels 
against the Ultra-welfare State . 
Through the efforts of PETE 
and REPEAT , two youthful baboons who are in Martino y s debt , 
they locate the hideaway of the 
saboteurs and , in an effort to secure 
more information about them , send 
Pete through the ruined subways 
with a bug to plant near the former 
bombshelter in a deserted department store basement where the 
others are hidden . 
Pete is captured and in an effort 
to rescue him and also to prevent 
the others from escaping by way 
of a submarine which is awaiting 
them in the Hudson River, Paul, 
Zack and Martino dash in. A fight 
follows in which all except Paul and 
one of the enemy, who escapes, are 
killed. 
Paul, badly wounded, activates 
his wrist teevee phone and calls 
Dempsey Harrison in Denver. "I’ll 
take that assignment ,” he says. 
XI 
'pvempsey Harrison, Director of 
the National Data Center, lo
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
t .. 
cated in Denver, said, " Professor 
Kosloff, Mr. Edgar of the InterAmerican Bureau of Investigation. 
I believe you have already met 
Miss Stebbins.” 
Paul Kosloff recognized the head 
of the IABI from long years of TriVision news programs. He shook 
hands and exchanged the usual banalities. He also said hello to Lisa 
Stebbins, who today was in the latest of feminine fashion, rather than 
Data Center uniform. 
They were in the escape room of 
Harrison’s luxurious offices in the 
National Data Center, possibly the 
most extensive complex of offices in 
the world. Implausibly, there was a 
real fire going in the fireplace and, 
almost as implausibly in this ultimate center of the computer system 
of the United States of the Americas, their host stood before a real 
bar. 
He took up a bottle, saying hospitably, "Is it too early in the day 
for anyone?” 
James Edgar chortled deeply to 
the point that his rotund belly 
shook. He was a rolly-poly man in 
his late fifties, jolly of face ' and 
looked absolutely nothing at all 
what one would expect of the ultimate authority in the world’s second largest police organization. 
He said, "It is never too early, 
in this day and age, when you are 
offered real guzzle. The ultimate 
luxury, eh, Professor Kosloff? 
Dempsey should be ashamed of 
himself, setting such an example. 
For all practical purposes, the 
whole world has banned the use of 
cereals for beverages, and this nation, at least, grapes for wine. Next 
thing we know, hell be offering us 
cigars.” 
Their top bureaucrat host said, 
"My dear Jim, none of your precious laws are being broken. This 
stuff is all prehistoric. Rank has its 
privileges, one of which is to spend 
astronomical sums on such ultimate 
luxuries as top quality guzzle and 
— you’ll never believe this — hermatically sealed Havanas. I had one 
the other day at Bickford’s. Actually, it has been so long that I 
found I had lost the taste for tobacco. Cognac and soda acceptable 
to everyone?” 
Lisa Stebbins, sitting rather 
primly to one side, said, "If you 
don’t mind, sir, sherry for me.” 
"Imagine anyone as young as 
Miss Stebbins having developed a 
taste for anything as exotic as 
Spanish sherry,” Harrison said jovially. 
Paul Kosloff was inwardly impatient. He still had minor bandages here and there and was a full 
five pounds under his normal 
weight. He wanted to get underway. He said, "Cognac is fine.” 
TX7liile Harrison was making the 
* * drinks, Edgar said to Paul 
Kosloff, "I knew your father slightly. 
"Oh?” He couldn’t help adding, 
"So did I.” 
The IABI head looked at him. 
Paul said, "What I meant was 
— only slightly. He was too busy 
fighting the Cold War to pay much 
attention to the little boy under 
foot about the house.” 
James Edgar chuckled, as though 
it had been meant to be amusing. 
"The Lawrence of Arabia of the 
Cold War, eh? And now, here you 
are following in his footsteps.” 
"Not exactly,” Paul said coldly. 
The rotund police head had a tendency to irritate him. As a matter 
of fact, he was beginning to have 
second reactions to this situation 
in which he found himself. 
Dempsey Harrison evidently 
sensed the latent antagonism. He 
handed the drinks around, found 
his own favorite comfort chair, 
and said to Paul, a placating element in his voice, "You must realize, Professor Kosloff, that we four 
in this room are the only persons 
in the United States of Americas 
who are familiar with your assignment.” 
Paul couldn’t keep from frowning 
at him. "You mean that not even 
the President ...” 
Harrison made a negative gesture 
with his left hand. "There is no 
such thing as letting the President 
in on an ultimately hush-hush situation such as this, Professor Kosloff. 
He has assistants, and assistants of 
assistants, and assistants of assisIF 
tants of assistants. It funnels down 
through scores of persons.” He 
added, dryly humorous. "And besides, frankly, he isn’t very bright.” 
Paul Kosloff had already suspected that from what he had heard 
of the Chief Executive, but it 
wasn’t exactly the sort of thing he 
had expected to hear from Dempsey Harrison who was actually a 
more important official, though 
supposedly a subordinate of the 
President. 
The computer data chief went 
on. "We are keeping the utmost 
security on this, Professor. It is not 
even going into the top priority 
data banks. How efficiently this 
mysterious element is tapping our 
information, we don’t know, but 
they won’t find anything about 
your mission. The last piece of information that went into your dossier recorded your refusal to take 
the assignment to Common EurAsia. There has been no record of 
your trip to Manhattan, your hospitalization, nor your coming here 
today.” 
Paul said, "That Rumanian with 
the bug planted on him. He probably saw me there at the fight at 
the bomb shelter.” 
"Possibly,” the IABI head said. 
"But from the description of that 
fracas, it was brief and poorly lit. 
It’s very probable that he didn’t 
know you were present.” 
"What’s happened to him?” 
Paul said. 
J ames Edgar’s face had lost its 
jolly qualities and there was a 
puzzled something in his voice. 
"We kept the fix on the bug. He 
went down to the river, obviously 
got aboard a vessel and headed out 
for the open sea.” 
"Couldn’t you have had the craft 
intercepted?” 
Edgar shook his head. "Not 
when it was three hundred feet below the surface. By the time we 
had suitable craft after it, it was 
six hundred feet.” 
Paul said, "I didn’t realize naval submarines went that deep.” 
Dempsey Harrison said, "Why 
did you think it was necessarily a 
naval vessel?” 
Paul looked at him in surprise. 
"It never occured to me otherwise. 
A Common Eur-Asia submarine.” 
The IABI man took it up again. 
"I doubt if the usual submersible 
could have penetrated our waters, 
even to such a point as the ruins 
of Manhattan. But our detectors, 
once locked onto it, indicated that 
this vessel was less than fifty feet 
long. Some specially built spy-craft, 
possibly. And that was borne out 
later. You see, we dumped the 
whole thing in the lap of Interpol 
when the submarine began to approach Europe. Frankly, we expected it to proceed through the 
Straits of Hercules and probably to 
the Dalmatian coast of what was 
formerly Yugoslavia. But according to Interpol, it didn’t. That bug 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
of ours proceeded to a thinly populated stretch of the Normandy 
coast. The man carrying it obviously disembarked. The bug then proceeded to Paris, where it was lost.” 
"Lost?” 
"Evidently, at that point the carrier was mopped and the bug discovered and destroyed. We’re 
lucky it remained undetected as 
long as it did.” 
Paul Kosloff thought about it. 
He said finally, "Frankly, I don’t 
see of what use I’d be to you. People continually seem to get the impression that because my father 
was active in international espionage-counter-espionage that I acquired his abilities in my genes. I 
didn’t. I don’t know a secret code 
from the blue prints of a space 
satellite.” 
"You don’t have to,” James Edgar said. "What you’ll be mostly, 
Kosloff, is a contact man. You 
have various excellent qualifications, especially your cover. You 
speak the Balkan languages, you 
have relatives there. You’re undeniably a university professor. In 
fact, if I’m not misinformed, you 
have some international credit 
coming to you that you can spend 
only in Common Eur-Asia — royalties on a couple of your books.” 
"I’d forgotten about that,” Paul 
said, nodding. 
"Very good. You have a perfect 
excuse for going into their country. 
You’ll contact people there, give 
them the situation, find out what 
can be found out and return to report verbally.” 
Paul said, "Do you mean to tell 
me that you people have no more 
efficient means of communicating 
with your foreign agents than messenger boys?” 
Dempsey Harrison said mildly, 
"Formerly, a sealed beam phone 
was considered excellent. But if 
they are tapping our data banks, 
how do we know they aren’t tapping everything else? No, everything connected with this operation 
goes by courier.” 
T he IABI head said, "We’ll do 
it this way. You’ll lob over to 
Paris, independently of each other, 
and contact Interpol to find out if 
they have anything. They’ve already been briefed by courier 
and ...” 
"Independently of each other?” 
Paul asked. 
"Ah, you didn’t know that Miss 
Stebbins is also involved in the assignment?” 
"Miss Stebbins?” Paul looked at 
the beautiful and self-possessed 
Lisa Stebbins. 
She turned down the sides of her 
mouth. "You have objections?” 
"Oh, I didn’t mean that. It just, 
well, never occurred to me.” 
"How much do you know about 
computers and their data banks, 
Professor Kosloff?” 
"Nothing.” 
IF 
”1 know everything about them.” 
Dempsey Harrison said, "You 
might need someone an the spot to 
consult with on some element of 
the problem with which you are not 
familiar. Miss Stebbins won’t go 
into Common Eur-Asia with you, 
but will be on hand in, say, Geneva. 
Interpol will undoubtedly have 
some suggestions on that. We’re 
turning this over to them.” 
"Could you brief me on this Interpol?” Paul Kosloff said. "I’ve 
heard of them vaguely.” 
"International Police,” Edgar 
said. "In the old days, before the 
amalgamation of the Western European countries into Common Europe, Interpol was a somewhat loose 
organization of national police cooperating in international matters, 
smuggling, the dope traffic, criminals who would commit a crime in 
one country and flee to another to 
escape arrest. That sort of thing. 
But with the forming of Common 
Europe, the only thing that made 
sense was to merge Scotland Yard, 
the Prefecture de Police of France, 
the Bund Polizei of West Germany, 
and all the rest, into one. We cooperate widely, of course.” 
Paul said, "All right. I contact 
Interpol. How?” 
"Carefully. You first go to a 
moderately priced hotel, like any 
tourist. That evening you go out 
on the town. You’ll be met.” 
"How’ll I know I’m being contacted by the right people?” 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
"You’ll know. And they’ll take 
it from there. Miss Stebbins will 
go independently of you and will 
make connections through Interpol.” 
"All right,” Paul said. "I suppose 
I have it.” He looked over at Dempsey Harrison. "Could I have a spot 
of that cognac for the road?” 
Harrison grinned at him. "I 
should say no,” he said plaintively. “Within a couple of hours you’ll 
be in France, and there you can 
still get the precious stuff, although 
they won’t export it.” But he took 
the edge off his words by pouring 
them all another hefty snort. 
The data bank head looked at 
Paul speculatively. "You realize, of 
course, Professor Kosloff, that this 
is the single most important project upon which you have ever embarked. Our world today is geared 
to the computer. We cannot go 
back. If anything happened to our 
data banks, our culture would collapse. All industry, all distribution, all our accumulated knowledge, is dependent upon the data 
banks.” 
Paul Kosloff knocked back the 
brandy. "So everybody keeps telling me,” he muttered. 
D empsey Harrison said, "We 
might as well get the show on 
the road. Professor Kosloff, Miss 
Stebbins will go further into the 
details with you, provide your rocketplane ticket, and International 
Credit Card.” The data, bank head 
looked at James Edgar. "If you’ll 
just stay on for a few minutes, 
Jim, there are some odds and ends 
to go over.” 
Paul Kosloff and Lisa Stebbins 
came to their feet Paul went 
through the usual routine of shak
murmuring amenities, then turned and followed the 
lithe Lisa from the escapl room! 
studiously trying to keep his eyes 
from the gentle sway of molded 
hips. 
In the outer office, she was 
briskly efficient. She fished in a 
drawer of her desk. 
"Here is your International Credit Card.” 
"How about my passport?” 
"You are out of date, Professor. 
Your International Credit Card is 
your passport. All the data once on 
a passport is now on your credit 
card.” 
"I assume I have unlimited cr 
cut.” 
"Wrong assumption, Professc 
tt is not to be expected that 
teacher of languages would be qui 
so prosperous. We don’t know 
what extent our data banks are b 
mg pned into, but if our frien 
came up with the little item th 
Professor Paul Kosloff had be, 
given unlimited credit, they mig 
smell a rat. As Mr. Edgar suggej 
. act like any touri« 
staying m a moderately priced h 
tel and so forth.” 
Paul pretended to groan. " Paris, and I have to be on a shoestring.” 
She looked at him speculatively. "You don’t exactly look the 
type who would throw a blast on 
the Rue Pigalle.” 
"Looks can deceive.” 
"If that is supposed to be a 
leer, it doesn’t quite come off. 
Here’s your rocketplane ticket.” 
"Tourist class, of course.” 
"Of course.” 
Paul was looking at the International Credit Card. He winced 
and said, "Where’d you get this 
photograph?” 
"Out of the data banks, of 
course. I picked the one that looked least like you.” 
"I’ll say you did.” 
"Lends authenticity. Passport 
photos never looked like the bearer, and now the same thing applies 
to International Credit Cards.” 
He looked at her. "I’ll bet your 
lunch that your own photo on 
your credit card is tri-di, in color 
and makes you look like this year’s 
winner of the Inter-American 
Miss America Contest.” 
TT'or the first time since he had 
met Miss Lisa Stebbins, she 
laughed. And it came to Paul Kosloff suddenly that not only was 
this girl extraordinarily handsome 
but that she was possibly the single most beautiful girl he had ever 
seen. It brought him up abruptly, 
IF 
along with the realization that he 
was going to be thrown together 
with her in the following days very 
closely indeed. He wasn’t complaining. 
“All rigjit,” she said. “You win. 
Lunch is on me. No, I’m prevaricating. Actually, it’s on the National Data Center. Mr. Edgar already suggested that we two get 
together over lunch to learn to 
know each other a bit better. If 
you’ll come this way, I’ll take you 
to the senior executives’ auto-cafeteria.” 
“Auto-cafeteria?” Paul said. “Is 
that the best Edgar could offer to 
two of his gladiators who are probably going forth to die? Which reminds me, he looks like a professional Santa Claus between Christmases.” 
She led the way to the outer 
corridor, saying, “Don’t downgrade Mr. James Edgar. You don’t 
reach his position by other than 
your own efforts and his position 
is one of the highest in the Ultrawelfare State.” She looked up at 
him from the side of her eyes. “By 
the way, just for the record, he is 
a very bad man not to have on 
your side.” 
Paul snorted lightly. “I’m a 
professor of Slavic languages. What 
difference could it possibly make 
if Edgar was less than happy about 
me?” 
She said, “All right, but I told 
you.” 
Lunch was surprisingly good in 
spite of the ultramated nature of 
the auto-cafeteria. Evidently, Harrison’s comment about rank having 
its privileges applied to the food 
of the data center’s senior executives, as well as to liquor laid 
down before the bans on distilling 
and fermentation. No dishes based 
on Antarctic krill were served here, 
nor even whale steaks. Paul ate 
beef for the first time in so long 
that he couldn’t remember. It must 
have been imported from Australia, 
he decided. He had heard that 
they still grazed beef cattle down 
under, and wondered vaguely how 
much longer the Aussies would be 
able to afford to. 
It turned out that they had considerable in common, including 
love of sports, contempt of TriVision as a means of entertainment, love of good books, contempt 
of labor draft dodgers and others 
who purposely lived lives of complete leisure, love of good food and 
drink, and contempt of what they 
usually had to put up with as an 
alternative, a preference for Chinese food, and contempt for such 
pseudo-concoctions as Chop Suey 
and Chow Mein. 
XII 
P aul said, over their coffee, “Actually, I’m not really interested in sodo-economics but I 
sometimes wonder if we aren’t in 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
a rut with this People’s Capitalism 
of ours.” 
"How do you mean, Paid?” 
They were calling each other Paul 
and Lisa already. Professor Kosloff and Miss Stebbins had fallen 
by the wayside. 
"It’s possible for cultures to get 
into a historic rut. Egypt was an 
example. So was the Mayan civilization. They reached a certain level 
and stayed there for centuries.” 
She thought about it, tilting her 
head unconsciously. She was, he 
decided all over again, the best 
looking woman he had ever talked 
to. He had never particularly liked 
red hair before; now he was enraptured of red hair. 
"Go on,” she said. 
"It’s not good for a people to 
be able to exist without any effort 
whatsoever. It wasn’t good for the 
Roman proletariat, and it finally 
contributed greatly to the fall of 
that Empire. And it’s not good for 
the United States of the Americas, and I wonder if it’ll eventually contribute to the fall of our 
country. Possibly, it’d be better if 
these data banks of ours were wiped clean, and we’d all have to pitch 
in and rebuild our world.” 
She shook her head at him. 
"You can’t unsolve a solved 
problem, Paul, any more than you 
can unscramble scrambled eggs. 
The computer world is here to stay. 
Perhaps it isn’t the best possible 
of all worlds, possibly it needs 
changes. But whatever changes we 
make, the new world would still 
utilize computers. You know what 
would happen if our worse fears 
were justified and our unknown 
enemy was able to wipe our data 
banks?” 
He looked at her. 
She said, "We’d devote all efforts to fill them again. We’d have 
to. It gives me a headache just to 
think of the magnitude of the task, 
but we’d have to begin.” 
He shrugged. "Life was simpler 
before.” 
"That it was,” she admitted. 
"But that doesn’t answer everything. Today, the combination of 
computer, data banks and the teevee phone working through them, 
is as important to man as fire was 
a couple of centuries ago.” 
"Oh, come now.” 
She pointed at her wrist teevee 
phone. "Practically every element of 
your life is tied up with this. At 
birth you are issued your teevee 
phone number which is also your 
credit account number, the number of your home, your postoffice 
box number, if you will. It is also 
your driver’s license number, your 
medical records number, your military, and so on. It’s also your 
voter’s registration number and 
your teeveephone is your secret 
voting booth. 
"Think of just that aspect of it. 
A citizen no longer registers to 
vote. Upon coming of age, the com
IF 
puters automatically register him. 
When he votes, it is on his teevee 
phone and there is no way possible 
for a crooked politician to count 
him out. Remember reading in the 
past, when whole elections were 
completely crooked? Ward heelers 
would go through the cemeteries 
finding names to register and later 
vote. Ballot boxes would be stuffed, or sometimes stolen. Records 
would be lost’. Some elements even 
voted over and over again. Well, 
no more. Elections are now at least 
honest. 
"Or take another aspect, that 
you’ve possibly never thought of. 
Children don’t get lost any more. 
They can’t. At birth they get their 
number and parents hang a little 
— well, it amounts to a bug — 
around their neck. The little tots 
don’t have teevee phones that early 
but their parents, the police, or 
whoever else might be looking for 
them, can get a fix on them from 
the computers in a matter of seconds. Of course, that applies to 
you, too. I understand you like 
mountain climbing. Wizard. Suppose you’re up in the Canadian 
Rockies alone and fall and break 
your leg way out in the boondocks. 
In the past, you would have been 
a dead man. But today you activate your wrist phone and request 
that they come and get you. You 
are, literally, in communication 
with anyone in the world within 
seconds.” 
P aul Kosloff said uncomfortably, 
"Oh, I’m not denying the extent to which the computer-data 
bank-teevee phone combine enters 
into our lives. But that’s the very 
trouble. It robs us of all privacy. 
Of course I can get in communication with anyone in the world in a 
matter of seconds, but the trouble 
is, they can get in touch with me, 
too. Suppose I’m up there in the 
Canadian Rockies trying to get 
away from it all, and my phone 
rings and there’s some slick trying 
to sell me a fancy imported wallto-wall rug for my mini-apartment.” 
Lisa had to laugh. "You know 
very well that’s easily handled. 
You have priorities on your phone. 
Tri-Vision stars and other celebrities would be deluged otherwise. 
Everyone lists their Number One 
Priorities and only those persons 
can ring them up at any time at 
all. Then you have your Number 
Two Priorities and that list includes most of your friends, acquaintances and business associates. But if you’d rather not have 
even these calling you in the middle of the night, or when you’re 
out on a date, or whenever, you 
simply switch off your Number 
Two Priority and nobody on that 
list can get through to you. Then, 
of course, there’s Number Three, 
and celebrities keep that switched 
off practically all of the time, but 
persons like you and me don’t both
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
er to. Number Four Priority is for 
the pests, and only the type person who is lonesome, or some such, 
and willing to take any call that 
:omes through has it switched on.” 
It was Paul’s turn to laugh and 
his chuckle was rueful. " Trouble 
with me is, I’m top curious to know 
who’s calling to switch off any of 
the priorities, except possibly Four. 
But this whole conversation reminds me. I’ve heard they have a 
new library booster teevee phone 
screen over in Common Europe. 
Very fine screen, wonderful for its 
reproductions of paintings and such 
delicate reception. I want one.” 
Lisa said, "I’ve got too many 
teevee boosters around the house as 
it is. One whole wall is taken up 
by my movie booster. Then there’s 
my library booster, and a phone 
screen in every room. That’s not 
counting the door identity screen, 
the Tri-Vision set and a smaller 
library booster screen I’ve had set 
into the ceiling above my bed so 
I can dial old movies, or concerts 
or whatever, if I can’t sleep. I’ll 
have to move out if anyone moves 
another screen in.” 
Paul Kosloff said, "All right, I 
surrender. I’ll admit that our world 
is so computer-teevee phone orientated that we couldn’t abolish 
them, even if we wanted to.” 
Lisa Stebbins was suddenly very 
serious. "The point is that we’ve 
simply got to prevent anyone else 
from abolishing them for us.” 
nphe rocketplane lobbed him over 
directly to Orly Rocketport 
and he took a vacuum-tube vehicle 
from there to the terminal on the 
lie de la Cite . He had never been 
in Paris before, but his French was 
adequate and he was tourist equipped with maps and guidebooks. 
He had been somewhat surprised that Harrison and Edgar hadn’t 
given him a definite hotel to go to, 
but then, he supposed that was 
part of his cover, as they called it. 
The less others knew about where 
he was and what he was doing, the 
better. He didn’t imagine Interpol 
would have much trouble finding 
him, not in this day of police detection gadgets. 
From one of his guides he had 
already picked a hotel, the aging 
George V Hilton. He studied the 
maps and instructions on the terminal walls, and dialed his way 
through to it, after placing his International Card in the payment 
slot. 
In the United States of Americas, he could have dialed through 
right to a room and have registered 
from it without ever having to see 
a hotel employee. But evidently 
here in Common Europe ultramation had not gone quite so far, at 
least not in the George V Hilton. 
He emerged from his vacuum-tube 
vehicle into a large lobby and live 
bellhops grabbed up his luggage 
and hauled it to a busy reception 
desk. Paul Kosloff had never seen 
IF 
a bellhop before, save on TriVision shows. 
At the reception desk he told 
them his needs, was assigned quarters and registered by putting his 
International Credit Card in the 
desk teevee screen, and adding his 
thumbprint. At least, the bellhops 
didn’t lug his stuff all the way to 
his room. There was a delivery 
chute at the side of the desk. 
In his room, he found the French 
weren’t as prehistoric as all that. 
There was an auto-bar in the comfortable quarters which overlooked 
the Place de la Madeleine and the 
Roman temple with its majestic 
Corinthian colonnade. 
The auto-bar was a slightly different model than the ones he was 
used to at home, but presented no 
problems. He dialed beverages, 
then alcoholic beverages and then 
read the list admiringly. Perhaps 
the French had gone along when 
the world had banned the use of 
cereals for such drinks as beer and 
whiskey, but they had no intentions of giving up the products of 
the vine. Paul Kosloff had had 
precious little wine in his life and 
looked forward to it during his stay 
in Europe, but right now he was up 
to spirits. 
He dialed a cognac and soda and, 
when it came, took it to a chair 
near the window and sat and sipped and looked out over the city. 
Paris, the City of Light. He had 
never met a person who had been 
to Paris that didn’t like the city. 
Come to think of it, they usually 
liked the city and disliked the 
French. Why, he didn’t know. Paul 
Kosloff was not politically conscious, but inwardly thought of 
himself as a liberal. He didn’t believe in making judgments of a 
whole people, he believed in judging each person as an individual. 
But then, he had never met such 
as the Egyptian, either singly or 
en masse. 
T T e was again having second 
^ ^ thoughts. He must have been 
an idiot to have taken this assignment. He hadn’t the vaguest idea 
of what was expected of him. Very 
well, admittedly his cover was excellent. Few would think twice of 
his entering either Common Europe, formerly known as the West, 
or even Eastern Europe, now part 
of Common Eur-Asia. But so 
what? Once there, what was there 
for him to do? 
Well, he couldn’t put it off indefinitely. He put his glass back 
on the top of the auto-bar so that 
it could sink away into the bowels 
of the hotel to be automatically 
washed and stored away for its 
next usage. 
Map and guidebook in hand — 
still the tourist — he went down 
to the lobby and out onto the 
street. He could have taken a vacuum-tube vehicle or, just for the 
experience, one of the antiquated 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
metros, but he decided to walk. 
The reason was double. He wanted 
to witness the city; he also wanted 
to check on whether or not he was 
being followed. Who would follow 
him, he didn’t exactly know, but 
whether it was the enemy or an 
agent of Interpol, he’d still like to 
be aware of it. 
He strolled down the Rue Royale to the Place de la Concorde and 
crossed the Champs-Elysees at its 
lower end. In the distance, he could 
see the Arc de Triomphe and felt 
that tiny stirring when a man first 
sees Napoleon’s arch of victory. 
He crossed the Seine on the 
Pont de la Concorde and emerged 
onto the Boulevard St. Germain. 
The walk fascinated him. The 
United States of the Americas was 
new. The cities, even the old ones 
still standing, were new, not to 
speak of the planned pseudo-cities. 
Paris was old, old. 
His instructions were to go out 
on the town. How he would be 
contacted and by whom, he hadn’t 
the vaguest idea. Very well, he was 
out on the town. 
He strode along St. Germain, 
taking in this generation’s artists, 
poets, musicians, sculptors, writers, both pseudo and otherwise. 
Paul Kosloff didn’t know it, but 
they differed little from those of 
Hemingway’s Lost Generation, or 
of the lost generation of Francois 
Villon’s day. All generations of 
artists are evidently lost. 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
He was beginning to get tired of 
pavement-pounding and turned 
left on a side street, the Ruel/Abbaye, which bordered an ancient 
looking church. There was a sound 
of guitars and song from a small 
place. All right, he was on , the 
town. He entered a small club called L’Abbaye. / 
And was hissed to silence. An 
. * t p ■ \ y 
aging Negro was sitting on a 
straight chair on a platform and 
singing a folk song. Folk music 
was no longer "in” in the United 
States of the Americas and it had 
been some time since Paul Kosloff 
had been subjected to it. The old 
timer was good. 
° / L.i 
* * 
" • i i , ’ \ 
TXThen the song was over, he was 
* ^ushered to a tiny table. A 
head waiter, yet, he marvelled. He 
was used to the auto-cafeterias and 
auto-bars of home, where the customer was untouched by human 
hands, period; where the customer 
never saw an employee of the establishment — assuming there were 
any such. Usually, efficient crews 
of men served the ultramated 
auto-cafeterias back home. 
However, his table was automated. He put his International Credit 
Card in the slot and dialed champagne. It was expensive, but, then, 
he had never tasted champagne. 
Let Dempsey Harrison foot the 
bill. Paul Kosloff was on an expense account. 
The center of the table sank — 
to return with glass and a full bottle of chilled wine. Paul Kosloff 
blinked at it. He had expected a 
single glass. 
However, he poured and sipped. 
To his surprise, it turned out that 
he didn’t lie the taste of the bubbly wine as much as he had expected to. 
The folk singer launched into a 
new song. 
Little boy, how old are you? 
Little boy , how old are you? 
Why , sir, Vm only six years 
old . 
Paul Kosloff found that he was 
enjoying himself. The other occupants of the tiny boite were largely younger people, teenagers some 
of them. Evidently, this was a favorite hangout of the ardent striver set When a song ended, they 
snapped their fingers rather than 
applauding; seemingly it was an 
institution in this establishment. 
As he lifted his glass to his lips 
again, realizing that the taste of 
the vintage wine was growing on 
him, a newcomer slid into the chair 
across the table. 
The light was dim, but it was 
all that he could do to refrain from 
spewing his mouth full of wine out 
over the table top. 
rf Zackt ” he ejaculated. 
XIII 
T he other said drily, "The name 
is Georg.” 
And then, even in the dim light 
of VAbbaye, Paul Kosloff could 
see that the man across from him 
was a younger edition of Zack 
Castriota. 
He put his glass down and 
shook his head. "This came as a 
surprise,” he said. "I last saw Zack 
under the most unpleasant of circumstances. We hadn’t known each 
other very long, but we were beginning to grow on one another. 
Brother . ?” 
"That’s right,” the other said. 
He extended a hand to be shaken. 
His voice was low. "Younger 
brother. Colonel Georg Castriota. 
You, of course, are Professor Kosloff.” 
Paul said, even as he shook, 
"How did you locate me? I’ve 
been looking out for anyone following me.” 
The other chuckled in deprecation and looked at the champagne. 
He even had the mannerisms of 
his brother. "That’s going to cost 
you a million dollars a bottle,” he 
said, dialing for a glass. 
"I will gladly submit the bill to 
Mr. James Edgar of the IABI,” 
Paul said. 
Georg Castriota’s glass arrived 
and he helped himself to a glass 
of the wine, evidently automatically assuming he was welcome. 
He said, quietly, "Security being what it is, the details of Zack’s 
. end haven’t all come through 
to us.” 
11 * 
Paul Kosloff said in a new-found 
caution. "Is it at all possible that 
our conversation is being overheard ?” 
The other shook his head. 
"Quite impossible.” 
"Someone told me that snooping 
devices have been so perfected that 
it is possible to put a bug on anyone’s wrist teevee phone so that 
not only can all phone calls be 
monitored but all conversations 
taking place in the vicinity. And 
nobody seems to know just how 
sophisticated this equipment of our 
mysterious snoopers might be. If 
they can tap our data banks, perhaps they can also tap our communications system.” 
The Interpol agent nodded. 
"However ...” He brought from 
an inner pocket of his jerkin what 
would at first appear to be an old 
fashioned cigarette case and handed it to Paul Kosloff. Paul scowled down at it. 
Georg Castriota said, "For every 
flow there’s an ebb. When some 
slick first invented the sword, several millennia ago, in short order 
somebody else came up with armor. More recently, when the tank 
was devised, someone else came up 
with the bazooka.” He nodded at 
the compact object Paul was examining. "You activate it by simply throwing that little switch. It 
scrambles any electronic bugs in 
your immediate vicinity. A lot of 
people keep a variation of it in 
their escape rooms. As long as it’s 
on, not even your teevee phone 
will work.” 
"I’ll be darned,” Paul said. He 
began to hand the device tack. 
"Keep it,” Georg Castriota said. 
"And now, the details of Zack’s 
death?” 
Paul told the whole story. ; 
B y the time he had come to the 
end, the bottle of wine was 
empty. They maintained a lengthy 
silence. Georg Castriota’s face was 
expressionless save for a slight tic 
at the side of his mouth. 
He sucked in air, finally, and 
said, "All right. It’s the way Zack 
would have liked to have gone.” 
He fished in a pocket again to 
emerge with another credit card. 
He handed it to Paul Kosloff. 
It was evidently a standard 
Common Europe equivalent of the 
American Universal Credit Card, 
although Paul had never seen one 
before. The face on it was his own 
and he suspected the thumbprint 
was as well. However, the identity 
number was strange to him and the 
name on the card read, Herman 
Voss. He looked across the table at 
the Interpol man. 
Georg said, "Your cover involves 
your having limited expenditures 
as a teacher making a tourist trip 
through Europe. We’ve issued this 
to you in case of extraordinary expenses. Even though our data 
banks are being tapped as well as 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
your own, it’s unlikely they could 
trace this to you. Nor will any of 
the records of this appear in your 
own data banks to cause suspicion. 
What you spend on your International Credit Card will, of course, 
appear all over the place, including 
in Switzerland for eventual international clearing.” 
He grunted sourness. "The 
world’s got a lot of progress still 
to be made. We need an international njonetary system. As it is, 
ultimately our exchange is still 
based on gold, and still has to be 
cleared from one country to another.” 
"Well,” Paul said, "the credit 
card is still a big improvement over 
the old system. Money never was 
a very good means of exchange. In 
the old days, you could work all 
your life and accumulate a small 
fortune, represented by gold. Wizard. But along would come a man 
with a gun and point it at you and 
walk off with your life-time work. 
It got even worse when paper came 
in to represent the gold, which was 
buried away in the ground somewhere. Your house could burn down 
and your paper money with it, and 
there was the end of your life’s 
work. At least now nobody can 
steal your money, nobody can 
spend it but you, you can’t lose it, 
and you can’t be conned out of it.” 
"I suppose so,” Castriota said. 
"However, I still think at least a 
monetary union of the United 
States of the Americas and Common Europe would make a lot of 
sense. For that matter, a more allembracing union.” 
Paul Kosloff was intrigued. 
"Sort of bring you into the United 
States as a junior partner of the 
firm, eh?” 
Castriota said, "Why junior?” 
Paul said, "Sorry. I wasn’t trying to tread on your toes. It’s just 
that we’re so much bigger than you 
are.” 
"Size isn’t everything. Australia 
is bigger than Common Europe, 
too.” 
Paul said uncomfortably. "Well, 
I wasn’t simply speaking of size. 
Our gross national product is considerably larger and ...” 
C astriota was looking at him impatiently. "Zoroaster, I sometimes think you Americans are the 
most arrogant people since Rome. 
These gross national product statistics are, along with per capita 
income statistics, some of the most 
elastic going, and it makes one 
hell of a difference who does the 
compiling.” 
Paul frowned at him. 
"Look,” Castriota said, leaning 
forward slightly. "Suppose you 
have two brain surgeons, one located in Greater Washington and 
one in Vienna. They are equally 
accomplished and do the same 
number of operations a year. The 
American is paid fifty thousand 
IF 
dollars a year and the Austrian 
doctor ten thousand. Those 
amounts are entered in their respective countries as part of the 
gross national product. Next year, 
the American arbitrarily doubles 
his fees, figuring he might as well 
get in on the gravy. He performs 
no greater number of operations, 
but now his contribution to the 
GNP of your country is one hundred thousand dollars. That of the 
Austrian doctor, strictly controlled 
by the government, still remains 
ten thousand dollars.” 
Paul had to laugh. Defensively 
he said, "Well, admittedly in services, errors can creep in. However, 
ultimately the proof of the pudding 
is in the eating and the American 
standard of living is the highest in 
the world.” 
The other was still irritated. "Is 
it? What determines a standard of 
living? For a long time, you Americans have been claiming the highest in the world, but by using 
whose criteria? If you base standard of living on diet, then the 
Australians, New Zealanders and 
even Argentines could point out 
that their meat consumption has 
been higher than yours since the 
early part of the 20th Century. If 
your national health is a criterion, 
then by the standards of northern 
Europe in general, your level is 
shockingly low. If education is your 
criterion, then even the Russians 
surpass you.” 
Paul said mildly, '"We have 
more color Tri-Vision and teevee 
sets per capita...” 
The other was on him. "And so 
what? How do you stand on legitimate theatres, opera, ballet, concert halls? Even the Eastern Europeans have been far ahead of 
you in those fields since long before your Ultra-welfare State was 
formed. Where do you place security in this standard of living of 
yours? The Scandinavians, the 
Swiss, the Dutch have had a security going back for decades before your comparatively recently 
instituted People’s Capitalism with 
its inadequate womb to tomb dividends from Inalienable Basic. 
There hasn’t been what you could 
truly call a poor man in Scandinavia or Switzerland in the memory 
of living man.” 
Georg Castriota was well into it 
now; evidently it was a pet peeve 
of his. He said, "Besides, Gross 
National Product and the per capita income of a country has little 
to do with the living standards of 
the people. You might have ten 
people whose gross product is one 
million dollars, which would make 
their per capita income a hundred 
thousand dollars apiece. However, 
how it is distributed is another 
thing. One man might get nine hundred thousand of that amount, a 
second man get sixty thousand of 
it, and the remaining eight wind 
up with five thousand apiece, which 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
comes under the head of poverty 
in these days. 
"As far back as the middle of 
the 20th Century, Russia had the 
second largest gross national product in the world, but the people 
lived like pigs. The government 
spent the income on rapid industrialization, on the military and the 
space program. The United States 
had the largest gross national income of all; but it also had the 
largest military machine, the largest bureaucracy, and the most ostentatiously living upper class in 
the world. And with all this went 
the appalling poverty of your slum 
dwellers, your American Indians 
and your rural backward areas 
such as the Appalachians.” 
T)aul Kosloff said with a grimace. 
**■ " You’re even worse than Zack. 
He too had this anti-American 
bit.” 
Georg Castriota was still impatient. "I’m not anti-American. 
If anything, it’s the other way. I 
think Common Europe and the 
United States should have closer 
ties, particularly in our monetary 
systems, communications and computer data banks. But I get fed 
up with your delusions of grandeur 
occasionally.” Then, in a complete 
change of subject: "Who are 
they?” 
Paul looked at him. 
Castriota said, "These people 
who are tapping the data banks?” 
"We were hoping you’d have 
some ideas.” 
The other shook his head. "Do 
you know who we thought it was, 
at first?” 
"Who?” 
"You.” 
The American stared at him. 
"What are you talking about?” 
"When we first became aware 
of the fact that our data banks 
were being tapped, we thought you 
Americans had come up with a 
method of doing it. Zack couldn’t 
believe it and was assigned to go 
to Greater Washington to check. 
He had the advantage of being a 
personal acquaintance of your 
Dempsey Harrison. We accepted 
his reports that you people were 
up against the same thing.” 
"Well, that leaves our friends 
the communists.” 
"Calling them communists, these 
days, is stretching a point. However, why? Why couldn’t it be 
some neutral state — say the Union of North Africa?” 
Paul Kosloff was unhappy. 
"From what Dempsey Harrison 
said, our own technicians have been 
working on the theory ...” 
"Oh, they have, eh?” 
Paul said, "Well, have yours?” 
Castriota grunted. "I suppose 
so. Not with much success certainly.” 
"Harrison says that our people 
think they’re near some break* 
throughs, and near possibilities, 
IF 
whatever that means. But it’s one 
thing being near breakthroughs, and 
another having made them. The 
point is that this is pretty sophisticated stuff. If your scientists and 
ours haven’t been able to tap the 
data banks of another power from 
a distance, why should a bunch of 
Arabs, or whoever, be able to?” 
"You’re most likely right. Look, 
who started the rumors?” 
"What rumors?” 
"The first inklings we had of 
our banks being tapped were a 
spate of rumors that spread 
through Paris and Geneva, where, 
as you know, we have our main 
banks. Rumors were that the data 
banks were being invaded,” 
Paul Kosloff said slowly, "Zack 
and Harrison did mention rumors. 
They didn’t go into details.” 
/^astriota said suddenly, "Look, 
^ have you had dinner?” 
"Why, no. I ate last in Greater 
Washington, just before taking the 
rocketplane over.” 
The other came to his feet. 
"There’s a restaurant nearby. 
Let’s continue there.” 
It was all right with Paul Kosloff. He looked forward to French 
food which, along with that of the 
Chinese, was still the most famed 
in the world. However, they had 
to wait for a short period until the 
folk singer finished his current 
song. Evidently in UAbbaye correct protocol was not to stir as 
long as a song was in progress. 
When it was through, they dutifully snapped their fingers in applause along with the teenage fans 
of the boite. 
On the street again, it was night. 
"This way,” Castriota said. "It’s 
only a few blocks and the walk 
will give us an appetite.” 
He led the way back up to Boulevard St. Germain and turned left. 
It was completely dark now, save 
for the street lights, which were 
somewhat more bright than Paul 
Kosloff was used to in the pseudocities of America. However, he 
suspected that the Manhattan of 
the old days before the* riots must 
have been even more brilliant than 
this, not to speak of such abominations as Las Vegas. 
As they pressed through the 
throngs of pedestrians, Georg said, 
"You’ve never been to Paris before?” v 
"No. My sole European jaunt 
was to Yugoslavia to visit some 
relatives there.” 
"It’s a town that gets under 
your skin. I suspect that it will be 
a long time before such centers as 
Paris, Rome and London disappear. Our cities didn’t evolve quite 
the way yours did.” 
They waited at the corner of St. 
Germain and Rue de Seine for a 
letup in the swarm of floater autocabs, and then crossed to the far 
side of the boulevard. Paul Kosloff 
was fascinated by the clothing 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
styles, or rather the lack of them. 
Evidently fashion on the Left Bank 
of Paris was meaningless. It was 
every person on his own, and evidently the devil take the hindmost. 
Had he known it, this had been so 
almost since Caesar’s day, and a 
computerized world was not about 
to change it. 
He looked at his companion and 
said, "How do you mean?” 
"Your big cities never had anything of enough value to retain. 
They completely changed their 
faces every couple of decades or 
so. A building seldom lasted long 
enough to become old. It was torn 
down and another more modern 
one erected. We treasure old building, you become impatient with 
them. Some of the best hotels in 
Europe are literally hundreds of 
years old.” 
Paul said sourly, "I doubt if we 
have any that are fifty. If we do, 
they aren’t our best hotels. They’re 
fleabags.” 
Georg said, "So when you started building your expressways and 
speedways, you tore great holes 
in your cities, pulled down buildings, uprooted parks. We couldn’t 
do it. Almost every building in 
downtown Paris or Rome is a historic monument that can’t be 
touched. We simply couldn’t allow 
to happen to our cities what did to 
yours.” 
Paul looked about him. "You 
should be glad.” 
"I am. Here. We turn here. 
You’ll love this place. Rim by a 
family that’s now in its third generation. Old, old neighborhood. 
There’s one bar in this vicinity that 
has cellars going back to Roman 
times.” 
XIV 
'T'hey turned right onto Rue 
Monsieur-le-Prince, out of the 
bright lights of the main stem of 
the Latin Quarter. Within a block 
it had become quite dark. 
Georg Castriota looked up at a 
darkened lamppost and said, with 
a puzzled quality, "Lights seem to 
be out in this vicinity. Hope the 
restaurant hasn’t been affected.” 
They crossed another street. The 
area was residential now, and largely deserted. Paul could see only 
two other figures, both of them in 
the distance. 
Georg said, "That’s the Odeon 
Theatre up there at the end of the 
street. Very famous once.” He 
added, "Here’s the restaurant. 
Monsieur Pierre’s. Michelin gives it 
one star, but it deserves two.” 
Paul snapped, "Look out!” 
He spoke too late. The assailants were upon them. 
He inwardly swore now. He 
hadn’t been allowed to bring his 
.38 Noiseless. University professors on tourist trips do not usually 
go armed. And most certainly, 
crossing the Common Eur-Asian 
border with a gun would have been 
disastrous. The border authorities 
would without doubt have been 
equipped with detectors that would 
have picked the metal up. 
There were three of the others, 
and they descended from nowhere. 
Immediately, developments became a blur of confusion. 
Georg Castriota blurted, "The 
scrambler I Deactivate ...” and 
then went down in a crumbled 
heap. 
Paul bounded back into the small 
doorway of the restaurant. It 
wasn’t a matter of two to three 
now, it was one to three. Georg 
didn’t stir. Paul hadn’t even seen 
what had hit the Interpol agent. 
Evidently, some sort of bludgeon. 
Georg seemingly wasn’t the handto-hand fighter his brother Zack 
had been. 
The three came toward him slowly. 
One said in a low, guttural voice 
in English, "Surrender yourself, 
Professor Kosloff. Resistance is futile.” 
Paul Kosloff was in the Hachijtdachi spreadout position. Left foot 
slightly forward, body weight evenly distributed, both fists clenched, knuckles facing down and held 
slightly to the side of his waist. 
"Come in and get me, you f linkers,” he growled. 
They began to move in unison, 
their hands outstretched. 
It suddenly came to him what 
Georg Castriota had said, even as 
he noted that worthy beginning to 
move slightly beyond the trio. He 
darted a hand to his side jerkin 
pocket, slid it in and snapped over 
the lever of the cigarette-case-like 
scrambling device Georg had given 
him. 
The three rushed. 
One threw a right, and Paul 
moved slightly back and to the left 
and blocked the punch with a hard 
right block to the other’s outside 
wrist 
He felt a blow crush into his left 
ribs, and grunted. 
TTe had one small advantage. 
* The three got in each other’s 
way. No, he had two advantages. 
The others were trying to overcome 
him, not kill him. In fact, the one 
who had spoken was still muttering placatingly, calling on him to 
surrender, even as he tried to throw 
his arms around the American. 
As they scrambled about, behind 
them, still on the cement sidewalk 
near the curb, Georg Castriota 
managed to get his wrist teevee 
phone to his face. "Zero-dans, 
zero-dansl” he snarled into it. 
One of the three growled irritation and rushed over and aimed a 
brutal kick at the fallen man’s 
head. But Georg rolled quickly over the curb and into the street and 
tried to come erect. The other followed him and chopped down with 
a vicious judo blow. It contacted 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
only glancingly, but the Interpol 
man went down again. 
Meanwhile, Paul Kosloff had his 
work cut out for him. The narrow 
doorway in which he had taken his 
stand confined him in his movements, but on the other hand, it 
prevented the two who now opposed him from coming in from 
either side. Their attack had to be 
from the direct front. 
Largely he punched, using the 
Okinawa fist, but given the room, 
he occasionally attempted a side 
knife-edge kick or a cross kick. 
Suddenly the two stepped back, 
their expressions furious. One fumbled under his coat to emerge with 
a squat handgun. 
But at that split moment, a police floater came careening around 
the corner from the direction that 
Paul and Georg Castriota had just 
come. The wail of another floater’s 
siren screamed down from the direction of the Odeon. 
The gun began to come up, but 
its bearer was put off by the new 
emergency. 
One of the three, darting his eyes 
about like a trapped coyote, 
screamed, " Venn rapide /” Even as 
he began to run, he also began 
tearing a weapon from his own 
shoulder rig. 
In seconds the street was seemingly full of police floaters and 
men, both uniformed and in plain 
clothes, began erupting from them. 
Georg Castriota, a gun now in 
his right hand, was up on one knee 
and yelling, "Prend-les vivantl” 
And disregarding his own order, 
he blasted three rounds into the 
back of the sole remaining of the 
trio, just in time to prevent that 
cornered desperado from cutting 
Paul down. 
A uniformed flic came running 
up to Castriota. " Colonel , comment 
allez-vous, okay?” 
Georg snarled something at him, 
came entirely erect and barked at 
Paul, "Get inside, damn it! Off the 
street! ” 
P aul Kosloff knew when to take 
orders. He turned quickly, 
grabbed the knob of the door and 
went on into the restaurant, ignoring the body of the fallen assailant. From up the street came the 
chatter of guns. 
Inside, obviously the sounds of 
the conflict had penetrated. The 
ground floor of the small establishment seated approximately twenty, 
and the tables had evidently been 
full. Now the customers were on 
their feet buzzing excitedly, bugeyeing Paul when he entered. 
In the middle of the floor, standing before a tiny bar, a pear shaped, applecheeked little man in the 
most stereotyped of stereotyped 
chef’s costumes, complete to white 
hat perched high, was wringing his 
hands and whining. 
Paul said impatiently, "Do you 
have a private room?” 
IF 
The other stared at him in terror. 
Paul repeated it in French, "Avez-vous une chambre privee?” 
The restaurant employee came 
out of it long enough to point at a 
very narrow, winding stairway. 
Paul went up it and found three 
small private dining rooms above. 
He entered one of them and took 
a chair facing the door. Georg Castriota wanted him out of the way. 
Very well, he was out of the way. 
He sat there wishing that he’d had 
the presence of mind to garner himself a hefty drink down at the bar 
before coming up here. 
Possibly twenty minutes passed 
before Georg Castriota entered, still 
dusting the street’s dirt from the 
knees of his trousers. He was obviously disgusted. He turned and 
shouted something down the stairwell, then entered the room where 
Paul sat 
He glared at Paul. "Did you contact anyone at all, between the 
time you left Orly until you entered that boite on the Rue d’Abbaye?” 
Paul said, "No.” 
"You had to have!” 
"No. I don’t know anybody in 
Paris, even if I had wanted to contact them.” 
Georg Castriota flung himself 
into a chair, rather than simply 
sitting down. "They’re all dead,” 
he said in complete disgust. "They 
wouldn’t allow themselves to be 
captured. They shot it out. Damn 
good men, as a matter of fact.” 
A waiter, on the trembling side, 
came up the stairs. 
"A bottle of Beaujolais,” Georg 
snapped in French. "And menus. 
This is a restaurant, isn’t it?” 
The waiter murmured something, and scurried down the stairs 
again. 
G eorg took a deep breath and 
looked at Paul accusingly. 
"That simply couldn’t have happened. It makes no sense at all.” 
Paul could think of nothing to 
say to that. Finally, he said, "Who 
were they?” 
"We don’t know. No identification at all. I couldn’t even identify 
that language.” 
"It was Esperanto,” Paul said. 
"I’m not really up on that so-called 
universal language, but I know a 
few words. I heard one of them say, 
kill him in Esperanto.” 
Georg looked at him in surprise. 
"I gained the impression that they 
were trying to kidnap you.” 
"At first. When they saw it 
wasn’t coming off, evidently their 
orders were to finish me.” 
"The thing is, they shouldn’t 
have been there. It’s an impossibility.” 
"If you located me, why couldn’t 
they have? You found me by getting a fix on my teevee phone?” 
"Correct. But there in the nightclub we had the scrambler on. No 
bug could have worked. They had 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
no way of knowing we were going 
to Monsieur Pierre’s here.” 
" Maybe they simply tailed us. 
This might be the age of computers and teevee phones and all 
the rest, but methods of yesteryear 
can still be used.” 
Georg said, as though explaining 
to a backward child, "They didn’t 
tail us here. They were here before 
we arrived.” 
"How do you know?” Paul said, 
mystified. 
"Because the street lights had 
been extinguished before we ever 
turned off St. Germain to go up 
Rue Monsieur-le-Prince.” 
Paul Kosloff was taken aback. 
"That’s right,” he said. "How did 
they accomplish that?” 
"We’ll find out,” Georg said 
grimly. "Some of my men are 
working on it now. But it couldn’t 
have been something they pulled 
off on a minute’s notice.” 
They halted their conversation 
when the waiter returned with the 
bottle of light red Burgundy, two 
glasses and two menus. When he 
was gone, Georg Castriota took up 
his glass. "Well, it was a short 
acquaintanceship, but it was pleasant knowing you, Professor. A real 
experience to see you in action.” 
Paul looked at him. "How do 
you mean?” 
"I mean you might as well get 
back on the rocketplane and return 
to your university, Professor. 
You’re useless over here. Your cov
er has been blown sky high. How, 
I don’t know, but so far as cover 
is concerned, you’re as conspicuous 
as a walrus in a goldfish bowl.” 
As was obviously correct. 
P aul sipped at his glass, frowning 
his puzzlement. "I can’t see 
how.” 
"Neither can I, damn it. There 
must have been a leak back in Denver.” 
Paul shook his head. "Only 
Dempsey Harrison, James Edgar 
and Lisa Stebbins knew about it 
at all. Nothing went into the data 
banks. It was all planned in Mr. 
Harrison’s escape room. Nothing 
was said over a teevee phone. The 
leak couldn’t have been in Denver.” 
"Well, it couldn’t have been 
here. You weren’t in town for more 
than a few hours.” 
"Could it have possibly been a 
coincidence? Three footpads attacking us?” 
"Don’t be ridiculous. Have you 
forgotten? They were trying to kidnap you. Zoroaster only knows 
why. And one of them called you 
by name. It’s as you said earlier. 
Their orders were to kidnap you, 
and if it was impossible to pull that 
off, to kill you.” 
The Interpol man’s phone tinkled and he activated it and held 
it up to his face. 
Paul couldn’t hear the conversation, but the other’s face went wan. 
IP 
Finally, Georg Castriota said, "111 
be at the office later.” He deactivated the phone, picked up his 
glass and drained it. 
He looked over at Paul Kosloff. 
"That was Geneva. What did 
you say the name of that girl was? 
The one who was present at your 
conference in Harrison’s office at 
your National Data Center, in 
Denver?” 
"Lisa Stebbins. Why?” 
"She’s disappeared. She was 
scheduled to land at the Geneva 
rocketport at seven o’clock. Evidently, she did. That is, she was 
on the rocketplane. She must have 
left it, quite normally. There’s no 
record of her from there on. Her 
luggage is still at the rocketport. 
Her wrist teevee phone has evidently been destroyed or deactivated. 
They can’t get a fix on it” 
xv 
T)aul Kosloff blurted, "She’s been 
kidnapped ! ” 
Georg Castriota looked at him 
strangely. "Or rejoined her colleagues?” 
"Don’t be ridiculous.” 
"Somebody blew your cover. An 
attempt was made to capture you. 
It failed. So she disappears. 
Doesn’t that suggest anything to 
you, Professor Kosloff?” 
"Yes. We were a team. When 
we landed here in Common Europe 
an attempt was made to kidnap 
me. Evidently, in her case, it sue* 
ceeded. Her cover was obviously 
blown too. It sounds increasingly 
as though whoever is behind all this 
is on this side of the ocean.” 
"You’re the one who is being ridiculous.” 
"Why would she abandon her 
luggage, if she simply wished to 
make off with her colleagues, as 
you call them?” 
"How would I know?” Georg 
Castriota picked up his menu in 
disgust. "We might as well order. 
We have to eat. Do you like Co quilles St . Jaques ? Monsieur Pierre 
does them beautifully, in a special 
semi-sweet wine sauce.” 
"Scallops? Of course, but look 
here, Castriota ...” 
"You’re going to have to eat 
anyway. We can finish any discussion while we do.” He pressed a 
button for the waiter. "I’ll assign 
you a couple of bodyguards and 
they can see you safely back to 
Orly Field and get you on the next 
rocketplane.” 
Paul Kosloff lapsed into sour silence while the waiter came, took 
their order and disappeared again. 
He said, merely to be saying 
something, "I don’t believe I’ve 
ever seen so un-automated a restaurant. I doubt if there are a 
score of live waiters in all Greater 
Washington, and they’re in private 
clubs and such, purely for ostentation.” 
The Interpol man said ungraci
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
ously, "You Americans carry your 
ultramaiion to the utter extreme. 
Gracious living is one of the most 
precious attributes of existence, 
why throw it away? Auto-cafeterias 
are all very well, if you are in a 
hurry and want only a quick sandwich and a cup of coffee for lunch, 
but to eat automatically prepared 
food, served in a sterile atmosphere 
automatically to canned music, is 
an abomination and to be avoided 
if possible.” 
"It saves a good deal of time 
and labor.” 
"Time and labor we have in 
abundance these days. Save it to 
what end? What better way to expend surplus labor than on attractive restaurants? Saving labor was 
all very important a century ago, 
but you Americans got on the binge 
and can’t shake it.” 
npfie dishes they had ordered 
■** * came and were served with a 
flourish. 
Paul Kosloff tasted. 
"Zo-ro-as-terl” he said. 
"Good?” 
"Wonderful I” Paul exclaimed. 
"I don’t believe I’ve ever tasted 
anything like this.” 
The other nodded, gratified. 
"You certainly haven’t in the United States of the Americas.” 
"No. I supp^si^I haven’t. Admittedly, we Americans largely eat 
to stoke the furnace. Perhaps it’s 
part of our Puritan tradition.” Paul 
took another bite of the superlative food. "A good many of us 
look on too much preoccupation 
with food as, well, almost effeminacy. The question is put: do 
you live to eat, or eat to live.” 
Georg Castriota snorted at that. 
"Obviously, both. However, good 
food is an art, not a craft. You 
don’t look down on a man because 
he likes to listen to good music, 
nor to look at beauty, or to smell 
a flower. Why should the other 
sense, taste, be discriminated 
against?” 
He pointed at Paul with his 
fork. "You started with some very 
sound traditions in the foods of a 
frontier country. Such items as the 
seafoods of New England, your 
wonderful fruit pastries, pies, your 
smoked hams and the skillet magic 
of your Southern States, your barbeque meats, your soups and chowders. But then you began to mechanize. You started down hill with 
your monstrous reliance on canned 
foods. You invented such abominations as skinless frankfurters, 
and the feeding of skim milk to 
chickens.” The European rolled his 
eyes upward. "Anyone who would 
eat the insipid meat of a milk-fed 
chicken! But that was just the beginning. Frozen foods came along 
and rapidly became a fetish. Kery 
few, if any, foods will take freezing and retain their true flavor. 
But it was still just the beginning. 
Your women became caught up in 
IF 
this drive to save time at any cost 
and revolted against the kitchen. 
Prepared dinners came in and took 
over. Put the whole, beautifully 
packaged, prepared mess into an 
electronic heater and then serve, 
later throwing away the dishes and 
even utensils. And your restaurants. Cafeterias and automats and 
finally, now, the auto-cafeterias, 
the food prepared by auto-chefs, 
untouched by human hands and 
served at auto-tables automatically, 
in restaurants that even self-clean 
themselves. Nor...” 
Paul said quietly, "Pm not going, you know.” 
The other was disconcerted by 
the break into his attack on the 
eating habits of the people of the 
United States of the Americas. 
"Eh?” He took up his wine and 
half drained it. 
"I’m not going back to the 
States.” 
"But of course you are.” 
"No.” 
Georg Castriota put down his 
fork. "Look here, hombre, I told 
you, your cover is completely 
blown. You’re of no value to us. 
Frankly, I never was of the opinion that you would be of much use, 
but the decisions were made on a 
higher level than mine.” 
"I’m staying.” 
"And I say you’ve gone completely drivel happy. Do you think 
for a moment that we would now 
turn over to you the identity of 
any of our contacts in Bucharest, 
Belgrade, or anywhere else?” 
"No, I suppose not. Nevertheless, Miss Stebbins and I were a 
team. I’m not going to leave her 
over here.” 
"Wizard. The lone eagle, eh? A 
university professor storming into 
Common Eur-Asia looking for his 
chum-pal. Kosloff, what in the 
name of the very living Zoroaster 
do you think you could do in the 
way of finding this Lisa Stebbins 
that Interpol, with the cooperation 
of your Inter-American Bureau of 
Investigation, can’t do?” 
"I don’t know,” Paul Kosloff 
said stubbornly. 
44Tf you stay on here, we’ll have 
to utilize the manpower necessary to guard you, when they 
could be busy at trying to find 
Miss Stebbins.” 
"I don’t want a guard. He’d 
probably just draw attention to 
me, anyway. Listen, that fellow 
your brother Zack planted the little bug on. Where’d he go? All they 
told me in Denver was that the 
bug faded out here in Paris.” 
Georg Castriota sighed. "We followed him a bit longer than that. 
Before he detected the bug, here 
in Paris, we put a twenty-fourhour-a-day tail on him. He shook 
two of them, the last day he was 
here, and evidently thought he had 
shaken them alL However, one 
agent was still on him.” 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
“And then where did he go?” 
“Budapest. We lost him there.” 
Paul said thoughtfully, "Of 
course, you would. He was in home 
territory.” 
Georg Castriota scowled at that. 
“Well, no, not necessarily. You see, 
he was of Italian descent, not Rumanian. Possibly the other one that 
jumped you and Zack in front of 
your home was a Rumanian, but 
we checked this one out closely 
enough when he was here in Paris 
to find he was an Italian.” 
"Do you have any idea at all 
why he went to Budapest? I suppose it's a silly question.” 
Georg Castriota said, in a tone 
reminiscent of his brother, "Budapest, Budapest. Seat of the Commissariat of Computer Data Banks 
of Common Eur-Asia, and the 
head offices of Academecian Pol 
Kodaly.” 
"Who is he?” 
"You really don’t know anything about the computer system, 
do you, Professor? Pol Kodaly is 
the Common Eur-Asian equivalent 
of your Dempsey Harrison. In other words, ultimate head of their 
data banks.” 
"All right,” Paul said. "That’s 
where I’m going. To Budapest.” 
"I warn you, Kosloff. You’ll 
have no support whatsoever from 
Interpol.” 
"I don’t expect any.” 
He had already been equipped 
by the efficient Lisa Stebbins with 
visas for Common Eur-Asia and 
with sufficient international credits 
to see him through the expenses 
end. 
He returned to the hotel, downed several stiff cognacs in hopes of 
nulling himself to sleep, but then 
spent a largely slumberless night. 
By three in the morning he was 
fully awake, staring into the darkness above, and going through that 
early morning period of wakefulness during which all seems disaster. 
Georg Castriota had obviously 
been right. Who was he to go romantically to the rescue of his 
team mate? International espionage-counter-espionage was not handled on such a basis. Spy-craft was 
not as prevalent today, perhaps, 
as it had been of old, but organizations such as Interpol and the 
IABI were still far better equipped 
to handle the problem than was 
Professor Paul Kosloff, linguistics 
teacher on the Tri-Vision University of the Air. 
But toward dawn he fell off 
again and got some fitful rest. 
TT'rom the air he received a quick 
* impression of Budapest when 
the rocketplane utilized its braking 
jets for the descent and landing. 
The two old cities straddling the 
Danube had changed little in the 
central areas over the centuries. 
Buda on the hilly west bank, Pest 
on the flat east bank, and the ultraIF 
beautiful Margitsziget Island going back to the days when Roman 
legions originated the twin city as 
a military camp. 
The outer areas were different, 
especially on the Pest side of the 
river. Pest now spread out almost 
to the extent of an American pseudo-city, and far beyond the modern 
rocketport. Paul Kosloff had heard 
it had one of the most advanced 
vacuum-tube transport systems in 
Europe and quite up to the standards he was used to. And by the 
looks of the hills above Buda, the 
elite of Common Eur-Asia evidently made their home here. He was 
mildly surprised, since his one contact among his never-seen relatives 
lived in the Matyas-Hegy section 
of Buda. Evidently at least one 
branch of the family had prospered, 
in spite of living behind what had 
once been known as the Iron Curtain — now long since rusted 
through. 
He had actually half expected to 
be arrested at the rocketport upon 
landing. To the contrary, he was 
all but ignored. The examination 
of his papers and his luggage was 
but a formality, and the immigration authorities seemed downright 
pleased at an American with such 
an excellent command of their language. He realized, of course, that 
linguistically speaking the Hungarians were an island in the midst of 
a Germanic and Slavic sea. The 
only other European language even 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
remotely allied to Magyar was Finnish, thousands of miles away. 
He explained briefly his business. He was an American teacher 
in Budapest to perfect his accent 
and to visit his relatives on his 
mother’s side. He entered as a tourist and really had no idea of how 
long his stay was to be. They politely inquired as to his finances, 
and he revealed that he had certain 
resources beyond the amount credited to him on his International 
Credit Card. He had royalties coming on several of his books that 
could be spent only in Common 
Eur-Asia, an institution between 
East and West that went back for 
decades. 
The government tourists organization, still known as Ibusz, had 
tourist guides available; but with 
Paul’s command of the language 
and his ever-ready tourist guide 
books, it was obvious that he didn’t 
require one. He went on into Budapest proper in a public vacuumtube vehicle that differed little 
from those he was used to at home, 
save that the vehicle seated some 
fifty persons rather than the more 
usual twenty in the Americas. 
The downtown terminal was located at what had once been the 
Keleli railroad station at the end 
of Rakoczi Ut. 
Paul Kosloff emerged and asked 
a police officer how to summon a 
floater auto-cab, and how to dial 
it through to his destination. Once 
again, his command of the Magyar 
tongue greased the way for him. 
In fact, the policeman tried to 
practice his English on Paul, who 
remained firm, explaining that his 
own purpose was to perfect his accent. 
H e had read of Budapest, and 
had seen Tri-Vision travel 
and fictional shows devoted to the 
city. And it was, after all, the birthplace of his maternal grandmother. 
He would have liked to have strolled the streets, assimilating its flavors. However, his luggage among 
other things called for an immediate locating of a hotel. 
The better Budapest hotels 
stretched along the Danube, on 
both sides. Those destroyed in the 
Hitler war were a heartbreaking 
loss of some of the most elegant 
hosteiries of the old Europe, but 
long since they had been replaced. 
To Paul Kosloff’s gratification, the 
Hungarian architects had refrained 
from the ultra-modern which prevailed in the Americas and had 
chosen to rebuild in the architectural traditions of the medieval. 
At random, he chose the Danu, 
at Apaczai Cseri Janos ut 4 , located charmingly on the river within 
sight of Margitsziget Island and 
Buda on the far bank. The old, 
weathered Parliament Building, 
now a museum, his guidebook told 
him, was a block or two to the 
north. 
As in Paris, hotel employees 
were still utilized. Paul Kosloff repressed a smug feeling of satisfaction that in the United States of 
the Americas the hotel enterprises 
had been far more ultramated. In 
the States one could dial right 
through in a small vacuum-tube 
vehicle to a hotel room, register in 
the teevee screen there, order food, 
drink or anything else, stay for the 
period desired and leave again, 
without ever seeing a hotel employee. 
Come to think of it, though, he 
was not so very sure that such 
sterility in hotel hospitality was so 
desirable. There was a certain 
pleasantness here in being personally greeted, his desires requested, 
having a clerk see him to his room 
and being assured that all was in 
correct order. 
The clerk suggested a cool bottle 
of Riesling wine, to help him relax 
from his arduous trip and showed 
him how to dial the Common EurAsia version of the room’s autobar. 
His trip hadn’t been as arduous 
as all that, having lasted a matter 
of no more than minutes from Orly 
field, but Paul Kosloff had heard 
of Hungarian Riesling and had no 
desire to refrain. He put his International Credit Card in the teevee 
screen slot, his thumbprint on the 
indicated position, and dialed a bottle of Balaton. 
He poured and took the glass of 
IF 
chilled wine to the window and 
stared out. Well, here he was, on 
his own in Common Eur-Asia. Was 
Lisa Stebbins here in Budapest, 
probably under duress and possibly 
even physical pressure? He shook 
his head. 
In actuality, he had no idea of 
why they should wish to abduct 
her. For that matter, he had no 
idea of why they had made the attempt on him in Paris. Nothing 
about all this made sense to him. 
XVI 
TTe finished the one portion of 
wine and put the glass down. 
He went over to the room’s teevee 
phone screen and dialed information and then said, "I wish to put 
a call through to Antal Puskas.” 
When the face faded in, Paul 
said, "I am Paul Kosloff, from the 
United States of the Americas.” 
"Paul Kosloff? Professor Kosloff, my nephew?” 
"That is correct, Uncle Antal. I 
am here in Budapest.” 
"Well, how pleasant.” The other 
man was in perhaps his early sixties. "My dear boy, just a minute, 
we must get together as soon as 
possible.” 
Evidently, he was checking the 
time. "See here, could you come 
to the house in, say, two hours?” 
"Excellent.” 
Antal Puskas gave him the address, which Paul already had at 
any rate, gushed his pleasure for a 
moment and then faded off. 
Two hours. He had the time to 
eat his lunch and perhaps to stroll 
along the river a bit before looking 
up his relative. 
Lunch at the Danu was a revelation. Evidently the Hungarians 
no more than the Parisians made 
modern concessions to good food. 
He ordered porkolt , a veal stew 
heavy with paprika sauce, after 
kalazle, a fish soup which was Budapest’s answer to bouillabaisse. 
He had another half bottle of Riesling to wash it down with, and 
wound up with retes , the local strudel which came crisp and flaky and 
filled with cherries, apples and nuts. 
Throughout the meal he enjoyed 
greatly the small gypsy stringed 
instrument band. Offhand, he could 
never remember having eaten to the 
music of live musicians before. The 
institution had disappeared in favor of the canned variety long 
years since back home. Or, at least, 
it had in the sort of establishment 
Paul Kosloff could afford. 
Later, replete, he strolled down 
to the Lanchid Bridge and over to 
the Buda side of the river and wandered around in the reconstructed 
medieval buildings there. It was, 
he decided, a beautiful city. 
It came to him that if the local 
authorities were by this time looking for him, it might be as well if 
he didn’t return to the hotel. His 
dimly conceived program was now 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
under way and he didn’t want it 
aborted. 
TTThen the two hours his unde 
* * had given him were up, he 
dialed for a floater auto-cab, got 
into it, put his International Credit 
Card into the slot and dialed his 
relative’s home. In actuality, of 
course, if the local police — or 
whoever — was really interested in 
him, they’d have no trouble at all 
finding him. They could always 
take a fix on his teevee phone, and 
obviously such taxi rides as this 
would be monitored somewhere in 
the computers of the dty. 
The cab took him along the river 
on Bern Rakpart to about half way 
down Margitsziget Island and then 
turned left and ascended into the 
Buda hills up Utca Epvolgyi . 
His unde’s home was moderately impressive, set back off the road 
behind a brick wall no more than 
waist high. Flowers were in profusion on the wall and in the garden 
behind it. By American standards, 
Uncle Antal was in upper-dass categories. A member of what Djilas, 
the Yugoslavian, had once called 
the New Class. Evidently the 
achievement of the dassless sodety 
was still in the future in Common 
Eur-Asia. 
He left the auto-cab and approached the gate and looked into 
the identity screen there. He said, 
"Paid Kosloff.” 
The gate opened and he went 
through and started up the gravel 
path to the front door. There was 
another identity screen, but before 
he could activate it, the door opened and Antal Puskas was there, 
beaming hospitality. 
He grabbed Paid’s hand, shook 
it; grabbed Paid about the body 
with both arms and bussed him on 
each cheek in turn. Paul’s first 
American reaction was to recoil 
from an embrace by another man, 
no matter how dosely related, but 
then he recalled the few occasions 
during his youth, when he had met 
European relations of his mother’s 
side of the family. Evidently kissing, in the Balkans, was protocol. 
He bore this now with such stamina as he could muster. 
Antal Puskas ushered him back 
into what was obviously the Hungarian equivalent of the American 
institution of the escape room, jabbering away that it was a shame 
that both of Paul’s cousins and his 
Aunt Ana were away on a short 
vacation in the mountains of Transylvania. It was to be hoped that 
Paul’s stay would be lengthy 
enough so that they would return 
before he left. 
In the escape room, Antal Puskas bustled about securing a bottle 
so long-necked as to be grotesque 
and two liqueur glasses. He hdd 
the bottle up triumphantly. 
"Barack,” he said. "Stoneage 
apricot brandy. Ah ha, it is seldom 
you get barack, eh?” 
IF 
Paul smiled. "None at all, Uncle. Our production planners don’t 
allow fruit for beverages. Most of 
our drink, these days, comes from 
products of the sea, although we 
can still get Mexican tequila and 
mescal, which is distilled from an 
inedible plant related to cactus.” 
His uncle closed his eyes in pain. 
"In Hungary, it would lead to revolution,” he said. 
Tn actuality, Paul Kosloff didn’t 
particularly like sweet drinks, 
and inwardly steeled himself before sipping the barack. To his surprise, it was extremely strong and 
had no suggestion of sweetness at 
all. Evidently, it was distilled and 
redistilled until all except the faintest hint of the apricot flavor was 
gone. 
He bore the expected questions 
pertaining to family and the state 
of matters in the Americas until at 
long last, Antal Puskas who, though 
aging, was obviously as sharp as he 
was energetic, switched subjects. 
He said, "You’re here for some 
definite purpose, I can see. Not 
that you aren’t interested in meeting your relatives, but your visit 
here involves more than that.” 
Paul nodded. "Well, yes. The 
fact is, Uncle, I wish to meet Pol 
Kodaly.” 
"Pol Kodaly! You mean Academician Pol Kodaly, of the Commissariat of Computer Data?” 
Paul nodded again. 
"My dear Paul, you must realize I don’t move in such exotic circles. My work is in biological research.” He reached out and poured them additional barack, an apologetic element in his voice. 
Paul leaned forward. "I didn’t 
expect you to. However, I once 
listened in on & conversation in 
which one of the speakers maintained that it took only foiir contacts, at most, to meet anyone in 
the world.” 
His uncle snorted. "I’d just like 
to see four contacts get me an introduction to, say, the King of 
England.” 
Paul accepted that. "Very well, 
I would be your first contact. I 
studied Polish and Czech with a 
friend who had once spent a year 
at Oxford. I would introduce you 
to him. In turn, while at Oxford, 
he associated with a man who was 
later to become Sir Antony BrettJames, who is now a colonel in the 
Royal Guard. I am sure he could 
arrange for an introduction for you 
to the King. Four contacts, iii fact 
only three.” 
Antal Puskas was taken aback. 
"Fascinating,” he said. 
T)aul said urgently, "I didn’t expect you to know Kodaly; 
however, I thought you might be 
my first contact. That you could 
introduce me to someone whq could 
introduce me to the head of your 
Commissariat of Computer Data.” 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
His uncle was unhappy. "But 
why do you wish to see this man, 
Paul? His time is not available for 
frivolous reasons.” 
Paul looked at him. "A man does 
not travel from the Americas all 
the way to Budapest — risking his 
life in the process, by the way — 
for some frivolous reason, Uncle 
Antal.” 
"Risking your life!” his uncle 
said. "See here, Paul. I am not political.” 
"Neither am I, in the ordinary 
sense.” 
His uncle said doubtfully, "What 
do I tell these people is your reason for seeking out Pol Kodaly?” 
Paul Kosloff thought about that. 
"You may say that I am on a secret mission for Dempsey Harrison.” 
Harrison’s name was known even 
in Common Eur-Asia, evidently. 
Paul’s uncle was impressed. IBs 
face twisted in irritated thought. 
"I understand that back in Greater Washington you teach the Slavic languages over the airwaves.” 
Paul nodded. "They are also 
taped, and both in Tri-Vision and 
in book form go into our own data 
banks.” 
"Ah, ha. Perhaps I have something.” Antal Puskas thought about 
it some more. "I have a colleague 
who sometimes has dinner with 
Zoltan Szilard. You have possibly 
heard of him?” 
"I am afraid not.” 
"Too bad. It would have been 
perhaps easier if you had. In a 
way, he is a colleague of yours. You 
see, he is in charge of the educational matter that goes into our 
computer banks for later release to 
the schools all over Common EurAsia. He, of course, works closely 
with Academician Kodaly.” 
"Sounds ideal,” Paul nodded. "If 
I can just get that far.” 
His uncle stood and went over 
to the teevee phone screen. "Just a 
minute,” he said, dialing. "I’ll get 
in touch with Ferencz.” He grinned 
at Paul. "He’s your second contact.” 
A s is so often the case with men 
who have reached the apex of 
power, Pol Kodaly, once met, was 
friendly, affable, and seemingly had 
at his disposal all the time in the 
world for an obscure American professor of languages. He came 
around his desk to shake hands 
with Paul at his entry. He was a 
tall man for a Hungarian, brisk of 
movement and with a pleasant 
enough face, save possibly for an 
overly piercing quality in his eyes. 
He would be, Paul decided, in his 
early fifties; young considering his 
rank. 
He said in English, "Professor 
Kosloff? We have all of your works 
in our library banks, of course. I 
had the occasion to skim through 
your book on Serbo-Croatian variations on the basic Slavic. Most in
teresting. I look forward to when 
I can find the time to read it thoroughly. I too am fascinated by 
language, Professor.” 
Paul Kosloff was taken aback. 
He had expected at best a quick 
handshake and then an almost immediate attempted brush-off. He 
shook and allowed the other to see 
him comfortably into a chair. 
While Kodaly was returning to 
his own swivel chair behind his 
desk, Paul looked about the room. 
It was a far cry from the swank of 
Dempsey Harrison’s office in Den
ver. 
He said, in the way of opening, 
"I had occasion to be in the American data center, just recently. The 
magnitude of the building astonished me. I am surprised you are 
able to do with so much less room.” 
The Hungarian chuckled. "This 
building was formerly a royal residence of the Hapsburgs, back before the first World War, Professor. It contains but a few offices of 
senior executives. Our more modem 
equipment and our banks are far 
below the surface. So far, that it 
would take a major nuclear attack 
to discomfit them.” 
He added quickly, "Not that 
such an eventuality was what we 
had primarily in mind in so constructing them. You see, of recent 
years we in Common Eur-Asia have 
evolved what amounts to an absolute fetish in regards to hiding the 
more grotesque buildings necessary 
in a highly technological society. 
Once we proudly built our factories 
and other industrial buildings 
prominent to view. But that was in 
our infancy. Now that the basic 
goals have been reached, we are 
more conscious of beauty.” 
"I couldn’t agree with you 
more,” Paul said. 
Pol Kodaly smiled at him. "And 
now, Professor? I am sure you 
haven’t traveled all the way to Budapest merely to compare the architecture of this city with that of 
Denver.” 
Paul took a deep breath before 
launching into his fling. "I’ll come 
right to the point, sir. I’ve come 
here looking for Lisa Stebbins.” 
The Academician looked at him 
quizzically. "Indeed? A moment, 
please.” He touched a desk control 
and said into one of his abnormally 
large desk teevee phone screens, 
"The dossier on Lisa Stebbins, if 
we have one.” 
He looked at Paul. "An American?” 
Paul said, somewhat surprised, 
"Well, yes.” 
"That will cut it down considerably.” And into the screen: "An 
American.” 
To Paul: "A contemporary, of 
course.” 
Paul said grimly, "She’d better 
be.” 
Into the screen: "Contemporary.” 
Printed matter appeared on the 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
screen and the Hungarian quickly 
scanned it. 
Finally he grunted and looked up 
at Paul again. "Very well. I assume 
she is not an elderly poetess, now 
residing in a small town in what 
was once the State of Iowa. Remaining is one other Lisa Stebbins, 
thirty years of age, resident of Denver. Employed by the National 
Data Center and currently the secretary and mistress of my colleague 
Dempsey Harrison.” 
XVII 
i C AyTistress? ” Paul blurted. 
1V1<< That’s ridiculous.” 
Pol Kodaly nodded. "Quite possibly. Our data on American citizens is obviously limited, nor are 
they usually in any position to 
challenge a misconception that 
creeps into it. However, in this 
case ...” 
He went back to the screen and 
read further. 
"... I am inclined to think the 
report accurate.” 
Paul shook his head. He felt bewildered, but wasn’t quite sure 
why. 
Kodaly said, "Our material on 
Miss Stebbins is limited. Could you 
tell me why you are looking for the 
young lady here in Budapest, and 
how I could possibly help?” 
"I suspect she has been brought 
here.” 
The data chief looked back at 
the screen and shook his head. 
"No. There is no record that Miss 
Stebbins has entered Common EurAsia.” 
Paul said, "Perhaps the material 
has not been entered in your computer banks.” 
The other shook his head again. 
"No, Professor. If you are thinking 
of forged papers perhaps, it is still 
no. For her to cross our borders, 
her thumbprint would have to be 
registered. Just as yours was when 
you crossed. It would have immediately been cross-checked and all 
but instantly the computers would 
have recorded that Lisa Stebbins 
was trying to cross into Common 
Eur-Asia under false pretenses. You 
see we have here her thumbprint 
from when she once attended a conference in Warsaw with her superior, Dempsey Harrison. 
"Possibly she was brought here 
in some manner so that the regular 
customs and immigration authorities were avoided. Perhaps against 
her will.” 
Still another shake of the head. 
"Professor, as chief of the Commissariat of Computer Data, I am 
also a full member of the Presidium 
of the Central Committee — a rank, 
as you possibly know, only under 
that of Number One himself. The 
Presidium no longer consists of Old 
Bolsheviks and ambitious politicians, but of scientists, highly 
trained technical men, managers of 
industry. Nothing else makes sense 
IF 
in this technological world. And, 
Professor, not even the KGB plays 
hanky-panky with a member of the 
Presidium. If, for whatever reason, 
some Common Eur-Asian authority 
found it necessary to perform such 
an action as would not be entered 
in the data banks, I would be informed — or heads would roll.” 
Paul said doggedly, "Perhaps 
someone involved thought it not 
important enough to be brought to 
your attention.” 
"Professor Kosloff, if the secretary and mistress of Dempsey Harrison, my equal number in your 
country — though I have sometimes wondered why — is involved, 
then the matter would be brought 
to my attention.” 
Paul Kosloff sank back into his 
chair. "Where else could she be?” 
he muttered. 
"I suggest that you tell me what 
this is all about. I am admittedly 
intrigued.” 
F or reasons unknown to him, 
Paul Kosloff trusted the other. 
He said, "Sir, are your data banks 
being tapped?” 
"What?” 
"I said, are your computer data 
banks being tapped? Those of both 
the United States of Americas and 
Common Europe are.” 
"My dear Professor, you . you 
are speaking nonsense.” 
"Dempsey Harrison doesn’t 
think so. The head of our IABI, 
James Edgar, doesn’t. And neither 
does Interpol.” 
"But this is unbelievable. Tapped by whom?” 
Paul shook his head. "We don’t 
know. When it first began to happen, the Interpol people of Common Europe suspected us, but when 
they sent a representative to Greater Washington, it was discovered 
that our banks too were being tapped. And the rumors spread that 
there was a possibility of them being wiped clean.” 
"But, by whom?” 
The man was either a superlative 
liar, or he was completely bewildered. 
Paul said slowly, "Obviously, 
one alternative we had to consider 
was that Common Eur-Asia was 
behind it all. In short, that the 
Cold War was being secretly reheated. I need not point out to 
someone in your position what it 
would mean to our economy, our 
military machine, and everything 
else for that matter, if our data 
banks were wiped clean.” 
The other remained silent for 
long moments. Finally, he said, 
"See here, Professor Kosloff, how 
do you know that your data banks 
are being tapped, as you call it?” 
Paul looked up at him blankly. 
"I’m not up on the technology involved. I would think that you 
would certainly know more about 
that phase of it.” 
Pol Kodaly allowed impatience 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
to show through. " Professor, the 
data banks are simply an extensive 
collection of human knowledge. If 
somebody extracts a portion of the 
information contained in them, the 
data itself is not affected, any more 
than anything is changed when you 
read the type on the page of a book. 
There is no physical evidence that 
a page of a book has been read, after a person has read it. Not even 
the librarian could look at the page 
later and say, ‘Somebody has read 
this/ ” He chuckled deprecation. 
"Not unless it was a child who had 
been eating bread and jam.” 
Paul Kosloff was puzzled. "I 
simply don’t know. Mr. Harrison 
didn’t go into that detail.” 
The other was silent again. 
"Professor Kosloff,” he said finally. "In view of your status as 
an envoy of Dempsey Harrison, I 
am going to let you in on a matter 
that is very hush-hush, as you 
Americans would say. Let me give 
you some background.” 
Paul nodded, and remained silent. 
44T7e ry well. The nationaliza* of the data banks was a 
comparatively simple operation in 
your nation, Professor. When the 
modern computer first began to 
come into its own, you were fifty 
— no, I suppose still forty-eight — 
States. But you were United States, 
with but one Federal government. 
It was simple enough to consolidate 
all of your computer data into your 
National Data Center. However, 
at that time what is now Common 
Eur-Asia was a dozen individual 
countries, each admittedly with the 
same socio-economic system, but 
still sovereign — although we had 
such institutions as the Warsaw 
Pact and in actuality the Soviet 
Union dominated like a colossus. 
Thus it was that in the early days 
each nation compiled its own computer data banks, most of which 
were inadequate. Those of the then 
Soviet Union were, obviously, by 
far the most extensive, but even 
nations as small as Bulgaria accumulated their own. It was ridiculous; indeed, one of the prime reasons for our amalgamation into 
Common Eur-Asia was so that we 
could unite our data in the same 
manner you were able to unite that 
of your fifty States. 
"Much the same was developing 
in Western Europe. Each country 
was compiling national data banks; 
Germany, France, England, Italy, 
every country rich enough to have 
a computer system. Once again it 
was ridiculous, a fantastic duplication of effort. However, so long as 
the nations remained sovereign, a 
national data bank was as necessary as a national military. It was 
one of the strongest factors leading 
to the growth of an alliance from 
the beginnings that were the Common Market. Do you begin to see 
at what I am driving, Professor?” 
IF 
Paul frowned. "I don’t believe 
so.” 
Pol Kodaly looked at him, a 
touch impatiently. " Professor, the 
next step should be obvious. It is 
ridiculous that the two major powers have individual data banks, and 
just as ridiculous that those neutrals, such as Common Europe, 
that are strong enough to have their 
own national data banks, have separate ones. We have internationalized communications — nothing 
else made sense. The next step is 
to internationalize the world’s data 
banks, bring together in one wonderful whole all the accumulated 
knowledge of man.” There was an 
element of inspiration in the data 
chief’s tone. 
Paul said slowly, "Just recently 
a citizen of Common Europe was 
suggesting to me that an international currency be developed, but 
he was referring only to Common 
Europe and the United States of 
the -Americas.” 
The other spread his hands in a 
Hungarian gesture. "But why? 
That too obviously makes sense, 
and will eventually come about. 
But what I am saying is this, Professor Kosloff. The discussions now 
underway to combine our data 
banks are being held in the utmost 
secrecy. It may take a month, it 
may take a year; international 
jealousies and suspicions are such 
that it might take many years of 
discussions, debate, concessions and 
all the rest of it; but, Professor, 
sooner or later, and I hope sooner, 
the world’s data banks will be joined. Now in view of that fact, is it 
reasonable that we of Common EurAsia would attempt to tap your 
data, not to speak of wiping it 
clean?” 
Paul Kosloff sank back into his 
chair in complete confusions. He 
said finally, "Dempsey Harrison 
told me nothing about this.” 
"It is being conducted only on 
the highest levels, but certainly my 
colleague, Mr. Harrison, is privy 
to the conference. Probably he 
didn’t deem it expedient to entrust 
the information to you.” 
"It possibly doesn’t seem to 
make sense,” Paul complained. 
"But the fact is still with us that 
I was sent over here to find whether 
or not the saboteurs originated in 
Common Eur-Asia. I have been 
twice attacked by men who attempted to kidnap or kill me. A 
general of Interpol was killed and 
an American IABI agent. And finally Lisa Stebbins has been abducted. This is not imagination, it 
has actually happened.” 
XVIII 
pol Kodaly evidently made a 
snap decision. He came to his 
feet. "Come with me, Professor,” 
he said, and led the way to a small 
elevator which occupied one corner 
of the office. 
IF 
He opened the door and motioned Paul inside. 
" Careful,” he said. "The drop is 
abrupt.” 
It was. Paul Kosloff’s knees all 
but buckled. 
The drop was both abrupt and 
long. 
Pol Kodaly was saying, "While 
most of us in Common Eur-Asia 
look forward to the day when all 
data banks are united, meanwhile 
we continue to work on our own, 
independently of the other nations. 
Undoubtedly, both your country 
and Common Europe do the same. 
Thus it is that each year we make 
progress in one aspect or the other 
of our computer system.” 
"They’re certainly continuing to 
evolve in the States,” Paul said, 
"and I suppose the end is not in 
sight. Sometimes there are terrifying aspects.” 
They had evidently reached the 
level for which the computer chief 
was heading. The elevator had 
slowed and stopped. They emerged 
and a soldier sprang to the salute, 
his submachine gun held across his 
chest. 
Kodaly ignored him and ushered 
Paul Kosloff past and to an interoffice corridor floater very similar 
to those Paul and Zack had utilized in the data center in Denver. 
They mounted it and Kodaly flicked the direction dial. 
He continued to talk as they 
traveled endless halls. 
"I suspect that in this particular 
field we have forged ahead of you.” 
He smiled his smile of deprecation. 
"But of course, one never knows. 
Perhaps it is something like the 
former space race; first one ahead, 
then the other.” He snorted. 
" There is a prime example of the 
stupidity and duplication of human 
effort. Billions of rubles and dollars 
spent, duplicating each other’s efforts. We could have reached the 
moon on less than half of what 
was spent, had we cooperated.” 
Paid Kosloff didn’t bother to 
point out the impossibility of that 
at the time involved. 
It was hard to believe, here in 
the sterility of this ultra-modern 
atmosphere, that they were still in 
actuality in the medieval-like city 
of Budapest. It could have been 
thought that this maze had been 
designed by the same architects 
that had laid out the data center 
in Denver. Paul Kosloff, the scholar and teacher, was far out of his 
element. 
And he continued to be when 
the corridor floater came to a halt 
and they dismounted. 
Pol Kodaly, obviously completely at home, activated a door and 
ushered his guest into a chamber 
that extended so far that the final 
reaches seemed to disappear into 
the distance. 
"One of our research areas,” the 
Hungarian murmured. "This way, 
please.” 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
Tie led Paul to a side alcove 
where a dozen or so coveralled technicians were engrossed in a 
fantastic mess of electronic equipment, absolutely none of which was 
recognizable to the American. The 
computer chief nodded to all, spoke 
a first name to several. Evidently 
they were of various nationalities. 
Frol is not a Hungarian name, nor 
is Ion. 
Pol Kodaly didn’t bother to introduce Paul around. He chuckled 
and said, "Frol is astonished at 
your being here. Supposedly, this 
is currently our most hush-hush of 
projects.” 
He led Paul to a console which 
had a seemingly standard computer screen on it and motioned him 
to a stool, taking one himself. For 
the moment, he seemed to ignore 
the machine. The technicians went 
back to their work after shooting 
questioning glances at the stranger. 
Kodaly said, "Professor, what 
do you know about intuition?” 
Paul frowned at him. "Intuition? Why, I don’t know. Do you 
mean in the colloquial sense, such 
as ‘feminine intuition,’ or the philosophical interpretation, the power 
of obtaining knowledge which cannot be acquired by either inference 
or observation, reason or experience?” 
The other said, "Well, perhaps 
both. Let us put it this way. We 
are still in our infancy in the understanding of the human mind. 
Some of its workings are all but 
mystical. We like to think of ourselves as logical beings but, in actuality, sheer intuition enters into 
our thinking processes to an amazing extent. 
"Suppose, Professor Kosloff, you 
have a problem to solve that contains, say, ten elements, one or two 
of which are unknowns. Very well, 
into our human brain we begin to 
feed the elements known, one by 
one. Somewhere along about the 
fifth or sixth element, the answer 
suddenly comes to the human 
brain. The problem is solved, even 
before all the known aspects were 
considered. Assimilating the remaining knowns but strengthens 
the validity of the conclusion. You 
follow me?” 
"I ... I suppose so,” Paul 
frowned. 
"Let me use an example. Suppose we have a poker game in progress. American poker is an addiction of mine. Say stud poker, 
rather than draw. You have a pair 
of queens. Across from you an opponent has nothing showing higher 
than a king. Possibly his hole card 
is another king, in which case you 
have met defeat. Very well, you 
have considered all the elements 
available. Such matters as the 
cards showing in the hands of the 
other players. Suddenly as though 
by inspiration, intuitively, you 
know that his hole card is the other 
king he needs. So you fold your 
IF 
hand. How did you know, Professor Kosloff?” 
Paul Kosloff had to laugh. "As 
you say, intuitively. It doesn’t exactly admit of proof.” 
"Until he turns the card over,” 
the Hungarian laughed in return. 
He hooked long fingers around 
a knee cap and became serious 
again. "Currently, most popular 
opinion is that in actuality you 
were calling upon data you didn’t 
know you possessed, something 
perhaps buried in your subconscious. Possibly your opponent has 
a mannerism that revealed his secret to you. Each time he gets a 
pair of cards back to back, he has 
a habit of lighting a cigarette, taking a single puff, and then grinding it out. You have not conscious ly noted this, but subconsciously 
you have filed the information 
away. When your supposed intuition comes up with an accurate 
answer, you have called upon your 
subconscious data bank.” 
Paul said, "Sounds fairly reasonable. But what are we getting 
at?” 
'T'he Hungarian reached out and 
patted the machine before 
which they sat. "We call it Nostradamus.” 
The technician he had earlier addressed as Frol was working only 
a few yards off. He snorted. 
Kodaly laughed. "Though Frol 
is more inclined to Casandra or 
even Cagliostro. We are having our 
difficulties.” 
The American scowled his lack 
of understanding. 
The computer chief said, "However, we shall give it a try, Professor. State your question and then 
divulge all the data of which you 
are cognizant.” 
Paul Kosloff stared at him. 
"What do you mean?” 
"This is an intuition computer, 
Professor. Given that same problem I mentioned earlier that had 
ten elements, two of which are unknowns: A man will often hit, intuitively, the correct answer after 
assimilating only five or six of the 
seemingly necessary elements. Nostradamus, here, halves that. It often comes up — intuitively — with 
the correct answer after being given but one-third of the seemingly 
pertinent information.” 
ff Zo-ro-as-ter I” Paul blurted unbelievingly. 
Kodaly shrugged. "We are still 
in highly technical debate, and 
frankly I myself am out of my 
depth. However, it would seem that 
Nostradamus works on much the 
same basis as does our intuitive 
poker player. He is tied into our 
complete Computer Data Banks. 
Undoubtedly, Nostradamus draws 
upon data with which we are unfamiliar, draws upon elements 
which it would not occur to us to 
utilize in solving our problems logically. Whatever, Nostradamus can 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
sometimes be startlingly accurate.” 
"You mean this is a thinking 
machine? Thinking machine, hell, 
an EJS.P. machine.” 
"Perhaps. We would have to go 
into the semantics. State your problem farto the screen, Professor, and 
then give us all the data you have 
available.” 
Paul Kosloff stared at the computer's screen in fascination. "In 
what language?” he said. 
"Whichever best suits you. As I 
say, Nostradamus is tied into our 
whole system. He can be utilized 
in any known language or combination of languages.” 
Paul took a deep breath. He 
worded it over inwardly, before 
saying, "Who is tapping the data 
b anks in Denver and in Geneva?” 
He then began reciting every 
item of information he had accumulated, even that which didn't 
seem relevant. 
He began to feel foolish. Could 
tins Pol Kodaly be pulling his leg? 
On the face of it . 
The machine had thus far been 
absolutely noiseless. Not a hum had 
proceeded from its interior. 
Now, of a sudden, a robot voice 
announced: 
THE DATA BANKS IN DENVER AND GENEVA ARE NOT 
BEING TAPPED. 
Paul Kosloff came to an abrupt 
haft, in mid-sentence, and goggled 
the screen. He turned and stared 
at Pol Kodaly, who returned his 
look with a certain complacence. 
Paul blurted at the Hungarian, 
"But that's impossible.” 
The other shook his head negatively. "I doubt it. I told you earlier that in my estimation the 
charge is ridiculous.” 
Paul spun and said shakily into 
the screen, "Who spread the rumors that the American and Common Europe computer data banks 
were being tapped and in danger of 
being wiped clean?” 
HIGH AMERICAN AND COMMON EUROPE GOVERNMENT 
OFFICIALS. 
"What are their names l” 
DATA UNAVAILABLE UPON 
WHICH TO BASE AN ANSWER. 
Paul Kosloff felt as though his 
brain was spinning. To the next 
question, he didn't expect an answer. 
"Where is Lisa Stebbins?” 
IN PARIS. 
He turned weakly, and looked at 
Pol Kodaly. He said, "I am beginning to have some intuitive ideas 
of my own.” 
XIX 
P aul Kosloff lobbed back to Orly 
Rocketport, Paris, and went directly to the George V Hilton . To 
his surprise, he was given the same 
accommodations he had occupied 
before. 
It was too late to begin his project that night, and he kept to his 
IF 
room, making sure the door was 
barred and ordering food and drink 
at the room’s auto-table. He had no 
intention of exposing himself on the 
streets at this stage. 
He was halfway through his meal 
when the door screen hummed. His 
eyes narrowed as he activated it. 
However, the face there was that 
of Georg Castriota. Paul Kosloff 
flicked the button that opened the 
door and came to his feet. 
Castriota entered and eyed him 
speculatively, "Well, back already, 
eh? And have you found your Lisa 
Stebbins?” 
"Not yet,” Paul said, making 
sure the door was barred again. He 
motioned to the table. "Wine?” 
"No, thanks. When are you returning to the States, Professor?” 
"I don’t know,” Paul said, refreshing his own glass. 
Castriota said grimly, "I suppose 
I could have you declared persona 
non grata” 
Paul thought about that. "I wish 
you wouldn’t. I have a lead on 
Miss Stebbins.” 
The other was surprised. "A 
lead? What is it?” 
"I don’t believe I’ll tell you.” 
"Why not, hombre? I’ve got all 
the resources of Interpol at my command. You’re working alone in a 
strange country.” 
Paul said deliberately, "Because 
you have leaks in your highest 
ranks.” 
"Leaks! Have you gone com
pletely drivel-happy, hombre? Do 
you mean in Interpol?” 
"Probably. It comes to me that 
it was no accident that those three 
men who jumped us outside the 
restaurant were all gunned down, in 
spite of the fact that you yelled at 
your men to try and capture them 
alive. Dead men tell no tales. It 
also comes to me that there could 
be only one reason why they knew 
we were going to be at Monsieur 
Pierre’s restaurant. You told somebody we were going to go there 
and they passed the information 
on. But whether or not some of the 
higher echelon Interpol people are 
in on the conspiracy, others in high 
office are, and probably have Interpol connections.” 
"You’ve said either too mttch or 
too little, Kosloff,” the Interpol 
man said. 
"I’ve said all I’m going to say, 
since I have no intentions of committing suicide.” 
"And you insist on remaining 
here in Paris?” 
"Yes. For a time, at least. Can 
you arrange permission for me to 
buy a gun?” 
Georg Castriota, disgust on his 
face, brought an automatic from 
under his left arm and handed it 
over. "Do you know its operation?” 
Paul Kosloff threw the breech, 
checked the magazine, clicked it 
back into the gun’s butt and jacked 
a cartridge into the barrel. 
"I know its operation. Thanks.” 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
"Don't mention it,” Castriota 
said grimly. "I'll keep in touch. 
The sooner you get out of town, the 
happier III be.” He turned to go. 
Paul said, "So will I, but I’ve 
got something to do first.” 
TTe found them on the third 
* ^ night, in a small Chinese restaurant in the vicinity of the Place 
d’Etoile . She’d mentioned her liking of Chinese food and he’d been 
haunting the few Oriental places 
for the past few nights. 
They were seated in a small alcove, eating with chopsticks. 
Paul came up behind them, immediately behind the man, and 
stared over his back at Lisa Stebbins, whose flaming red hair had 
been dyed black. Her eyes came up 
and suddenly widened in shocked 
surprise. 
The man, sensing something, 
started to his feet, his hand darting 
beneath his jerkin. It was one of 
the two who had first jumped Paul 
and Zack Castriota in front of the 
Kosloff apartment. 
Paul chopped down viciously with 
the Tcttui ken edge of fist blow to 
the other’s right collar bone, crushing it, and then again, in a blur of 
speed to the other collar bone. The 
man collapsed into his chair, unconscious. Paul steadied him so that 
he wouldn’t fall. 
Keeping his eyes on Lisa Stebbins, he brought his wrist teevee 
phone to his face and said into it, 
"Information. I want to talk to 
Georg Castriota of Interpol.” 
Castriota’s face faded in immediately. He seemed to be seated in 
a vehicle. He snapped, "Yes?” 
"I’m in the Lee Chang Chinese 
Restaurant, near the Place ...” 
"I know where it is.” 
"And I have the man who killed 
your brother Zack.” 
Castriota’s face flicked off. 
Paul, still steadying the unconscious Italian, took an empty chair 
and sat down. 
"Professor Kosloff!” Lisa blurted. 
"So. No more Paul and Lisa, eh? 
Don’t use that wrist phone! I warn 
you.” 
To his surprise, Georg Castriota 
came hurrying in, followed by another husky who was obviously a 
plainclothesman. 
Paul said, "You got here in a 
hurry.” 
Georg Castriota said disgustedly, "You didn’t think we’d allow 
you to bustle all over town on your 
own, did you? We have a dozen 
men on you, Kosloff, including me. 
What’s this about my brother’s 
killer?” 
"This was one of the four men 
at the final shoot-out, there on 
Manhattan.” 
"That’s a lie,” Lisa Stebbins 
said. She began to bring her wrist 
phone to her face. 
Paul Kosloff reached out and, 
more or less gently, pulled the inIF 
strument from her arm and pocketed it. 
Georg Castriota looked at them. 
Paul said, "This is our missing 
Lisa Stebbins.” 
Lisa said indignantly, "It is illegal to deprive a citizen of her 
teevee phone.” 
The husky companion of the Interpol man had taken over the 
handling of the Italian triggerman. 
Paul looked at Castriota. "I 
don’t want her to make any contacts over here. If she does, I 
wouldn’t guarantee that we’d live 
the night out.” 
'T'he other’s eyebrows went up 
skeptically, but he said to the 
beauteous secretary of Dempsey 
Harrison, "In Common Europe it is 
legal for a proper authority, such 
as a police officer performing his 
duty, to temporarily appropriate a 
personal teevee phone.” 
"He is not a proper authority 
and I am not subject to the laws 
of Common Europe.” 
"The way I see it,” Georg Castriota said, evidently deciding on 
Paul’s support, "is that Professor 
Kosloff is at present on a special 
mission for the Inter-American Bureau of Investigation, and as such 
can be deemed a police officer. And 
so long as you are on Common Europe soil, you are subject to our 
laws, since you cannot claim diplomatic immunity.” He looked back 
at Paul. "What’s up?” 
"I’m returning with her tomorrow to the United States. She Has 
some matters to answer to.” 
"What are your charges against 
this man?” He made a gesture 
with his head at the still unconscious Italian. "Your evidence.” 
"You know as much as I do. 
Find your own evidence. All I can 
tell you is that he’s one of the men 
who participated in killing Zack. 
Your Interpol facilities should allow you to dredge up all you’ll need 
against him. And, Georg . * . ” 
"Yes?” 
"... remember what I told you 
about leaks. I mean big leaks. If 
you lose this man, it’s your own 
fault.” 
"I won’t lose him,” Georg Castriota said grimly. 
Georg Castriota saw them to the 
Orly Rocketport in the morning. 
He was unshaven and somewhat red 
of eye and obviously hadn’t slept. 
Lisa Stebbins had gone into a 
sullen silence. They had spent the 
night in Paul’s George V Hilton 
room, she taking the bed and sleeping fully clothed, he sitting in the 
heavy comfort chair, snoozing fitfully, coming awake immediately if 
she so much as stirred. 
Paul said to the Interpol man, 
"Any luck with our friend?” 
The other grinned. "Not yet. 
He’s a tough one, a real pro. But 
we’ve got methods. I’m waiting on 
a serum they’ve recently developed 
in Copenhagen. Truth-drug sort of 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
Hung that makes scopolamine 
ashamed of itself.” He motioned 
with his head at the girl. “You 
know, as soon as you get her back 
to the States, you’re not going to 
be able to keep her. I’ve made concessions, under the circumstances, 
but in actuality you’re in no more 
position to arrest her than she is to 
arrest you.” 
“I know.” 
Lisa Stebbins scowled. 
It was time for them to embark. 
Georg Castriota held out a hand 
to be shaken. “Good luck, Professor. And as soon as you’re in a 
position to do so, let us know what 
you’re holding that you can’t release now. You’ve got a Priority 
One rating on my teevee phone.” 
“Of course.” 
Georg looked at Lisa Stebbins 
and said wryly, “You’re awful pretty to be a wrong-o.” 
“Curd!” 
“My, my. Four letter words out 
of that rosebud of a mouth.” 
A s they lobbed across the Atlantic, Paul looked at her from the 
side of his eyes. “Zack Castriota 
said you were ambitious. That 
you’d do anything to get to the 
top,” 
She bit out, “That’s more than 
I can say for you, Professor Kosloff. You’re going to find out the 
hard way that you shouldn’t nose 
yourself into situations that don’t 
concern you.” 
In spite of himself, he had to 
laugh. “Don’t concern me? In the 
first place I didn’t nose myself in, 
I was dragged in, protesting all the 
way. In the second place, at least 
three attempts have been made on 
my life for reasons I hadn’t the 
vaguest idea about at the time. If 
that doesn’t concern me, I don’t 
know what does. By the way, has 
it occurred to you that you, too, 
know too much? These people are 
ruthless, Lisa. Are you sure you 
were meant to ever return from 
Common Europe? It would have 
been a bit difficult for them to explain, when and if you did.” 
For a moment, die looked startled, but then snorted her scorn. 
“Don’t be ridiculous. Besides, you 
don’t know what you’re talking 
about. You’re fishing around, trying to get me to say something I’d 
regret.” 
Paul Kosloff smiled at her and 
dropped it. 
They landed at the Greater 
Washington Rocketport. As soon as 
they were at the administration 
building, she turned on him bitterly and held out her hand. “My teevee phone, please, or I’ll immediately call an officer and have 
you arrested.” 
He bowed slightly and extended 
it to her. 
He said, “I imagine you’ll be 
going on directly to Denver. I have 
some personal things to do here. 
Among other matters, checking in 
IF 
at the school. You see, ordinarily, 
this is my day to broadcast my 
lecture.” 
"Ever the pedagogue, eh?” she 
said contemptuously. "You might 
as well forget it, Professor . After 
today, you’ll never again work in 
the United States of the Americas. 
You’ll be bounced down to living on 
your ten shares of Inalienable Basic — at best.” 
"We’ll see,” he said. "However, 
as soon as I get one or two things 
fixed up, I’ll come to Denver, too. 
You can expect me later today.” 
She looked at him coldly. "Is 
that a guarantee?” 
"It is. Word of honor.” 
She spun and stalked off, her 
Etruscan revival sandals clicking 
sharply on the cement of the tarmac. For the moment, Paul Kosloff stared after her, but then he 
too turned and hurried away. He 
had no way of knowing how quickly she might make contact with 
some of her people, and possibly 
take steps against him. 
XX 
T Te tried to time it exactly, and 
-*■ wasn’t overly surprised when 
he had no difficulty whatsoever in 
entering the Denver National Data 
Center. In fact, he was met at the 
entry by not only the guards he 
had come up against before, when 
he had first entered the information center, but by a clean-cut, 
conservatively dressed young stalwart as well. 
When he had identified himself, 
this new one said, "Professor, the 
indicator there ...” He nodded at a 
small red light set into an inconspicuous panel to one side. "... 
suggests you are carrying a shooter. I’m afraid you are not allowed 
to enter the Center armed.” 
"Very well,” Paul said. "But 
what is your own authority?” 
The younger man brought forth 
his Universal Credit Card, and 
showed it to Paul Kosloff. He said 
softly, "Agent Peter Baker.” Under occupation, it read : Senior 
Agent, Inter-American Bureau of 
Investigation. 
Paul said, "Pardon me.” He took 
the card from the other’s hand. 
Peter Baker’s eyebrows went up 
slightly, but he surrendered the 
identification. 
On the heavy desk that stood at 
the entry was a standard teevee 
screen. Paul put the card in the 
slot and said, "Your thumbprint, 
please.” 
The agent shrugged and put his 
thumb on the screen. 
Paul said, "Identity check, 
please.” 
A robot voice said, "Identity established, as indicated.” 
Baker regained his card and returned it to his pocket. His eyebrows went up again. 
Paul said, "I just wanted to be 
sure with whom I was dealing.” He 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
brought the gun Georg Castriota 
had given him from his hip pocket 
and handed it over. The agent stuck 
it in his own pocket and indicated 
a corridor floater. Evidently, the 
rule against firearms in the data 
center didn’t apply to Agent Peter 
Baker. 
On the floater, they retraced the 
route Paul had first taken with 
Zack Castriota — which now seemed long, long ago but in actuality 
was only a couple of weeks in the 
past. 
There was another at the desk 
that had been occupied by Lisa 
Stebbins when he had first come. 
Identically uniformed, but far from 
the pulchritude standards of the 
beauteous Lisa. 
Agent Baker said something to 
her that Paul didn’t catch, and she 
answered, “Professor Kosloff is to 
go in immediately.” 
Evidently this was as far as 
Peter Baker entered into the picture. He nodded to Paul and made 
a gesture toward the door which 
opened to Dempsey Harrison’s 
sanctum sanctorum. 
As he approached, the door opened before him and he was once 
again in the escape-room-like office 
of the ultimate head of the National Data Center. 
Lisa Stebbins, in smart fresh 
business suit, was seated there and 
hardly bothered to look up at him 
when he entered. Her face was surly. 
J ames Edgar was there, rotund 
and beaming, a cool long glass 
in his right hand. He sat, at jovial 
ease, in one of the room’s several 
comfort chairs. 
Dempsey Harrison was over at 
the bar, evidently refreshing his 
own drink. He turned when Paul 
entered. 
The LABI head said, “Ah, our 
Professor. Returned from the wars.” 
Dempsey Harrison, his dose 
shaven, well cared for face bland, 
said, “A drink, Professor Kosloff?” 
“No, thanks,” Paul said. “I’d 
rather this take place in some other room.” 
Harrison scowled at him questioningly. 
Paul said doggedly, “In the past 
couple of weeks I’ve become ultraconscious of bugs, spying devices 
of a half dozen varieties, electronic 
geegaws that I’d never dreamed existed. This report can’t get much 
paore confidential. I’d rather we 
talked in . well, say the autocafeteria Miss Stebbins took me to 
when I was here last.” 
Dempsey Harrison sighed. “I can 
assure you it is no more bugged, or 
romantically equipped with electronic gadgets than this room. We 
can adjourn there if you so demand. 
Lisa, my dear?” He cavalierly held 
out a hand to help her to her feet. 
She looked her disgust at Paul, 
but stood up and led the way to 
the door. 
James Edgar chuckled. “Cloak and dagger.” He too followed. 
In the relatively spacious senior 
executive’s auto-cafeteria several of 
those sitting about looked moderately surprised when their chief entered with his guests; but without 
instructions they moved away from 
the vicinity of the table Dempsey 
Harrison chose. 
The four of them sat. 
“Can I order you something?” 
the data head said courteously to 
Paul Kosloff. 
“No,” Paul said. He looked up at 
the clock on the wall. “I suppose 
your time is valuable, and this 
might be long. Shall we dispense 
with the amenities and get underway?” 
“By all means. Lisa has filled us 
in a bit. It would seem that you ran 
into some difficulties . and some 
misconceptions.” 
“I don’t think so,” Paul said 
evenly. “Give me a moment to describe what I found.” 
Lisa gave a bored sigh. Edgar 
chuckled meaninglessly. 
Harrison said, “By all means, 
Professor.” 
Paul took his characteristic deep 
breath before launching into his 
subject. “I suppose it starts with 
the old truism that power corrupts 
and absolute power corrupts absolutely.” 
“My dear Professor.” 
Paul said, “When Miss Stebbins 
supposedly disappeared in Geneva, 
with the implication of kidnapping, 
I was urged to return home by Colonel Castriota of Interpol, following 
an attack on my own person. However, I refused; instead, I went to’ 
Budapest where I was able to confront Pol Kodaly, of the Commissariat of Computer Data.” 
Harrison nodded pompously. “I 
know Pol well. We have met at 
various conferences. Competent 
man.” 
“Yes, so I thought. He revealed 
to me the high-security conferences 
being held on the matter of un iting 
all the computer data banks in the 
world.” 
T T arrison was slightly taken 
* aback. “Ah? In actuality, a 
matter that should be held in more 
secrecy, considering your level of 
authority — or lack of it, Professor.” 
“Perhaps,” Paul said. “He also 
pointed out some of the ramifications. This would be a step far and 
beyond such organizations as the 
Reunited Nations, toward world 
government, obviously. The first * 
feeble efforts in that direction, the 
League of Nations, the United Nations, and now the Reunited Nations have all come a cropper. But 
on the face of it, a combining of 
the world’s data banks would be a 
step toward a one-world government that could never be retraced. 
Perhaps in the conferences now being so secretly held, that aspect 
isn’t even being discussed. The sub
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
1 55 
ject would have such taboo aspects 
that it might be completely avoided; but, gentlemen and Miss Stebbins, given amalgamation of all the 
world’s data banks, further steps 
would willy-nilly follow. Unification 
of postal systems, of coast and geodetic surveys, the exploration of the 
ocean depths and of space. All these 
things and a score more, a hundred 
more, become ridiculous to be handled unilaterally, when all the 
world’s information is at the hands 
of each nation. And such cooperation would inevitably lead in time 
to more and more amalgamation in 
every field from industrial planning 
to education.” 
"I am afraid you are a dreamer 
and a romantic, Professor Kosloff.” 
Paul Kosloff had put his hands 
on the table before him, the fingers 
interlaced. "That I am not, as you 
well know. I am a somewhat stodgy 
professor of language, immersed 
largely in his work and not up on 
the ins and outs, the double-dealing 
of high government and interna• tional intrigue. Which is one of the 
reasons I was chosen to be one of 
your stooges.” 
James Edgar chuckled and said, 
"What were the other reasons?” 
Paul twisted his hands slightly 
and said, "The fact that I am my 
father’s son. I can hear the TriVision news commentator excitedly 
saying: ' Flash! Paul Kosloff the 
Second, son of the espionage-counter-espionage star agent once known 
as the Cold War’s Lawrence of 
Arabia, was shot to death today in 
Paris while involved in an attempt 
to flush secret agents who have 
been tapping American data banks 
and threatening to wipe them clean. 
It is known that these agents have 
stolen the plans for the min-nuclear 
bomb and it is expected that they 
will utilize them for extortion.’ ” 
Lisa Stebbins snorted. 
Paul twisted his hands again, 
nervously, and looked at her. "Possibly later, there would be another 
alarming news flash. ‘Beautiful 
Lisa Stebbins, personal secretary of 
Data Chief Dempsey Harrison, 
while on vacation in Common Europe was kidnapped today by elements of the group which has been 
threatening to wipe clean American 
and Common Europe data banks, 
thus precipitating a complete collapse of our economies. It is suspected that she has been smuggled 
into Budapest.’ ” 
Edgar chuckled again, but Harrison was staring at Paul Kosloff 
speculatively. 
P aul went on. "And somewhere 
along in here there would probably be an item which would go 
like this: ‘It has been revealed that 
Generale Zack Castriota, ace Interpol agent, met his death in the ruins 
of Manhattan with IABI agent 
Mark Martino in a gun battle with 
elements of the gang suspected by 
some of being from Common EurIF 
Asia, and known to be tapping 
American and Common European 
data banks. Remnants of the gang 
escaped by submarine/ ” 
Paul’s hand moved nervously 
again. "And somewhere along in 
here would come the really big 
news flash. Something like this 
would probably be announced: The 
President of the United States of 
the Americas has called upon IABI 
head James Edgar , and generals so 
and-so, to take emergency measures 
to protect our national data banks , 
and forestall attempts at extortion 
on the part of enemy agents , suspected of representing Common 
Eur-Asia ” 
"Generals so-and-so?” Dempsey 
Harrison said. 
Paul looked at him. "I don’t 
know all the details of this, and 
doubt if I ever will. I don’t have to 
know them. I don’t know who your 
confederates might be, but I assume 
some of them are highly placed 
military.” 
"Our confederates!” Harrison 
said. "My dear Professor, your, ah, 
report has thus far been so ridiculous as to be almost incoherent, but 
now you verge on insanity. What 
possible reason could we have to go 
to these fantastic extremes?” 
Paul nodded. "That would be 
your obvious reaction, of course. To 
pretend innocence. There must be 
many elements in high government 
in our country and in Common Europe and Common Eur-Asia as well 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
who would be opposed to eventual 
world government. Given such drastic changes, how could they be sure 
of retaining their posts? They might 
even be afraid that basic socioeconomic changes would take place 
that would leave them without their 
present affluence. It would seem 
impossible, for instance, that the 
present economic system in Common Eur-Asia could stand if subjected to union with the West. But 
possibly our own People’s Capitalism, which has its ridiculous aspects, couldn’t stand either. In 
short, there are those in all major 
governments who, to protect themselves in their positions of power, 
would take any steps — any — to 
forestall the moves in the direction 
of world government such as the 
amalgamation of the world’s data 
banks.” 
He looked straight into Harrison’s face. "Take your own position as head of the National Data 
Center. If this merging of the banks 
took place, could you be sure that 
you would be chief of the new 
ultra-data-banks, or ‘might the position go to Pol Kodaly, or whoever it is that currently heads the 
Common Europe banks? Might it 
turn out that while you are quite 
a wily politician, perhaps you 
haven’t the real knowledgeability of 
such men as Kodaly? I suspect that 
in at least one field of computer 
research the Common Eur-Asian 
scientists are sweeping ahead of our 
. 157 
own research. Could it be because 
of ineptness in our ranks?” 
He twisted his hands again nervously. "The same would apply, of 
course, to our military. Given all 
the data banks of the world ^combined, armies and navies would be 
completely antiquated, since all information of a military nature 
would be available to all. Generals 
and admirals would suddenly be on 
the scrapheap.” 
L isa Stebbins said to her boss, 
"I told you.” 
"Be quiet, my dear. Let me 
think.” 
James Edgar said, his voice less 
than amiable now, "What is there 
to think about? Let me take care 
of him.” 
For the moment, Dempsey Harrison ignored Paul Kosloff as 
though he wasn’t there. He said to 
the IABI head, "Do you think he 
would have entered this lion’s den, 
if he didn’t have some resources to 
guarantee his safety? What they 
are, I don’t know.” 
He looked back to Paul. "There 
are many aspects to this of which 
you are unaware, Professor Kosloff. 
You have done a fairly good job of 
striking near the truth, but there 
are elements with which you are 
unfamiliar. It is quite true that I 
and certain colleagues in both this 
country and Common Europe, and 
even Common Eur-Asia, strongly 
oppose the merging of the data 
banks and for the very reason you 
point out. That is, it would eventually tend to eliminate national 
boundaries. It is our motivation 
that you misunderstand.” 
"Oh?” Paul Kosloff said flatly. 
"Yes. Professor, we of the elite, 
if you will not think me too vain 
to use that term, cannot allow the 
mongrelization of this, our great 
country. We must stand firm and 
prevent, by whatever methods we 
can, being taken over by the hordes 
of Europe and Asia.” 
"And I suppose over there, they 
are telling their people that the 
threat is of being taken over and 
mongrelized by the hordes of Americans.” 
"Please don’t be facetious, Professor. This noble goal must be 
achieved.” 
"And the ends justify the means, 
eh? Even when the means involve 
the killing of — let me see — eleven 
men that I know of, so far.” 
Harrison said tightly, "The 
means are justified by our idealistic ends, Professor. Eleven is a 
small number when the cause is 
considered. They were expendable.” 
Paul said wryly, "The one who 
tells others they are expendable 
usually isn’t one of those who becomes expended. Did Zack Castriota know that he was expendable in 
this idealistic cause? He seemed to 
think you were somewhat of a 
friend.” 
"That was an accident,” Edgar 
IF 
said coldly. "That group in Manhattan was putting on a show, admittedly to alarm the common herd 
to the point where they would not 
object to certain measures taken to 
strengthen our government. But 
they were meant to be gone before 
Castriota found their mysterious 
hideaway. It was all a big act.” 
"Generate Castriota was not acquainted with the true nature of 
this little intrigue,” Harrison said. 
"Our group includes members of 
Interpol, and indeed some elements 
in Budapest and Moscow, but Castriota was not among them.” His 
voice went very earnest. "Professor, some are meant to rule, others 
to be ruled. We who are, let us say, 
in the saddle now in the United 
States of the Americas, are the elite 
of this land. If basic changes take 
place, who can know who might 
wind up in control of our noble 
country? It is our duty to remain 
in our position of power. Now obviously you are even more astute 
than I had believed. You belong 
with us. Professor Kosloff, how 
would you like to be Secretary of 
Education in the President’s cabinet?” 
Paul Kosloff laughed and shook 
his head in deprecation. "I am not 
trained in administrative education, Mr. Harrison.” 
"That is not of essence,” Harrison beamed at him. "You can be 
briefed on the duties. They are not 
arduous.” 
"Ill bet they’re not,” Paul said. 
"I’m beginning to see why you’re 
afraid of amalgamation with the 
other leading countries, if our cabinet members are chosen in such 
manner as this.” 
James Edgar had drifted far 
from his pose of amiability. He 
looked a question at Harrison, who 
shook his head negatively. 
D empsey Harrison said to Paul, 
"Very well. The issues are 
great, and I have no way of knowing what steps you have taken. I 
will pull no punches. Professor, how 
would you like deposited to your 
portfolio so many shares of Variable Basic stock that all your 
dreams of avarice would be more 
than fulfilled?” 
Lisa said sourly, "I don’t see why 
you think him so damned important.” 
Paul ignored her and said to Harrison, "That’s the difficulty. You 
see, I have no dreams of avarice. I 
am that rare specimen, a satisfied 
man. I like my work, I enjoy my 
leisure; I am amply enough paid 
to accomplish the things in life that 
I like. Mr. Harrison, I can’t be 
bribed. Even if ordinarily I could 
be, I rather doubt if I could ever 
forget a young chap named Pete 
who died in the ruins of Manhattan 
as a result of your little play act, 
nor Zack Castriota and Mark Martino. You and your friends have 
concocted a fantastic scheme to 
THE COMPUTER CONSPIRACY 
frighten the people of this country 
into accepting some sort of emergency government which would undoubtedly seize power in the name 
of protecting the nation against the 
two most dreaded things that could 
happen to it — nuclear attack and 
a complete collapse of our culture 
due to loss of our data banks. I 
intend to do everything in my power to reveal your scheme.” 
James Edgar said flatly, "I see 
that it’s about time for me to take 
over. Kosloff, I have approximately a hundred men between this 
room and the nearest exit. Do you 
really think you can get out of 
here? I suggest you take Dempsey’s 
offer while you can, and mend your 
fences with him and me. The issues 
are too big for a pipsqueak of a 
language teacher to get in the way.” 
"You’re threatening me?” 
Lisa Stebbins laughed at him, her 
voice ugly, and shook her head as 
though marveling. 
"Could it be more obvious?” Edgar said flatly. 
Paul said, "You know, you 
should have considered that pipsqueak of a language teacher a bit 
sooner.” He looked up at the clock 
on the wall. "Did you know that 
this is the hour upon which Professor Paul Kosloff of the University of the Air, on National TriVision, brings his weekly lecture to 
his students?” 
"What in the name of Zoroaster 
are you driveling about, hombre?” 
Edgar snorted. 
Paul twisted his hands again, 
this time in such a way that they 
could all see the screen of his wrist 
teevee phone. 
"The reason I wanted you to 
come here to the auto-cafeteria for 
our little discussion was because I 
wasn’t sure but that you might 
have a scrambler in your office. 
You see, this past couple of weeks 
I’ve become increasingly conscious 
of bugs, teevee phone communications, and a dozen other electronic 
devices. To cut the story short, 
chum-pals, before I came here I 
made a call on the studios in 
Greater Washington where I give 
my broadcasts. The technician is 
an old friend who owes me a debt. 
The past two weeks, I missed my 
regular broadcasts but he played 
canned ones. This time, we made 
other arrangements. You see, all 
through, this conversation, my teevee wrist phone has been on and 
dialed to Jerry, who has been receiving it for the past fifteen minutes and broadcasting it. With a 
little screen like this, I imagine reception will be somewhat poor so 
far as image pickups are concerned, but it should be sufficient so 
that you are all identifiable. And, 
of course, the sound will be excellent.” END 
IF 
Dear Editor: 
As one of the offenders of Miss 
Camo, in that I used Altair as the 
scene of a story (Close to Critical), 
may I be allowed a word of defense? 
First, she is partly right, and if I had 
known in 1957 what 1 know now, I 
would probably have laid the story 
on Venus. However — 
Altair does, indeed, rotate rapidly; 
it is the standard example of this 
property in astronomy texts. This 
would have no affect whatever on 
the stability of a planetary orbit, 
however. It does suggest that most 
of the original -angular momentum 
of the cosmic cloudlet which pre
sumably formed the star is concentrated in the star itself; it is the rather 
sudden disappearance of evidence for 
rapid rotation at about spectral class 
F2 which makes some astronomers 
suspect that something regularly 
causes these cooler bodies to give 
their angular momentum to, say, a 
planetary system. Since this point 
came out, I have avoided hotter stars 
as background scenes for stories; 
but I am not convinced that the 
original cloud couldn’t have had 
enough angular momentum to take 
care of planets and a rapidly whirling 
sun. We just don’t know; this is one 
of the foggier spots in the current 
theories of planet formation. 
Calling Altair a “kid” as stars 
go is a bit shaky. It is not a Rigeltype supergiant only a million or two 
years old; it is of spectral type A7, 
luminosity class V — that is, a main 
sequence star. Its absolute magnitude 
is about +2.3 — about a dozen 
times as bright as our sun — and 
may indeed be only a billion years 
or so old instead of Sol’s four or five 
billion, but it’s just not that different. I’m quite prepared to believe in 
not only life but intelligence evolving in a billion years. 
The fact that no perturbations 
have been detected means nothing 
whatever. If Jupiter were in a 5 A.U. 
orbit around Altair, it would perturb the latter to the tune of about 
one fifteen-hundredth of a second of 
arc — wholly undetectable by present techniques. The Earth has less 
than one three-hundredth the mass 
of Jupiter; its perturbations would bo 
directly proportional to this. Also, to 
have normal Earth temperature it 
would have to be less than four A. 
U.’s from Altair, rather than five, 
and the perturbations would also be 
proportional to that. There is simply 
no star in the universe for which we 
can disprove the existence of planets 
on the basis of no-observed-perturbations. 
I doubt that Ted Sturgeon used Altair because it was close to Vulcan, 
since he presumably knew better. It 
is true that 40 Eridani and Altair are 
about equally distant from Sol; it is 
also true that Buffalo, New York, 
and Richmond, Virginia, are about 
equally distant from New York City. 
Anyone who assumes that Richmond 
is adjacent to Buffalo has not checked all the relevant facts. 
A similar relevant fact is that 40 
Eridani, seen from near Sol, is oves 
one hundred twenty degrees from Altair. If some hasty mental arithmetic 
is correct, the two are about thirty 
light years apart 
So — I grant that on the basis of 
current theory, Altair is rather unlikely to possess planets; but I still 
don’t feel too guilty about using it. 
— Hal Clement, Milton, Mass. 
* * * 
Dear Editor: 
I’m a very old science fiction fan, 
and I’ve a complete collection of 
s-f works published in Italy. I read 
regularly French Galaxy edition and 
since last year I collect your Worlds 
of IF. I don’t have a good knowledge of English, but I’m studying by 
myself, and IF is my reading book. 
In the last IF issues I’ve liked Lin 
Carter’s features on U.S. fandom and 
Zelazny, Delany and Ellison’s stories. 
Very beautiful, your covers. Unfortunately in Italy we don’t have as 
good artists as Pederson or Morrow. 
I write to ask you for a favour: 
there is someone of your readers that 
will exchange back issues of IF with 
Italian magazines? I hope you publish my letter (subject to corrections). 
— G. L. Staffilano, 38 via Madonna 
delle Rosa, 10134, Torino, Italy. 
November 9-10, 1968. PHILCON. At 
Sylvania Hotel, Broad & Locust Streets, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Features: 
Panel Discussion about “Science in Society," moderated by Ted Thomas; Ben 
Bova on “Weather Control"; panels on sex 
and violence in the future, with Fred Pohl, 
Lester del Rey, James Blish, et aliens 
... A special open meeting of the Philadelphia Science Fiction Society will be 
held at the YMCA (Broad and Arch 
Sts.) on November 8, at 8 P.M. — all 
welcome. For information: Tom Purdom, 
162 
4734 Cedar Avenue, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19143. 
March 22-23, 1969. BOSKONE VI. At 
the Statler-Hilton, Boston, Massachusetts. 
Guest of Honor: Jack Gaughan. Membership $2.00. For information: New England Science Fiction Association, Box G, 
MIT Branch Station, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139. 
April 4-6, 1969. BRITISH SCIENCE 
FICTION CONVENTION. At Randolph 
Hotel, Oxford, England. Guest of Honor: 
Judith Merril. For information in the 
USA: Sam Russell, 1351 Tremaine Avenue, Los Angeles, California 90019. 
April 11-13, 1969. LUNACON. Guest 
of Honor: Robert (Doc) A. W. Lowndes. 
At the Hotel McAlpin, New York City. 
Advance membership $2.00, or $2.50 at 
the door. Two Progress Reports will be 
sent to members. For information: Franklin M. Dietz, 1750 Walton Avenue, Bronx, 
New York 10453. 
LgaiaxyT 
WORLDS OF FANTASY 
l. SPRAGUE DeCAMP 
ROBERT E. HOWARD 
Arrival Date 
Normal 
130 pages 
Length 
Condition All.Ne.w..S.tor.ie.s.l 
Lester del Rey 
Editor 
All 
STORIES 
NEW 
Residence 
This is number one, 
And the fun has just begun . 
IER AND CHILD ARE DOING WELL ! 
SCIENCE 
FICTION 
nil 
choice. Pub. ed. $5.95 
628. From The 
Twilight Zone by 
Rod Serling. 14 
spine-tingling sto 
ries that breach the 
gap betwefen science 
and superstition. 
618*. Dangerous Visions. Anthology of 
33 original stories 
never before in 
print by Sturgeon, 
Anderson, others. 
Pub. ed. $6.95 
357. Interrupted 
Journey by John G. 
Fuller. The strange 
story of an American couple abducted aboard a UFO. 
Pub. ed. $5.95 
622. The Foundation Trilogy, by 
Isaac Asimov. The 
ends of the galaxy 
revert to barbarism. 
Pub. ed $10.50 
640. Fantastic Voyage, by Isaac Asimov. A miniaturized team of doctors 
invade a man's 
blood stream Pub. 
ed $3.95 
603. The Time 
Hoppers, K. Silverberg. Population 
explosion forces 
thousands to flee 
back 500 years. 
Pub. ed. $3.95 
964. The Flying 
Saucer Reader. J. 
David. Anthology 
on UFO’s. Fact or 
fiction? Pub. ed. 
" $4.95 
61 1. Element 79, 
Fred Hoyle. Satan 
as mayor; non-human TV viewers: 
agents chasing 
UFO’s Pub ed $4.50 
State 
If under 18, parent must sign here. 
(Offer good in U.S.A. only) 
609. Colossus by 
D. F. Jones. Machine conquers 
man! "Ingenious. .. 
alarming". Punch. 
Pub. ed. $4.95 
614. The Egg 
Shaped Thing. C. 
Hodder-Williams. 
Engineer finds creature "programmed” 
to destroy the world. 
Pub ed $4.95. 
643. The Past 
Through Tomorrow: “Future History” Stories, by 
Robert A. Heinlein. 
Pub. ed $5.95 
602. Psychogeist, 
L. P. Davies. Three 
minds — a galaxy 
apart — meet and 
turn a sleepy village 
into a nightmare. 
Pub. ed. $3.95 
Take any 
A TREASURY OF GREAT 
SCIENCE FICTION 
Edited by Anthony Boucher 
600. A giant two- volume collection of great science fiction reading. Over 1,000 pages of exciting 
fiction— four full-length novels, 
twelve novelettes, eight short 
stories by Ray Bradbury, Robert 
A. Heinlein, A. E. van Vogt. 
Foul Anderson. Arthur C. Clarke, 
Theodore Sturgeon, Alfred Bester. 
and a dozen more. Counts as 1 
YES— even the two-volume set at left 
counts as only a single choice! 
How the Club works: Each month it oilers a 
really superb new science fact or fiction book at 
a fraction of its regular price. Even though these 
books sell for $4.95, $5.95 and more in their original editions, Club members get them for only 
$1.49 eac+i-in special full-length, hard-cover edit ions— unless you select an extra-value book at 
slightly higher price. And the Clutf tells you in 
advance what each monthly selection will be. 
During your trial membership, you agree to take 
as few as four books in the coming year. Cancel 
any time thereafter. 
No-Risk Guarantee: If not delighted with introductory 3-book shipment, return books within 10 
days to cancel membership. Otherwise you will 
be enrolled in the Club as a Trial Member. Mail 
coupon today to Science Fiction Book Club. 
Garden City, New York 11530 
SCIENCE FICTION BOOK CLUB 
Dept. 8D-FHX, Garden City, N.Y. 11530 
Please accept my application for membership in the Science 
Fiction Book Club and rush the 3 hooks whose numbers I have 
circled below. Bill me only $1.00, plus shipping and handling, 
for all 3. Then every month, send me the Club’s free bulletin, 
“Things tb Come”, which describes coming selections. For 
each hook I accept. I will pay only $1.49, plus shipping and 
handling, unless I take an extra
value selection at a higher price. circle the numbers of 
I need take only four books with- wmi u/ant* 
in the coming year and may inB J D00 * s you 
resign at any time thereafter, 357 609 622 
NO-RISK GUARANTEE: If not 
delighted with my introductory 
package, I may return it in 10 days, 
pay nothing, owe nothing, and my 
membership will be canceled. 
Print 
Name 
Circle the numbers of 
the 3 books you want: 
357 609 622 
600 611 628 
602 614 640 
603 618 643 Address. 
when you join the 
Science Fiction Book 
Club and agree to 
accept only fbur books 
during the coming year. 
SCIENCE FICTION