WORLDS OF 
SCIENCE FICTION 
IN THIS ISSUE: 
Latest Look at Mars! Exclusive Report by 
DR. ROBERT RICHARDSON 
Mt. Wilson and Palomar Observatories 
Also ASIMOV • FONTENAY • BIGGIE • GALOUYE 
ROCKET ROTORSHIP by Mel Hunter — Theoretical Mars ship designed ta 
take advantage of the thin Martian atmosphere. The ship leaves an Earth 
Satellite Station and arrives in the upper atmosphere of Mars with wings 
in swept-back position. Using its rotating bank of eight motors in forward 
braking position, speed is finally slowed to a mushing stall in atmosphere. 
Wings are moved forward till they oppose, and are angled to become 
effective rotor blades, whereupon ship lowers like a helicopter to a vertical 
landing. Return journey is just the reverse, except that whole wing and 
tail assembly may be left in orbit about Mars for future use, and long 
nose section goes home alone, on chemical rocket power. Wing and tail 
section are atomically powered. Long nose section serves double purpose of 
being lightweight return rocket, and providing shielding for crew by long 
distance from aft reactor. White areas (see cover) are ceramic to withstand 
terrific heat. 
WORLDS of SCIENCE FICTION 
JUNE 1957 
All Stories New and Complete 
Editor: JAMES L. QUINN 
Assistant Editor: EVE WULFF 
Art Director: MEL HUNTER 
aiiimmiiiiiiiinimiuiiuiimimiiiMimiiimiiiMiiuMiiiiuiiiimiuiiiiiiiiMiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiuiuiiiiimiiiiuimiiiiiHiiiiuniHUiiiiuiimii 
SPECIAL! 
I THE FACE OF MARS by Dr. Robert S. Richordson 
s 
I NOVELETTES 
I PRETTY QUADROON by Charles Fontenay 
I JINGLE IN THE JUNGLE by Aldo Giunta 
I ON THE DOTTED LINE by Lloyd Biggie, Jr. 
SHORT STORIES 
OPERATION GOLD BRICK by Walter S. Tevis, Jr. 
DOES A BEE CARE? by Isaac Asimov 
SHUFFLE BOARD by Dan Gaiouye 
THE HUMAN ELEMENT by Leo Kelley 
FEATURES 
EDITOR'S REPORT 
WHAT IS YOUR SCIENCE I.Q.? 
SCIENCE BRIEFS 
HUE AND CRY 
COVER: 
Kodachrome from Files of First Mars Expedition 
by Mel Hunter 
4 
42 
24 
69 
94 
2 
113 
115 
IF is published bi-moathly by Quinn Publkhing Company, Inc. Volume 7, No. 4. 
CoDvriKht 1957 by Quinn Publi^ing Co., Inc. Office of publication, 8 Lord Street, 
Bunalo New York. Entered as Second Class Matter at Post Office, Buffalo, New 
York, l^ubscription $3.50 for 12 issues in U.S. and Possessions; Canada $4 for 12 
issues* elsewhere $4.50. Allow four weeks for change of address. All stories appearing in this magazine are fiction; any similarity to actual persons is coincidental. 
Not responsible for unsolicited artwork or manuscripts. 35c a copy. Printed in U.S.A. 
EDITORIAL AND BUSINESS OFFICES, KINGSTON, NEW YORK 
Next (August) issue on sale June 12th 
niiiimiimiHmiiiimmHiiiHiiMiiiiiiimiiimimiiimimiiiiMiHiiiHimmiiiiiii 
Illustrated by Virgil Finlay 
BY CHARLES FONTENAY 
Once a man has chosen a path to follow, there’s no 
turning back. But what if the die could be re
cast and we could retrace our steps when we 
chose the wrong one . and choose another? 
Pretty Quadroon 
G eneral Beauregard Courtney sat in his staff car 
atop a slight rise and watched the slow, meshing 
movement of his troops on the plains south of Tullahoma, 
Tennessee. Clouds of dust drifted westward in the lazy 
summer air, and the dull boom of enemy artillery sounded 
from the north. 
“You damn black coon,” he said without rancor, “you 
know you’re costing me a night’s sleep?” 
The Negro courier stood beside his motorcycle and his 
teeth flashed white in his good-natured face. The dust of 
the road filmed his uniform of Southern grey. 
“Miss Piquette told me to bring you the message, suh,” 
he answered. 
“A wife couldn’t be more demanding,” grumbled Beau
regard. “Why couldn’t she wait until this push is over?” 
“I don’t know, suh,” said the 
courier. 
“Well, get back to headquarters 
and get some supper,” commanded 
Beauregard. “You can fly back to 
Chattanooga with me.” 
The man saluted and climbed 
aboard his motorcycle. It kicked to 
life with a sputtering roar, and he 
turned it southward on what was 
left of the highway. 
The sun was low in the west, and 
its reddening beams glinted from 
the weapons and vehicles of the 
men who moved through the fields 
below Beauregard. That would be 
the 184th, moving into the trenches 
at the edge of what had been Camp 
Forrest during the last war. 
On the morrow this was to be the 
frontal attack on what was left of 
the Northern wind tunnel installations, while the armor moved in 
like a powerful pincers from Pelham to the east and Lynchburg to 
the west. If the Union strongpoint 
at Tullahoma could be enveloped, 
the way lay open to Shelbyville and 
the north. No natural barrier lay 
north of Tullahoma until the Duck 
River was reached. 
This was the kind of warfare 
Beauregard Courtney relished, this 
wheeling and maneuvering of tanks 
across country, this artillery barrage 
followed by infantry assault, the 
planes used in tactical support. It 
was more a soldier’s warfare than 
the cold, calculated, long-range 
bombardment by guided missiles, 
the lofty, aloof flight of strategic 
bombers. He would have been 
happy to live in the days when 
wars were fought with sword and 
spear. 
When the Second War for Southern Independence (the Northerners called it “The Second Rebellion”) had broken out, Beauregard 
had feared it would be a swift holocaust of hydrogen bombs, followed 
by a cruel scourge of guerilla fighting. But not one nuclear weapon 
had exploded, except the atomic 
artillery of the two opposing forces. 
A powerful deterrent spelled caution to both North and South. 
Sitting afar, watching the divided 
country with glee, was Soviet Russia. Her armies and navies were 
mobilized. She waited only for the 
two halves of the United States to 
ruin and weaken each other, before 
her troops would crush the flimsy 
barriers of western Europe and 
move into a disorganized America. 
So the Second Rebellion (Beauregard found himself using the 
term because it was shorter) remained a classic war of fighting on 
the ground and bombing of only industrial and military targets. Both 
sides, by tacit agreement, left the 
great superhighways intact, both 
held their H-bombers under leash, 
ready to reunite if need be against 
a greater threat. 
Just now the war was going well 
for the South. At the start, the new 
Confederacy had held nothing of 
Tennessee except Chattanooga 
south of the mountains and the 
southwestern plains around Memphis. That had been on Beauregard’s advice, for he was high in 
the councils of the Southern military. He had felt it too dangerous 
to try to hold the lines as far north 
CHARLES FONTENAY 
as Nashville, Knoxville and Paducah until the South mobilized its 
strength. 
He had proved right. The Northern bulge down into Tennessee had 
been a weak point, and the Southern sympathies of many Tennesseans had hampered their defense. 
The Army of West Tennessee had 
driven up along the Mississippi 
River plains to the Kentucky line 
and the Army of East Tennessee 
now stood at the gates of Knoxville. 
Outflanked by these two threats, 
the Union forces were pulling back 
toward Nashville before Beauregard Courtney’s Army of Middle 
Tennessee, and he did not intend 
to stop his offensive short of the 
Ohio River. 
“Head back for Winchester, Sergeant,” he commanded his driver. 
The man started the staff car and 
swung it aroimd on the highway. 
He should not go to Chattanooga, 
Beauregard thought as the car 
bumped southward over the rutted 
road. His executive officer was perfectly capable of taking care of 
things for the few hours he would 
be gone, but it ran against his military training to be away from his 
command so soon before an attack. 
Had the summons come from his 
wife, Beauregard would have sent 
her a stem refusal, even had she 
been in Chattanooga instead of 
New Orleans. She had been a soldier’s wife long enough to know 
that duty’s demands took precedence over conjugal matters. 
But there was a weakness in him 
where Piquette was concerned. 
Nor was that all. She knew, as well 
as Lucy did, the stern requirements 
PRETTY QUADROON 
of military existence; and she was 
even less likely than Lucy to ask 
him to come to her unless the matter was of such overwhelming import as to overshadow what he 
gained by staying. 
Beauregard sighed. He would eat 
a light supper on the plane and be 
back in Winchester by midnight. 
The pre-attack artillery barrage 
was not scheduled to open before 
four o’clock in the morning. 
The plane put down at the 
Chattanooga airport at dusk, and 
a swift military car took him down 
Riverside Drive, past the old Confederate cemetery, and downtown. 
Chattanooga was a military city. 
Grey-uniformed military police 
stood at the intersections, and soldiers on rest leave from both East 
and Middle armies trooped in 
laughing gangs along darkened 
Market Street. Few civilians were 
abroad. 
The siren and circled stars on 
Beauregard’s car cleared a path for 
him through the sparse downtown 
traffic. The car roared out Broad 
Street, swung under the viaduct 
and sped up the curving drives of 
Lookout Mountain. 
At a darkened house on the brow 
of the mountain, overlooking 
Georgia and Alabama, the car 
pulled up. Beauregard spoke a word 
to the driver, got out and went to 
the front door. Behind him the 
car’s lights went out, and it 
crunched quietly into the shadowed 
driveway. 
There was light in the house 
when Piquette opened the door to 
him. She held out her hands in 
welcome, and her smile was as 
sweet as sunshine on dew-sparkling 
fields. 
Piquette’s skin was golden, like 
autumn leaves, with an undertone 
of rich bronze. Her dark eyes were 
liquid and warm, and her hair 
tumbled to her shoulders, a jet 
cascade. She was clad in a simple 
white dress that, in the daring new 
fashion, bared the full, firm swell 
of her breasts. 
Beauregard took her in his arms, 
and as her lips clung to his he felt 
a grey old man, as grey as his braidhung uniform. He held her away 
from him. In the mirror behind 
her he saw his face, stern, weatherbeaten, light-mustached, with startling blue eyes. 
“Piquette, what on earth is this 
folly?” he demanded, kicking the 
door shut behind him. “Don’t you 
know I’m moving on Tullahoma 
in the morning?” 
“You know I wouldn’t call you 
unless it was important. Card, as 
much as I long for you.” When 
she talked, her delicately molded 
face was as mobile as quicksilver. 
“I’ve found something that may 
end the war and save my people.” 
“Dammit, Quette, how many 
times have I told you they are 
not your people? You’re a quadroon. You’re three-fourths white, 
and a lot whiter in your heart than 
some white women I’ve seen.” 
“But I’m one-fourth Negro, and 
you wouldn’t have married me, for 
that, even if you’d known me before you met your Lucy. Isn’t that 
right. Card?” 
“Look, Quette, just because 
things are the way they are . • .” 
She hushed him with a finger 
on his lips. 
“The Negroes are my people, 
and the white people are my 
people,” she said. “If the world 
were right. I’d be a woman instead 
of a thing in between, scorned by 
both. Can’t you see that. Card? 
You’re not like most Southerners.” 
“I am a Southerner,” he answered proudly. “That I love you 
above my own blood makes no 
difference. No, I don’t hate the 
black man, as so many Southerners 
do — and Northerners too, if the 
truth were known. But, by God, 
he’s not my equal, and I won’t 
have him ruling over whites.” 
“This is an old argument,” she 
said wearily, “and it isn’t why I 
called you here. I’ve found a man — 
or, rather, a man has found me — 
who can end this war and give my 
people the place in the world they 
deserve.” 
Beauregard raised his bushy eyebrows, but he said nothing. Piquette took him by the hand and 
led him from the hall into the 
spacious living room. 
A Negro man sat there on die 
sofa, behind the antique coffee 
table. He was well-dressed in a 
civilian suit. His woolly hair was 
grey and his eyes shone like black 
diamonds in his wizened face. 
“General Courtney, this is Mr. 
Adjaha,” said Piquette. 
“From where?” demanded Beauregard warily. Surely Piquette 
would not have led him into a trap 
set by Northern spies? 
Adjaha arose and inclined his 
head gravely. He was a short man, 
rather squarely built. Neither he 
CHARLES FONTENAY 
nor Beauregard offered to shake 
hands. 
“Originally from the Ivory 
Coast of Africa, sir,” said Adjaha 
in a low, mellow voice. “I have 
lived in the United States ... in 
the Confederacy . since several 
years before the unfortunate outbreak of war.” 
Beauregard turned to Piquette. 
“I don’t see the point of this,” 
he said. “Is this man some relative of yours? What does his being 
here have to do with this crazy 
talk of ending the war?” 
“If you will excuse me. General,” 
said Adjaha, “I overheard your 
conversation in the hall and, indeed, Piquette already had informed me of the dissension in 
your heart. You would be fair to 
my race in the South, yet you fear 
that if they had equality under the 
law they would misuse their superiority in numbers.” 
Beauregard laughed scornfully. 
“See her, old man, if you think 
I’m ripe to lead a peace and surrender movement in the South, 
you’re wasting your time,” he said. 
“The South is committed to this 
war, and so be it.” 
“I ask only that you listen for a 
brief time to words that may be 
more fruitful than a few hours in a 
quadroon’s bedroom,” said Adjaha 
patiently. “As I said, I am from 
the Ivory Coast. When the white 
man set foot in that part of Africa, 
he found a great but savage kingdom called Dahomey: the ancestral home of most of the slaves 
who were brought to the South. 
“Before Dahomey there was a 
civilization whose roots struck 
PRETTY QUADROON 
back to the age when the Sahara 
bloomed and was fertile. Before the 
great civilizations of Egypt, of 
Sumer and of Crete was the greater 
civilization of the African black 
man. 
“That civilization had a science 
that was greater than anything that 
has arisen since. It was not a science 
of steel and steam and atoms, but 
a science of men’s minds and men’s 
motives. Its decadent recollections 
would have been called witchcraft 
in medieval Europe; they have 
been known in the West as voodoo 
and superstition.” 
“I think you’re crazy,” said Beauregard candidly. “Quette, have you 
hired a voodoo man to hex me?” 
“Be tolerant. General,” admonished Adjaha in his mellow voice. 
“Many of you in the West are 
not aware of it, but Africa has 
been struggling back to civilization 
in the Twentieth Century. And, 
while most of its people have been 
content to strive toward the young 
ways of the West, a few of us have 
sought in our ancestral traditions 
a path to the old knowledge. Not 
entirely in vain. Look.” 
Like a conjuror, he produced 
from somewhere in his clothing a 
small carved figure. About six 
inches high, it was cut from some 
gleaming black stone in the attenuated form so common to 
African sculpture. It dangled from 
Adjaha’s fingers on a string and 
turned slowly, then more swiftly. 
As it spun, the light from the 
chandelier flashed from its planes 
and curves in a silvery, bewildering 
pattern. Beauregard felt his eyes 
drawn to it, into it, his very brain 
drawn into it. 
Beauregard stood there, staring 
at the twirling image. His eyes were 
wide open and slightly glazed. 
Piquette gave a little, frightened 
cry, 
“It’s all right, my dear,” said 
Ad j aha. “He’s just under hypnosis. 
Your General Beauregard is the 
key that can unlock the past and 
the future for us.” 
T here was an insistent command beating against Beauregard’s brain: “Go back , . go 
back ... go back ...” 
It was a sunny summer morning 
in Memphis. Beauregard Courtney, 
Nashville attorney and adjutant 
general of Tennessee, stepped out 
of the elevator of the Peabody 
Hotel and walked across the wide, 
columned lobby to the newsstand. 
He did not go by the desk; Beauregard preferred to keep his room 
key in his pocket when he stayed in 
a hotel. 
He bought a copy of The Commercial Appeal and dropped onto 
one of the sofas nearby to read the 
headlines. As he had suspected, 
the story in which he was involved 
took top play. 
SOUTHERN GOVERNORS 
GATHER HERE TODAY TO 
DISCUSS ‘REVOLT.’ 
It was a three-column head at 
the right of the page. The Commercial wasn’t as conservative as 
it had been when he was a boy, 
but it still didn’t go in for the 
bold black streamers, he thought 
approvingly. 
He glanced at the other front 
10 
page headlines: MERIDIAN 
QUIET UNDER FEDERAL 
REGIME . NEHRU BLASTS 
RACE UNREST IN MISSISSIPPI . PRESIDENT URGES 
SOUTH: ‘ABIDE BY LAW’ . 
Beauregard sighed. He was 
caught up in the vortex of great 
events. 
He arose, folding his paper, 
and walked toward the stairs leading down to the grill. The governors’ meeting was not until eleven 
o’clock. After breakfast, he would 
talk with some of the Memphis 
political leaders and telephone 
Governor Gentry. He was in a 
delicate position here, representing 
a state that did not think exactly 
as he did. 
As he reached the steps, a darkhaired woman, dressed in misty 
blue for the morning, approached 
from the elevators. He stepped aside 
to let her precede him. Then they 
recognized each other. 
“Piquette!” he exclaimed. “I 
didn’t know you were in Memphis.” 
The quadroon flashed a smile and 
a sparkle of black eyes at him. 
“I knew you were here,” she 
said, gesturing at his newspaper. 
He hesitated, uncertain whether 
she was just countering his own 
remark or telling him that he was 
her reason for being here. 
“Will you have breakfast with 
me?” he invited. 
“Yes,” she answered, and gave 
him a sidelong glance, “if it’s in 
my room.” 
He laughed, rich and fullthroated. She took his arm and 
they went back to the elevators together. His heart was lighter now 
CHARLES FONTENAY 
that Piquette was in Memphis with 
him . 
There were eleven Southern governors at the meeting. Governor 
LeBlanc of Louisiana, like Governor Gentry of Tennessee, had sent 
a representative in his stead. As 
representative of the host state, 
Beauregard opened the meeting, 
welcomed the visitors and tum^ 
over the chairmanship to Governor 
Dortch of Georgia. 
“Gentlemen, there is no point in 
delaying our principal discussion,” 
said Dortch. “Within the past week, 
federal troops have moved into a 
Mississippi city to enforce the Supreme Court’s infamous integration 
decree. For the first time since Reconstruction Days, hostile soldiers 
are on the soil of a sovereign Southern state. The question before us is, 
shall we bow to this invasion of 
states’ rights and continue our 
hopeless fight in the courts, or shall 
we join hands in resisting force with 
force?” 
Chubby Governor Marsh of Alabama rose to his feet. 
“There wouldn’t have been any 
federal troops if it hadn’t been for 
this extremist segregation organization, the Konfederate Klan,” he 
said heavily. “I belong to a segregationist organization myself : I 
suppose most of you do, because 
you got elected. But lynching and 
rioting and burning homes and 
schools is no way to resist integration. Mississippi’s national guard 
should have been in Meridian.” 
‘Tf I’d mobilized the guard. I’d 
have had a revolt on my hands,” 
said Governor Ahlgren of Mississippi mildly. “Two-diirds of the 
PR€TTY QUADROON 
guardsmen belong to the Klan.” 
“I’ll go along with the majority, 
of course,” said Marsh, “but I think 
this propK>sed Pact of Resistance can 
lead only to full-fledged military 
occupation of the South.” 
Almost without willing it, Beauregard arose. Governor Gentry had 
counselled caution, listening instead 
of talking, but a fire burned deep 
in Beauregard. Somehow the laughing face of Piquette as he had last 
seen her misted his eyes. A powerful 
urging was on him to beat his breast 
and cry: “The white man must 
rule . .!” 
Beauregard opened his eyes and 
looked around him dazedly. He was 
sitting in the parlor of Piquette’s 
house on Lookout Mountain. 
Piquette leaned against his shoulder, patting his hand, and Adjaha 
stood before him with hands 
clasped behind his back. Adjaha 
looked like a worried dwarf. 
“You remember that you relived your participation in the governors’ conference in Memphis?” 
asked Adjaha. 
“Yes,” said Beauregard, rubbing 
his forehead. “You black scoundrel! 
You hypnotized me with that 
pagan doll!” 
“Yes, sir,” admitted Adjaha. “It 
took me a long time to trace the key 
to this war, and when I found you 
were that key I knew I could reach 
you only through Piquette. It was 
your impassioned speech before the 
governors that turned the South to 
war instead of peace.” 
“Nonsense!” said Beauregard, sitting up straighter. “I just expressed 
what the majority was thinking. 
/ 
\\ 
The/d have agreed on the Pact of 
Resistance even if I had objected.” 
“The man of destiny sometimes 
doesn’t realize his own influence,” 
said Adjaha drily. “Many factors 
were concentrated in you that day 
besides your own native persuasiveness. No, General, your stand swung 
the governors to the Pact of Resistance. Announcement of that 
pact spurred the Konfederate 
Klansmen to massacre the federal 
troops at Meridian. That brought 
the federal proclamation placing 
Mississippi under martial law and 
the subsequent mobilization and revolt of the South.” 
“Perhaps so,” conceded Beauregard wearily. “Perhaps I did wrong 
in not following Governor Gentry’s 
instructions and keeping my mouth 
shut. But I spoke my convictions, 
and it’s too late now.” 
“That is not necessarily true, 
General,” said Adjaha. “Time is a 
dimension, and it is as easy to move 
east as it is to move west. A better 
simile: one can move upward as 
well as downward, but the presence 
of gravitation makes special skills 
necessary.” 
Beauregard shook his head. 
“A go^ theory, but good only 
as a theory,” he said. “If it were 
more than that, the law of cause 
and effect Would be abrogated.” 
“No, it works both ways. The 
present can influence the past as 
much as it influences Ae future, or 
as much as Ae past influenced it. 
Thus, through the past, Ae present can influence itself. 
“In my native land, the Ivory 
Coast of Africa, we believe in fanshaped destiny, General. At every 
instant where a choice is made, a 
man may take one of many paths. 
And Aose who had the old knowledge of my people could retrace 
their steps when the wrong paA 
was taken, and choose anoAer 
path.” 
“But I can’t,” said Beauregard. 
“If I could, I don’t know anything 
that could have changed what I 
said and did Aat day in Memphis.” 
“Tell me. General, how long had 
Piquette been your mistress before 
the Memphis Conference?” asked 
Adjaha. 
“About Aree years,” answered 
Beauregard, too puzzled at this 
change of tack to be offended. 
“Even if you were a psychologist 
instead of a general, it would be 
difficult for you to probe Ae motivation of your own heart,” said the 
Negro. “Piquette was your reason 
for voting for war, instead of 
peace!” 
Beauregard sprang to his feet 
angrily. 
“Look, damn you, don’t feed me 
your voodoo doubletalk!” he Aundered. “If it were Piquette alone I 
had to consider, don’t you think I’d 
have advocated equality for Ae 
black race?” 
It was Piquette’s voice Aat sobered him, like a dash of cold water. 
“And yet you try to tell me I’m 
not a Negro, Gard,” she said quiet
ly
The anger drained from him. He 
slumped back to Ae sofa. 
“Ah, yes, Ae perversity of a man 
whose mind and heart are at odds!” 
exclaimed Adjaha softly. “You love 
Piquette, yet your pride tells you 
CHARLES FONTENAY 
that you should not love a woman 
with Negro blood in her veins. For 
that you must be aggressive, you 
must prove the moral code taught 
you as a child was not wrong. 
“You went to the Memphis Conference with Piquette’s kisses still 
sweet on your lips, and because of 
that your conscience demanded that 
you stand forth as a champion of 
the white man’s superiority.” 
“So be it, then, you black Freudian,” retorted Beauregard cynically, 
an angry gleam in his blue eyes. 
“The die was cast two years ago.” 
“The die shall be recast,” said 
Adjaha firmly. “Piquette must not 
have gone to Memphis. She must 
not have been your mistress before 
you went to Memphis.” 
With this, he walked swiftly from 
the room. Beauregard looked at 
Piquette, his eyes half amused, half 
doubtful. She smiled at him. 
“What he does is out of our 
hands,” she said. “It’s still early, 
Card.” 
He took her in his arms. 
OVERNOR BEAUREGARD 
Courtney of Tennessee sat in 
the tall chair behind the governor’s 
desk and twiddled a paperweight 
given him, if his recollection was 
accurate, by the Nashville Rotary 
Club. His wife, Lucy, a handsome 
woman whose dark brown hair was 
just beginning to grey, stood by the 
door with an armload of packages. 
“Beauregard, the people moving 
into that vacant house down on 
Franklin Road are Negroes,” she 
said indignantly. “I want you to do 
something about it. The very idea! 
That close to the mansion!” 
“They aren’t Negroes,” he said 
patiently. “They’re my secretary 
and her mother. My secretary is a 
quadroon and her mother’s a mulatto. It’s convenient to have them 
live so close, in case I need to do 
some weekend work at home.” 
“A quadroon!” Lucy’s eyes widened. “Which of your secretaries is 
a quadroon?” 
“Piquette. And don’t tell me I 
shouldn’t have employed her. The 
Negro vote is important in this 
state, and if I’d hired a full-blooded 
Negro a lot of the white vote would 
turn against me.” 
“Well, I never! You’ve become 
more and more of an integrationist 
ever since you got into politics, 
Beauregard.” 
“Maybe I’ve gained some wisdom and understanding,” he replied. “That is not to say I’m an 
‘integrationist.’ I’m still doing my 
best to get it done slowly and cautiously. But the only way the South 
could have resisted it was by open 
revolt, which would have been suicide. And I must say the Southern 
fears have not been realized, so 
far.” 
Lucy sniffed. 
“I have to speak at a woman’s 
club meeting tonight,” she said, 
opening the door. “Are you going 
home now?” 
“No, Sergeant Parker will drive 
you home and come back for me. 
I’m going to eat downtown and 
clean up some work in the office 
tonight.” 
She left, and Beauregard leaned 
back in his chair thoughtfully, having just told his wife a lie. 
They had no children to be affected by it, but Lucy would never 
become reconciled to integration. 
She blamed him for his part in 
turning the Memphis Governors 
Conference away from the proposed Pact of Resistance five years 
ago. 
Beauregard had had his doubts 
about speaking out against resisting the federal government with 
the threat of force. Now he thought 
he had done right: war would have 
been terrible, and the South could 
not have won such a war. And it 
was his statesmanship at that conference, and Governor Gentry’s 
lavish praise of it, that had set him 
up to succeed Gentry as governor. 
Beauregard sighed peacefully. He 
had done right and the world was 
better for it. 
The door opened, and Piquette’s 
golden, black-eyed face peeked 
around it. 
“It’s four-thirty. Governor,” she 
said. “Will you want me for anything else?” 
“Not just now,” he said, smiling. 
She smiled back. 
“Room 832,” she said in a voice 
that was hardly more than a whisper. Then she was gone. 
Beauregard’s blood quickened, 
but he was disturbed. This that he 
was going to do was not right. But 
what other course would a normal 
man take, when his wife was so 
estranged that she had become 
nothing more than a front for the 
married happiness the people demanded of their governor, a figurehead who lived in another wing of 
the mansion? 
He had met Piquette eight years 
14 
before, briefly, when he was a staid, 
climbing Nashville lawyer. Not 
knowing she was of mixed blood 
then, he had been drawn to her 
strongly. He had thought her 
drawn also to him, but for some 
reason their paths parted and he 
had not seen her again until after 
his election to the governorship. 
She had been among a group of 
applicants for state jobs, and Beauregard had happened to be visiting the personnel office the day she 
came in. He employed her in the 
governor’s office at once. She was 
a good secretary. 
Nothing untoward had passed between them in that year she had 
worked as his secretary. In nothing 
either of them said or did could 
any members of his staff have detected an incorrect attitude. But 
there were invitations of the eyes, 
caresses of the voice . and a 
week ago their hands had touched, 
and clung, and he had found she 
was willing . 
Beauregard heaved himself to 
his feet with a sigh. Briefly, he felt 
sorry for Lucy. He would eat supper downtown tonight, but it would 
be in Room 832. 
Beauregard awoke slowly, with a 
hand shaking his shoulder. Reluctantly he abandoned a dream in 
which the South had remained at 
peace and he was governor of his 
state. 
Piquette’s flower-like face hovered over him in the dimness. She 
rested on one elbow in the big bed 
beside him and shook his shoulder. 
“Gard!” she said urgently. 
“Wake up! It’s after midnight.” 
CHARLES FONTENAY 
“Oh, damn!” he groaned, rolling out of the warm covers. “And 
the Northerners will attack today if 
my intelligence service hasn’t gone 
completely haywire.” 
“Get dressed,” she said, dropping 
her bare feet to the floor and 
smoothing her nightgown over her 
knees. “I’ll fix you some coffee.” 
He pulled on his uniform, the 
Confederate grey with the stars 
glittering on the shoulders, while 
she plugged in the hotplate and 
started the coffee. Outside, the 
eastern sky was streaked with dim 
light, against which the sleeping 
houses of Winchester thrust up 
stark silhouettes. 
She sat across the little table from 
him, a flowered robe drawn around 
her, while he sipped his coffee and 
thrust the last wisps of dreams from 
his head. 
“Quette,” he said, “I want you 
to pack and get out of here. Before daylight, if you can get ready. 
Head south, for Birmingham. I’ll 
send a staff car around for you as 
soon as I get to headquarters.” 
“I don’t want to leave you. 
Card,” she objected. 
“You’ve got to, Quette. We 
can’t hold these Federals. We’re in 
a bulge here, and the only reason 
they haven’t cracked us out yet is 
Chattanooga holding our right 
flank.” 
He kissed her goodbye, a long 
kiss, and strode down the street to 
the Franklin County courthouse, 
where he had set up headquarters 
for the Army of Middle Tennessee 
when the Union troops had forced 
them out of Nashville. The place 
was a beehive of activity. 
PRETTY QUADROON 
The eastern sky glowed red over 
the Cumberlands and the artillery 
was thundering in the north when 
General Beauregard Courtney rode 
out toward the front. He had his 
driver park the staff car on a slight 
rise overlooking his troop formations. 
The war was going badly for the 
South, and Beauregard unhappily 
took much of the responsibility on 
himself. Perhaps he had been 
wrong in making that impassioned 
speech at the Governors Conference in Memphis which, he was 
sure, had swung the weight of opinion in favor of the Pact of Resistance. Certainly he had been wrong 
in recommending a farflung northern battle line, at the start of the 
war, which stretched from Paducah, Kentucky, north of Nashville to Knoxville, with its eastern 
anchor on the Cumberlands. 
It had been his idea that a defensive line so far north would 
give the South more time to mobilize behind it, would hold the rich 
industries of Tennessee for the 
South, and would give the South a 
jumping off place for a strike across 
the Ohio River. But the North had 
mobilized faster, and Northern 
armies had crunched down through 
the Southern defenses like paper. 
Now all West Tennessee and a 
segment of Mississippi was in Federal hands. The Southern defense 
in East Tennessee had been forced 
back to the mountains around 
Chattanooga. And his own troops 
had fallen back from stand after 
stand after the Battle of Nashville. 
Even now, Federal armour was reported to have crossed the Tennes
15 
see River and be heading southeastward toward Columbia and 
Lewisburg. 
He hoped Piquette had left 
Winchester by now. Perhaps he 
should not have kept his quadroon 
mistress with him through the constant danger of defeat, but with 
Lucy way down in New Oreans . 
As the morning wore on, the 
guns thundered below him and the 
tanks rumbled across the Tullahoma plain, spouting fire. Several 
times his sergeant urged him to 
withdraw, out of danger, and return to headquarters, but he stayed. 
He wanted to direct this battle 
personally, giving his orders over 
the car radio. 
A great pall of smoke hung over 
the battlefield. Then the attack 
came, wave after wave of blue-clad 
infantry, pouring down from the 
north. Tanks and planes supported 
them, and atomic artillery shells 
burst in the Southern trenches. The 
grey lines began to crumble. 
“Colonel, throw in the 112th and 
the armored reserve, and let’s try 
to get an orderly withdrawal to the 
Alabama line,” Beauregard ordered 
into his microphone. He turned to 
his driver. “Sergeant, I think you’re 
right. We’d better get out of here.” 
The staff car swung around and 
headed back toward Winchester 
over the bumpy highway. As it 
left the rise, Beauregard swore fervently and reached for the microphone. From the west came a great 
cloud of dust and a mass of rumbling tanks. The Federals had 
broken through the left flank at 
Lynchburg. 
Jet planes streaked overhead 
from the north, flying low. The 
flash of exploding bombs and rockets was visible in Winchester, ahead 
of them. 
Speaking swiftly into the microphone, Beauregard glanced out of 
the car’s back window. 
“Sergeant!” he yelled. “Strafers!” 
The driver twisted the wheel so 
quickly Beauregard was thrown 
against the door. The speeding car 
leaped a ditch and bounced into 
the fields. 
Out the window, Beauregard saw 
the jet swooping down at them 
like a hawk. It was a speck in the 
sky, and almost instantly it was on 
them in a terrifying rush. 
He saw the flare of the rockets 
leaving the plane’s wings, he felt 
the shock of a thunderous explosion, and the blackness engulfed 
him. 
Beauregard opened his eyes painfully. His head ached, and his left 
arm hurt horribly. 
He was lying on a rumpled bed 
in his tom uniform. Piquette and 
a wizened, very black Negro man 
were standing beside the bed, looking down at him anxiously. He 
recognized that he was in the house 
in Winchester, in the room where 
he had spent last night ... or was 
it last night? 
“Quette!” he croaked, trying to 
sit up. He couldn’t make it, and he 
gasped at the pain in his arm. “I 
thought I told you to leave Winchester.” 
“I didn’t want to leave you. 
Card,” she answered softly. “And 
CHARLES FONTENAY 
it’s lucky I didn’t. Some men on an 
ammunition truck found your car. 
Your driver was killed and your 
arm blown half off. They brought 
you here.” 
“Dammit,” he complained, “why 
didn’t they take me to the base 
hospital?” 
“Because the base hospital took 
a direct hit from a bomb.” 
That startled Beauregard into 
the realization that there was no 
sound of firing, no crash of bombs, 
outside. There were men’s shouts 
and the normal sounds of a town 
occupied by the military. Had the 
Union forces been repulsed by some 
miracle? 
“Well, for Pete’s sake, call the 
medics and get me to a field hospital,” he ordered. “And you head 
south for Birmingham, like I told 
you to.” 
“Card,” she said soberly, “I 
thought it ought to be your decision, and not mine. If we call the 
medics, they’ll be Federal troops. 
Winchester was captured hours 
ago, and it’s just chance that they 
haven’t entered this house and 
found you before now.” 
Beauregard lay silent, stunned. 
The strange man beside the bed 
spoke for the first time. 
“It is not his decision,” he said. 
“There is work that I must do 
which may be delayed forever if he 
is captured.” 
“This is Adjaha, a friend of 
mine,” said Piquette. “He came to 
Winchester to see you. He thinks 
he knows a way to end the war.” 
“Poppycock!” snorted Beauregard weakly. 
“General Courtney,” said Adjaha 
PRETTY QUADROON 
intensely, “you spent last night with 
Piquette. Where did you spend the 
night? Here or in Chattanooga?” 
Beauregard opened his mouth to 
say, “Here, of course.” Then he 
stopped. Suddenly a vision, almost 
a memory, rose up before him and 
he could not be sure. There was a 
chandelier, and a black voodoo 
charm . 
“You do remember some of it!” 
exclaimed Adjaha delightedly. 
“It seems that I dreamed the 
South was winning, and I was going to drive on Tullahoma, and I 
went to Chattanooga to see Piquette,” said Beauregard slowly. 
“But it’s mixed up in my mind with 
another dream, in which there was 
no war at all, and I was elected 
governor . .” 
“Those were not dreams,” said 
Adjaha. “They happened and yet 
they did not happen.” 
“I remember you in a dream,” 
said Beauregard faintly, “and words 
about ‘fan-shaped destiny’ . .” 
“You have to understand this or 
I can do nothing,” said Adjaha 
hurriedly. “The South was doing 
well, although it could not have 
won in the end. You were preparing to advance on Tullahoma, and 
you did go to Chattanooga last 
night to see Piquette. This happened. 
“But it didn’t happen, because I 
utilized the ancient knowledge of 
my people, involving dimensions 
beyond time, to change the factors 
that led to it. Decisions of different 
people were influenced differently 
at a dozen points in the past so that 
Piquette did not become your mistress before you went to Memphis, 
and your own emotional attitude 
was changed just enough to steer 
you on a different course. 
“Then the other things you call 
a dream happened instead. There 
was peace instead of war.” 
“Then how is it that we actually 
have war and defeat?” demanded 
Beauregard, his voice a little 
stronger. 
“Piquette,” said Adjaha gravely. 
“You found her again, and she became your mistress after you were 
governor.” 
“But I remember that now!” exclaimed Beauregard. “That’s three 
years in the future . and there 
was no war.” 
“It is difficult to understand, 
but the future can change the present,” said Adjaha. “General Courtney, even more than I realized at 
first you are the ‘man of destiny,’ 
the key to war or peace in the 
South, and Piquette is the key to 
your own emotions. 
“Try to comprehend this: you 
cannot love Piquette in a South 
that is at peace! The whole social 
fabric in which you were nurtured 
demands of you that a woman of 
Negro blood cannot be your paramour unless she is socially recognized as an inferior and, in a very 
real sense, not your co-equal lover 
but the servant of your pleasure. 
When Piquette became your mistress, even five years after the decisive moment of the Memphis 
Conference, the entire framework 
of time and events was distorted 
and thrown back into a sequence 
in which the South was at war. 
This time, unfortunately for you, a 
slightly different time-path was 
taken and the South does not fare 
so well.” 
“Then you’ve failed, and things 
are worse than they were if you 
hadn’t interfered,” said Beauregard. 
“No, I must try again,” said Adjaha. “Piquette’s mother must never 
have brought her to Nashville as a 
child, so there will be no chance of 
your ever meeting her at all.” 
There was a thunderous knocking at the front door. Federal 
troops who were investing the town 
at last had reached this house. Adjaha gave Beauregard one sympathetic look from his dark eyes, and 
slipped quietly from the room, toward the rear of the house. 
The knocking sounded again. 
Beauregard lay in a semi-daze, his 
blood-encrusted left arm an agony 
to him. Through the haze over his 
mind intruded a premonition that 
bit more deeply than the physical 
pain : Never to know Piquette? 
He clutched her hand to his 
breast. 
“Quette,” he whimpered. 
“Be still, darling. I won’t leave 
you,” she soothed him as a mother 
soothes her child. Her cool hand 
caressed his cheek. 
NITED STATES Senator 
Beauregard Courtney of Tennessee crossed Canal Street cautiously and plunged into the French 
Quarter of New Orleans with a 
swift, military stride. 
He had 2dways urged Lucy that 
they take a trip to New Orleans, 
but she always had demurred; she 
said the city reminded her of war 
CHARLES FONTENAY 
and trouble, somehow. Now he had 
been invited to be the principal 
speaker at the annual banquet of 
the Louisiana Bar Association tonight. He had welcomed the opportunity to make the trip, without 
Lucy. 
It had been ten years since his 
voice at the Memphis conference 
had swung the South away from 
war and onto the path of peace. 
His statesmanship on that occasion had brought him great honoiu*. 
He had served a foim-year term as 
governor of his state and, on leaving that office, had been advanced 
to the U. S. Senate. His light-coloured hair and mustache were beginning to grey slightly. 
Lucy had been a good wife to 
him, even though there had been 
that near-estrangement when he 
was so busy as governor. Perhaps 
she still did not agree with him 
entirely on his acceptance of the 
fact of racial integration without 
bitter resistance, but she was more 
tolerant now of his sincerity than 
she had been once. He was sorry 
she was not here: she would have 
enjoyed the Old World atmosphere 
through which he walked. 
Beauregard moved up fabled 
Bourbon Street, past Galatoire’s and 
the Absinthe House. He stared with 
interest at the intricate ironwork of 
the balconies that overhung the 
narrow sidewalk, at the bright 
flowers that peered over the stone 
walls of gardens, at the blank wooden doors flush with the sidewalk. 
How far, he wondered, was he 
from Rampart Street, where the 
Creoles had kept their beautiful 
quadroon mistresses in one-story 
PRETTY QUADROON 
white houses in days long gone? 
He knew nothing of the Vieux 
Carre, and had no map. 
As he penetrated more deeply into the French Quarter, he began to 
pass the barred gates that stopped 
the dim corridors leading back to 
ancient courtyards. These fascinated him, and he tried several of 
the gates, only to find them locked. 
He never knew later, studying 
the map, whether the street he had 
just crossed was Toulouse, St. Peter 
or Orleans, when he came upon 
one of those gates that stood ajar. 
Beauregard did not hesitate. He 
pushed it open and paced eagerly 
down the shadowed corridor until 
he emerged into the sunlit courtyard. 
There was a stone statue, grey 
and cracked with age, in the midst 
of a circular pool in the center of 
the courtyard. Flower-lined walks 
surrounded it. The doors that 
opened into the courtyard were 
shadowed by balconies, on which 
there were other doors, and to 
which steep flights of stairs climbed. 
On a bench beside the pool sat 
a woman in a simple print dress. 
Her skin was tawny gold and her 
hair was black and tumbled about 
her shoulders. Her eyes were black 
and deep, too, when she raised them 
in surprise to the intruder. She 
was beautiful, with a poignant, 
wistful beauty, 
“I’m sorry,” said Beauregard. 
“The gate was open, and I was 
curious.” 
“Mrs. Mills forgot to lock the 
gate,” she said, smiling at him. 
“All of us who live here have our 
keys and are supposed to lock the 
gate when we go out. But Mrs. 
Mills forgets.” 
“I’ll leave,” he said, not moving. 
“No, stay,” she said. “You’re a 
visitor to town, aren’t you? There’s 
no reason why you can’t see a 
French Quarter courtyard, if you 
wish.” 
Beauregard moved closer to her. 
“I’m Beauregard Courtney,” he 
said. For some reason, he omitted 
the “Senator.” 
“Card,” she said in a low voice, 
her big eyes fixed on his face. 
“Card Courtney.” 
Somewhere in the deep recesses 
of his mind, faint memory stirred. 
Was it the memory of a dream? 
“Have I dreamed that we met 
before?” he asked slowly. “Piquette?” 
“You know!” she exclaimed, her 
face lighting gloriously. “I didn’t 
dream alone!” 
“No,” he said. “No. You didn’t 
dream alone. Your name is Piquette, isn’t it? I don’t know why 
I said that. It seemed right.” 
“It is right.” 
“And you live here?” 
“Up there,” she said, and pointed 
to one of the doors that looked out ^ 
on the balcony. 
Beauregard looked up at the 
balcony and the door, and he knew, 
as though he had prevision, that 
before he left the courtyard he 
would go through that door with 
Piquette. 
He took her hands in his. 
“I’ll never let you leave me,” he 
murmured. 
General Beauregard Courtney 
sat under the open-sided tent that 
was his field headquarters and 
stretched long legs under the flimsy 
table. He gazed morosely out toward Tullahoma in the north, 
where the trenches stretched endlessly from east to west and only 
an occasional artillery shell broke 
the quiet of the battlefield. 
Stalemate. 
“I thought trench warfare went 
out with World War I,” he growled 
to his executive officer. 
“No, sir. Apparently not, sir,” replied Colonel Smithson correctly, 
not interrupting his preparation of 
tomorrow’s orders. 
Stalemate. The Northern armies 
and the Southern armies had collided with great carnage on that 
battlefield. Fighting had swayed 
back and forth for weeks, and at 
last had settled down to a stubborn 
holding action by both sides. 
That had been months ago. Now 
trenches and fortifications and 
tank traps extended across southern Tennessee from the Cumberlands to the Mississippi. Occasional 
offensives came to naught. Only 
the planes of both sides swept daily 
over the lines, bombarding the rear 
areas, reducing the cities of Tennessee to rubble. 
Beauregard toyed with a pencil 
and listened idly to the news over 
the little radio at his elbow. It was 
a Nashville station, and Nashville 
was held by the North, but he had 
learned how to discount the news 
from the battlefront. 
“. And our planes destroyed 
thirteen Rebel tanks and an ammunition depot in a mission near 
Lexington,” the announcer was 
saying. “A gunboat duel in the 
CHARLES FONTENAY 
Mississippi River near Dyersburg 
was broken off after severe casualties were inflicted on the Rebel 
crew. Our armored troops have advanced farther into the Texas Panhandle. 
“Wait. There’s a flash coming 
in . 
There was a momentary pause. 
Beauregard bent his ear to the 
radio. Colonel Smithson looked up, 
listening. 
“My God!” cried the announcer 
in a shaky voice. “This flash , . 
a hydrogen bomb has exploded in 
New York City!” 
Beauregard surged to his feet, 
upsetting the table. The radio 
crashed to the ground. The other 
men in the tent were standing, 
aghast. 
“It isn’t ours!” cried Beauregard, 
his face grey. “It’s a Russian bomb! 
It must be . .!” 
The voice on the fallen radio was 
shouting, excited, almost hysterical, 
“ . The heart of the city wiped 
out . Number of dead not estimated yet, but known to be high 
. Great fires raging . Radioactive fallout spreading over New 
Jersey and eastern Pennsylvania . 
“Here’s a bulletin: the President accuses the Rebel government of violating the pact not to 
use large nuclear weapons. Retaliatory action has already been 
initiated . 
“Here’s another flash: Detroit 
and Chicago have been H-bombed! 
My God, has the world gone mad? 
There’s a report, unconfirmed, that 
the Detroit bombers came from 
the north . 
“They can’t believe we did it!” 
PRETTY QUADROON 
muttered Beauregard. All the men 
in the tent, irrespective of rank, 
were clustered around the radio. No 
one thought to pick it up from the 
ground. 
A staff car drove in from the 
south and rocked to a stop in front 
of the headquarters tent. Beauregard hardly noticed it until Piquette 
got out, followed by a slight, greyhaired Negro man in civilian 
clothes. 
Beauregard strode out of the 
tent. The car radio was on loud, 
and the same announcer was babbling over it. 
“Quette, what are you doing out 
here?” he demanded. 
“Gard, this is Adjaha, a friend 
of mine,” she said hurriedly. “I 
couldn’t wait for you to come back 
to town tonight. I had to get him 
out to see you before it was too 
late.” 
“Dammit, it is too late,” he 
growled. “It’s too late for anything. 
Haven’t you been listening to that 
damn radio?” 
“This is extremely important, 
General,” said Adjaha in a mellow 
voice. “If I may impose on you, I’d 
like to talk with you for a short 
while.” 
Beauregard frowned and glanced 
at Piquette. She nodded slightly, 
and her face was anxious. 
“I suppose I have plenty of time 
to talk,” he said heavily. “We can 
do nothing but sit here with useless 
armies while the country tears itself apart. Sergeant, turn that damn 
car radio off and go bring some 
chairs out here. You can listen to 
the radio in the tent.” 
They sat, the three of them, and 
Adjaha talked. Beauregard listened 
skeptically, almost incredulously, 
but something within him — not 
quite a memory, but an insistent 
familiarity — caused him to listen. 
He did not believe, but he suspended disbelief. 
“So you see. General,” concluded 
Adjaha, “there is some drive within you and Piquette — call it fate, 
if you wish — that draws you together. When it was arranged that 
she did not become your mistress 
before the Memphis Conference, 
she did after you became governor. 
When it was arranged that her 
parents did not move to Nashville 
with her, you were drawn to New 
Orleans to meet her. Apparently 
you must meet if there is any possibility that you meet, and when 
you meet you love each other. 
“And, though you can’t remember it. General — for it didn’t happen, even though it did — I explained to you once, on this very 
day, that you cannot love Piquette 
in an unrebellious and peaceful 
South.” 
“If we were fated to meet. I’m 
happy,” said Beauregard, taking 
Piquette’s hand. “If these fantastic 
things you say were true, I still 
would never consent to not having 
met Piquette.” 
“But you must see that it’s right, 
Gard!” exclaimed Piquette, surprisingly. 
“Quette! How can you say that? 
Would you be happy if we were 
never to know each other?” 
She looked at him, and there 
were tears in her eyes. 
“Yes, Gard,” she said in a low 
voice, “because . well, Adjaha 
can see a little of the future, too. 
And on every alternate path he 
sees . Gard, if the South is at 
war, you’ll be killed before the 
war ends!” 
“We can’t take any chances this 
time. General,” said Adjaha. 
“Should events be thrown back 
into a path that leads to war again, 
this time you might be killed before I could reach you. Piquette’s 
parents must never have met. She 
must never have been bornV^ 
Suddenly, Beauregard believed. 
This quiet little black man could 
do what he said. 
“I won’t permit it!” he roared, 
starting to his feet. “Damn the 
South! Damn the world! Piquette 
is mine!” 
But Adjaha, moving like lightning, was in the staff car. Its 
motor roared, it swung in a cloud 
of dust and accelerated toward the 
south. 
“Sergeant! Colonel! Get that 
stolen staff car!” Beauregard bellowed. He whipped out his service 
pistol and fired two futile shots 
after the diminishing vehicle. 
The general’s staff boiled out of 
the tent. They milled around a 
minute, shouting questions, before 
piling into two command cars and 
giving chase to the disappearing 
staff car. 
Beauregard glowered after them. 
Then he took Piquette’s hand and 
they walked together into the empty 
tent. 
“ . Here’s a late flash,” said 
the radio on the ground. “Birmingham has been H-bombed. Our 
planes are in the air against the 
Rebels . .” 
CHARLES FONTENAY 
Beauregard imagined the ground 
trembled. Instinctively he looked 
toward the south for the radioactive mushroom cloud. Then he 
swung back to Piquette. 
“Quette, he can’t do it,” said 
Beauregard. “He’s a voodoo fraud.” 
She looked at him with great, 
dark eyes. Her lips trembled. 
“Card,” she whispered like a 
frightened child. “Card, aren’t 
there other worlds than this 
one . .?” 
She crept into his arms. 
Colonel Beauregard Courtney 
sat on the terrace of his home in the 
suburbs of Nashville and enjoyed 
the warmth of the sun on his grey 
head. The steady hum of automobiles on the superhighway half 
a mile away was a droning background to the songs of birds in 
the trees of his big back yard. 
The “Colonel” was an honorary 
title bestowed on him by the governor, for Beauregard never had worn 
a uniform. He had been Governor 
Gentry’s representative at the fateful Memphis Conference forty years 
ago, he had been governor of his 
state, he had been United States 
senator from Tennessee, he had 
been chief justice of the state supreme court. Now he preferred to 
think of himself as Beauregard 
Courtney, attorney, retired. 
Where was Lucy? Probably sitting in front of the television screen, 
nodding, not seeing a bit of the 
program. She should be out here 
in this glorious sunshine. 
Beauregard’s gardener, a wizened 
Kttle Negro man, came aroimd the 
comer of the house. 
“Adjaha, you black scoundrel, 
why don’t you die?” demanded 
Beauregard affectionately. “You 
must be twenty years older than I 
am.” 
“Fully that, Colonel,” agreed 
Adjaha with a smile that wrinkled 
his entire face. “But I’m waiting for 
you to die first. I’m here to keep 
watch over you, you know.” 
He picked up the hoe and went 
around the house. 
Curious thing about Adjaha. 
Beauregard never had understood 
why an able, well-educated man 
like Adjaha, in a free and successfully integrated society, would 
be content to spend his whole life 
as gardener for Beauregard Courtney. 
Beauregard leaned back comfortably in his lawn chair and 
thrummed his thin fingers on its 
wooden arm. Absently he whistled 
a tune, and presently became aware 
that he was whistling it. 
It was a haunting little melody, 
from long ago. He didn’t know 
the words, only one phrase; and 
he didn’t know whether that was 
the title or some words from the 
song itself, that song of old New 
Orleans: “ . my pretty quadroon . 
“Piquette,” he thought, and wondered why that name came to 
mind. 
Piquette. A pretty name. Perhaps a name for a pretty quadroon. 
But why had that particular name 
come to mind? 
He never had known a woman 
named Piquette. END 
PRETTY QUADROON 
The problem was enough to drive the army into a furor. It was 
the old classic about an immovable object meeting the 
irresistible force. Something just had to give. 
OPERATION GOLD BRICK 
BY WALTER S. TEVIS, JR. 
T WO ARMY Engineers found 
it while drilling a hole through 
one of the Appalachian Mountains, 
in the Primitive Reservation, on a 
lovely spring day in 1993. The 
hole was to be used for a monorail track; and although in 1993 
it was very simple to run monorail lines over mountains, it was 
also quite easy to drill large, 
straight holes through almost anything; and the U. S. Army liked to 
affect the neatness of straight lines. 
So the Engineers had set up a 
little converter machine on a tripod, pointed it, and proceeded to 
convert a singularly neat hole, 
twenty-two feet in diameter, in the 
side of the mountain. At first the 
mountain converted nicely, the hole 
tunnelling along at an efficient 
thirteen feet per hour; and the 
Engineers, whose names were 
George and Sam, were quite 
pleased with themselves and 
rubbed their hands together with 
pleasure; while the little machine 
on the tripod hummed merrily. 
Illustrated by Ed Emsh 
birds sang, and wisps of brown 
smoke floated off from the mountain into an otherwise clear blue 
sky. 
And then they found it. Or, 
rather, the converter did, by abruptly ceasing to convert. The 
machine continued to hum; but 
the little feedback-controlled counter, which normally clicked off the 
number of tons of material substance that had been converted into 
immaterial substance, stopped. 
The last wisps of smoke dis
appeared from the mountainside. 
The two Engineers looked at one 
another. After a minute George 
picked a rock up from the ground, 
a large one, and threw it out in 
front of the lens of the machine. 
The rock vanished instantly. The 
one-tenth ton counter wheel trembled, and was still. 
“Well,” Sam said, after a minute, “It’s still working.” 
George thought about this for 
a minute. Then he said, “I guess 
we’d better look at the tunnel.” 
So they shut the machine off, 
walked over to the hole in the 
mountainside and went in. Fortunately the sun was behind them and 
they had no difficulty seeing as 
they made their way down the 
glassy-smooth shaft — which needed 
no shoring since the converter had 
been set to convert part of the 
materials removed into a quite 
sturdy lining of neo-adamant. The 
shaft ended in a somewhat foreboding, twenty-two foot, black 
disk of unconverted mountain bowels. The two of them peered uneasily at this for a few minutes and 
then Sam said, suddenly, ‘‘What’s 
this?” and kneeled down to inspect 
a rectangle, goldish in color, about 
ten inches long and four high, 
which appeared to be engraved in 
the rock at the dead end of the 
tunnel. 
“Let me see,” George said, stooping beside his co-scientist and pulling from his pocket a pocketknife, 
with which he proceed^ to scrape 
around the edges of the rectangle. 
Some of the loose rock crumbled 
away, revealing that the rectangle 
was, actually, one surface of a 
solid bar of some sort. 
He continued to scrape for a 
few minutes, removing enough 
rock to get a grip on the sides of 
the bar with his fingers, took a 
good hold and began to try to 
work the bar loose. The other 
Engineer helped him, and they 
pulled, strained, wedged and 
pushed for about ten minutes, 
until finally George said, “It won’t 
move,” and they stopped, perspiring. And it hadn’t moved, not a 
millimeter. 
The two of them glared, for a 
moment, at the smooth surface of 
the golden bar, which shone, 
lustrous, back at them. Then Sam 
said, “Let’s get a pick.” 
“A pick?” 
Sam, who knew something of 
Army history, was patronizing; 
“Yes. A kind of manual powered 
converter. No cut-off.” 
George was impressed. “But 
where?” he said. 
“At U-10 Supply.” 
They left the uncompleted tunnel, stepped into their Minnijet, 
field model, officer-type helicopter 
and flew at a leisurely five hundred 
miles per hour to U-10. U-10 had 
been, before the 1980’s Decade of 
Enlightenment, the University of 
Tennessee — the 1980’s had held no 
illusions about what was important 
to the American Way of Liferand they landed their little olivedrab plastic craft in front of the 
library. Inside, the librarian, a 
young sergeant, was put into something of a tizzy at their request for 
a pick, and explained to them that 
the library shelves held only weap^ 
ons of the past, and, as far as he 
knew, there was no such weapon as 
a pick. He sent them to the Captain. 
The Captain knew what a pick 
was, all right; but when the two 
Engineers told him what it was 
for he called the Major. The Major was a tall, athletic officer with 
wavy hair, a very neat mustache, 
a firm, undaunted jaw, and clear 
eyes that looked squarely into the 
future. He smoked a pipe, of course, 
and was wearing a natty black 
field uniform with regulation crim
WALTER S. TEVIS, JR. 
son cummerbund and beret. His 
voice was friendly but there was a 
“no-nonsense” tone in it. “What’s 
the deal, men?” he said out of the 
side of his mouth, the other side 
being engaged in biting, squarely, 
on ins pipestem. 
They told him about the gold 
bar. 
“Interesting,” he said, “Let’s 
have a look-see” and he sent for 
a pick, a heavy-duty converter, 
a portable lighting system, two 
quarts of synthetic Scotch and three 
Privates. All of these were stowed 
away in a staff helicopter and then 
the three officers, the two Engineers and the Major, flew to the 
mountains. This being a staff helicopter, the trip took three and one 
half minutes. 
At the mountain two of the 
Privates set up the portable lighting system in the tunnel while the 
other studied the manual that had 
come with the pick. The Major 
was first charmed, and then somewhat piqued, by ffie bar, after trying to prod it loose with his pipestem. The Private with the pick was 
called, and after some difficulty 
with determining the proper stance 
and grip for swinging that instrument — the Private was a recent 
recruit of only fourteen and naturally knew nothing whatever 
about manual converters of any 
sort — a few desultory swings were 
taken at the granite surrounding the 
bar. After a while the other two 
Privates joined in, alternating in 
swinging the pick, until, finally, 
a rough area of about two or three 
square feet had been hollowed out 
OPERATION GOLD BRICK 
around the bar, which was found 
at that time to extend only about 
four inches back into the mountain. 
Above the bar they noticed a sort 
of fissure, like a cicatrice, in the 
granite; and one of the Privates 
remarked that it looked like the 
mountain either had been split 
open to admit the bar from the top, 
or that, maybe, the bar had just 
been there and the mountain had 
grown up around it. 
It was impossible to cut away 
the rock on the other side, so the 
three Privates got a strong grip on 
the bar and began to pull. Then 
the officers began to pull on the 
Privates. The bar stayed where it 
was. They pulled harder. The bar 
stayed. The Major took off his 
ciunmerbund and beret and began 
to sweat. The bar didn’t move. The 
Major began to curse, pushed the 
others aside, grabbed the pick handle, gave a mighty heave, and hit 
the bar solidly with the point. 
There was no sound from the impact, and the pick did not rebound, nor did the bar move. The 
Major tried again. And again. 
Then they knelt and looked at the 
bar. It still gleamed. No scars. 
The Major swore for five minutes. Then he said, “Who owns 
this mountain?” 
George spoke up, “The Army, 
sir. Of course.” 
“Good,” said the Major, beginning to look imdaunted again. 
“We’ll get at that son of a bitch.” 
“How, sir?” 
“We’ll convert this Goddamn 
mountain, that’s how.” The Major 
began wrapping his cummerbund 
back around his waist. 
“The whole mountain?'' Sam 
said^ aghast. 
“Level it.” The Major dusted off 
his beret and replaced it. 
Sam spoke up querelously, “But 
wouldn’t that be . ah . misusing our natural resources, sir?” 
“Nonsense.” This mountain belongs to the Army. It’s not a natursJ resource. As a matter of fact, 
it’s an eyesore. I order you to 
vaporize it.” 
So they vaporized the moimtain. 
Since the converter could not cut 
through the bar they set it up — 
the heavy-duty one — to shear off 
the top of the mountain. Then 
they moved the machine around 
to each of the four sides and sliced 
them off. Their instruments were 
very accurate, and when the last 
wisp of smoke had drifted away 
there stood in the middle of a plain 
so smooth billiards could have been 
played on it, sitting on a neat, 
rectangular column of granite, four 
feet high, what was now plainly 
seen as a shiny, gold colored brick, 
its sides glittering in the evening 
sun. 
The Major picked up the pick 
and walked slowly over to the column. There was a slight, almost 
unnoticeable, swagger in his walk. 
He hefted the pick slowly, carefully, braced himself, and took aim. 
“All right, you son of a bitch,” he 
said, and then gave the pick a 
magnificent swing. 
The brick didn’t move. 
The Major stood where he was, 
looking at the brick, for about 
three minutes. Then he said, softly, 
“All right. All right!" 
He walked back to the converter 
— which was sitting on its tripod 
nearby — and began to adjust its 
aim and elevation and set its dials, 
all very carefully. When he was 
ready he stood behind it, his feet 
planted firmly, his fists clenched, 
his lower jaw firm and jutting, his 
eyes squarely ahead, focused on the 
brick. 
^^Now!" he said, and pressed the 
switch. There was a small hum 
and a tiny puff of smoke and the 
little column of granite disappeared. The brick was now unsupported and the Major watched it, 
his eyes now betraying an intense 
gleam, waiting for it to fall to the 
earth. The Major waited. 
The brick stayed exactly where 
it was, four feet above the ground, 
completely unsupported. 
It took the Major a few minutes 
to realize that there was no use in 
waiting. He said nothing, however; 
but stepped over to the brick, 
looked at it a minute, and then 
reached casually over to it and 
pushed it, with his index finger. It 
didn’t move. Then the Major sat 
down on the ground and began to 
cry, very softly, as the sun sank in 
the west and the birds, hushing, 
went back to their nests . , 
T hat, 9F course, w^ only 
the beginning of it. Within two 
weeks the little plain that had once 
been a mountain was covered with 
multicolored plastic quonset huts 
through which moved so many people of such world-shaking importance that four gossip-columnists 
had to be flown in from New York 
and Los Angeles to handle the 
WALTER S. TEVIS, JR. 
overflow. Generals and Admirals 
abounded, offering careful and profound opinions freely; slim, dark, 
intense young men with impeccable dark civilian suits and carrying dark attach^ cases held hurried, 
sotto voce conferences; newspaper 
reporters did “Profiles” of everybody. The weather held fair, the 
neighborhood abounded in divers 
kinds of nature: birdsong and waterfall, poplar and mountain daisy, 
which most of the visitors found 
quaint and novel, and a good time 
was being had by all. 
In the midst of this activity floated the still shiny golden brick, unperturbed, apparently as oblivious 
of the melee it had attracted as it 
was of the immutable laws governing the motion of masses: the laws 
of inertia and reaction, and the law 
of universal gravitation. 
Some interesting things had been 
discovered about the brick. It was, 
for instance, completely impervious 
to any known form of radiant energy; it neither absorbed nor radiated heat ; electron microscopes 
found its surface, on the atomic 
level, still smooth, metallic and 
shiny, without gaps, it apparently 
had no molecular — or, even, atomic 
— structure to speak of; it would 
conduct neither electricity, heat, 
nor anything else ; and it obeyed no 
physical laws whatever. Thus far 
nine neo-adamant points, sharpened to sub-microscopic pointedness and under pressures ranging 
up to three hundred fifty thousand 
tons, had failed to make any 
scratches in its surface; and all had 
eventually cracked. 
The Major had recovered most 
OPERATION GOLD BRICK 
of his old poise and undauntedness, 
although his eyes now seemed to 
face the future with some hint of 
trepidation, and he was assigned to 
Operation Gold Brick — as the Army 
had cleverly named it — in an advisory capacity. In fact it was he 
who gave voice to a notion that had 
been whispered about for several 
days. After the ninth neo-adamant 
point had split against the surface 
of the brick it was he who marched 
to the orange quonset of General 
Pomeroy and said, “Sir, let’s try an 
H-bomb.” 
So they H-bombed it. 
There was some confusion during the four days while the crater 
was being filled in; but after that 
was done and new quonsets were 
built the Operation was even more 
pleasant and roomy, since nine 
more mountains had been levelled 
by the bomb, and about twenty 
others had been fused into interesting colors and shapes. The birds 
and trees and suchlike had, of 
course, been obliterated; but they 
had been beginning to pall on the 
visitors anyway; and now the area 
had something of the look of a neoSurrealist landscape, or a Japanese 
garden. The radiations had, of 
course, been absorbed by the usual 
means. 
The brick stayed right where it 
was, its surface parallel to the horizon, poised, immediately after the 
blast, over a crater two hundred 
and ninety-four feet deep. 
After the failure of the H-bomb 
the Generals’ pique and frustration 
began to turn to anger and, in some 
cases, fear. One pacifistic Lieuten
ant General did in fact suggest that 
the brick be left alone and the 
monorail rerouted; but it was to 
the credit of the Army that his superiors rallied together and denounced his defeatism for what it 
was. But the Generals did agree at 
this conference to call in a theoretical physicist, provided one could be 
found, in a desperate hope that 
some light might be thrown on the 
nature of their adversary. 
A call was sent out to headquarters at Big-H (once Harvard University) and a two-day scramble ensued while a theory man — or ‘‘egghead” as such men were cleverly 
called — was sought. One was eventually found, working in a weather 
observatory in the Kentucky Reservation, and he was brought — a 
gray-haired old fellow who freely 
admitted that he read books and 
refused to drink synthetic whiskey 
— to the site of the brick, which he 
surveyed with some attention. 
“Well?” said one of the Generals. 
“Very interesting,” said the theoretical physicist, whose name was 
Albert, and he produced from a 
trunk he had brought with him 
a collection of peculiar looking instruments, which he began to set 
up on the ground. After peering 
down various tripod-mounted 
tubes, first at the brick and then 
at the sun, he then said, “Amazing!” 
“Yes,” said one of the generals, 
“We know that.” There was a ring 
of generals in brilliant tunics and 
of security men in black flannel 
suits around the physicist. 
“Amazing,” he said again, “This 
seems to be the exact set point of 
Propkofski’s principle!” He gazed 
at the brick reverently. 
Whose principle?” said one of 
the security men, raising his eyebrows and fetching a little black 
book from his breast pocket. 
“Propkofski.” The physicist’s eyes 
were aglow. The security men were 
raising eyebrows at one another. 
“The principle of terrestial orbital 
space-time suspension, formulated 
in 1972, I believe. This is the place, 
gentlemen, the exact point, where 
Propkofski maintained that the 
mass-influx lines of the Earth’s 
field intersected. This is the very 
hub, provided that Propkofski was 
right,” and he pointed to the brick. 
“Yet I believe that Propkofski said 
something about a mountain hindering his observations.” 
“Yes?” said the general, “We removed the mountain.” 
“My!” said the old physicist, 
looking up from the brick for the 
first time, “How did you do that? 
With faith?” 
“With a converter,” the general 
said. “But what about that brick? 
How do we move it?” 
“The brick? Oh.” The scientist 
went to the floating piece of golden 
metal, still unmarred by the Hbomb, and examined it carefully. 
When he had finished checking it 
with a good many instruments, 
mechanical and electronic, he said, 
“I wish Newton could see this.” 
The security man’s eyebrows 
went up again, “Newton?” 
The old man smiled at him, “Another physicist,” he said, “Dead.” 
“Oh,” said the security man. 
“Sorry.” 
WALTER S. TEVIS, JR. 
“So/’ said the general, impatiently. “How do we move it?” 
The old man looked at him a 
moment. “I suggest you don’t.” 
“Thank you/’ said the general, 
crisply, “Then how would you say 
it might be moved?” 
The physicist scratched his head, 
“Well,” he said, “I suppose the 
Earth might be pushed away from 
it, since it seems to be a kind of 
Archemides’ fulcrum. A pressure of 
about seventeen trillion tons per 
square centimeter might accomplish that. Of course, moving the 
Earth might alter the length of the 
year considerably. And then, again, 
if Propkofski’s principle, which 
states . .” 
“Thank you,” said the general, 
“That will be all.” 
After the security men had taken 
the physicist away for investigation 
the general who had interviewed 
him looked at another general and 
then at the others. He could tell 
they were all having the same wild 
surmise. Finally, he said, “Well, 
why not?” 
“Ah , . said one of the others. 
“The cold war’s been going on 
for fifty years. We may never get a 
chance to try it out.” 
“Ah . well . .” 
One of the other, younger generals could not contain himself and 
abruptly spoke up. “Let’s use it!” 
he said, his voice quivering with 
emotion. 
And all the rest of them began 
to chime in, their eagerness, now 
that one of their number had committed himself, unrepressed. “Let’s 
use it!” they said. “Let’s use the 
R-bomb!” 
F irst a pit was dug — or converted — a mile and a half deep 
and three miles in diameter. This 
was then filled with neo-adamant 
except for a hole in the center four 
by ten inches rectangular, directly 
under the brick. Then the R-bomb 
and its electronic detonator, the 
whole thing about the size and color 
of an avocado, was lowered into 
the hole, and then the neo-adamant 
walls were built up six feet above 
the ground to enclose the brick in 
what amounted to the barrel of a 
monstrous cannon. The states of 
Virginia, West Virginia, Ohio and 
half of Kentucky were then evacuated, and a final check was made 
of the figures. It was determined 
that the kickback from the blast 
would throw the Earth approximately four hundred and ten miles 
out of her orbit, and shorten the 
length of the year to three hundred 
and sixty-three days, a number 
which all of the generals found to 
be eminently satisfactory, in fact, a 
decided improvement. 
The generals decided to use the 
old physicist’s weather station, in 
the Kentucky Reservation, as their 
observation point, its elevation and 
its distance from the brick being 
quite desirable. 
The station was raised on a tripod to a height of one thousand 
feet, and the Army had the whole 
structure properly reinforced and 
shielded. Then the equipment for 
observation, the T. V. monitoring 
screens and the electron telescopes, 
was set up and the generals moved 
in. The old physicist had by this 
time taken a loyalty oath and he 
was allowed to remain in the ob
OPERATION GOLD BRICK 
servarion dome for the event since, 
after all, he worked there. 
At zero hour minus sixty seconds 
the senior general carefully pressed 
a smaU red button and unwittingly echoed the words of a forgotten 
subordinate. “We’ll blast the son of 
a bitch sky high,” he said. Flashbulbs popped. A counter began 
ticking off the seconds, loudly, efficiently. All eyes were on the large 
T. V. screen which showed the 
huge circle of white neo-adamant 
four hundred miles away. The 
T. V. picture was being beamed 
from a monitoring, pilotless aircraft eighty miles above the location of the brick; they would be 
able to see the actual blast before 
the camera was destroyed. The 
physicist busied himself with his 
own instruments, making readings 
of the sun’s position. The seconds 
ticked off. 
At the sixtieth tick the counter 
became silent. There was no sound 
in the little observation tower. The 
white circle on the screen was unchanged. Then, suddenly, the 
screen erupted. In a burst of flame 
and steam the neo-adamant circle 
began to crumble. Flames shot up 
everywhere. Mountains seen at the 
edge of the screen began to sizzle 
and ooze out of shape. It was at 
this moment that the states of Virginia, West Virginia and Ohio 
were obliterated. Then, abruptly, 
the picture changed. A specially 
controlled monitoring camera had 
picked up a flash of gold. The brick. 
It appeared to be flying through 
the air. 
“By God,” said the senior general. “We did it!” 
At this moment the screen went 
black. There was a roar, a rumble, 
starting from what seemed to be 
the very bowels of the Earth, building to a dynamic, deep-buried 
scream, a screeching of wrenched 
rock and of the tearing of the 
Earth’s crust; and then a sickening 
lurch, a nauseous dip and lunge of 
sideward motion, a sense of acceleration; and then a howling sound, 
the howling of a sudden, tremendous wind. The generals were all 
thrown to the floor, trembling. 
Somehow the physicist had remained standing, holding the sides 
of the table on which his instruments were mounted. His old hands 
were white with the strain and were 
trembling, but his face was ecstatic. 
“Amazing!” he said, “Amazing!” 
His eyes were shining. 
“What happened?” one of the 
generals said weakly, from the 
floor. 
“Propkofski! Propkofski was 
right!” said the other, his voice 
jubilant, shaking with emotion. 
“That was the intersection of the 
mass-influx lines. The brick, the 
gold brick, was the keystone, the 
hub! Amazing!” 
“But what,” said the General, 
shouting above the roar of the 
wind that was now like a cyclone, 
above the screeching of twisted rock 
and the wrenching of the very 
bowels of the Earth, “What does 
that mean?” 
“It means that Propkofski must 
have been right!” said the other, 
his voice quivering. “The Earth, it 
seems, is falling into the sun!” 
END 
What does the latest look at Mars tell us? What has 
been determined about its strange canals, its oxygen, 
its vegetation, its minerals? Here is a fascinating report 
by one of the world’s foremost astronomers . 
THE 
FACE OF MARS 
BY DR. ROBERT S. RICHARDSON 
of Mt. Wilson and Palomar Observatories 
O N SEPTEMBER 7, 1956, Mars came within 35,131,000 
miles of the earth, the closest approach since 1924, and the 
closest the planet will come again till 1971. Before last September 
people were asking me, “Well, Bob, what do you expect to find 
out about Mars this time?” Now they want to know, “What did 
you find out about Mars?” As I write this at the end of 1956 it 
is still hard to answer that question. You can get enough plates 
in a single night working at the telescope to keep you busy measuring in your office for months. But some of the main results can 
be told now as well as later. 
Planning a Program for Mars 
People have the impression that 
when one of these close approaches 
occurs, astronomers drop all their 
other work to concentrate on Mars. 
On the contrary only a few astronomers who specialize in planetary 
work are affected. The others go 
ahead observing variable stars and 
nebulae the same as usual. At a 
large observatory there will be perhaps twenty astronomers who want 
to use the telescopes. This means 
that you cannot observe Mars 
whenever you like. A program is 
made out about a month in advance assigning certain astronomers 
to the telescopes on certain nights. 
Let us say you get one of the telescopes for five nights at the beginning of the month and five nights 
at the end. So on the first of the 
month you leave your office in the 
city and go to the observatory on 
the mountain eager to get some 
epoch-making observations of Mars. 
But all five nights turn out to be 
cloudy so that you never even catch 
a glimpse of Mars. (By a coincidence the sky clears up beautifully 
the day you retxum to town) . Your 
five nights at the end of the month 
now become doubly precious. But 
again you may be stopped by clouds 
or the air may be so disturbed that 
the image of Mars formed by the 
telescope is nothing but a blur of 
light. Mars is only near the earth 
for about three months. Thus it is 
easy to see that the planet may pass 
you by without your getting a single 
observation of any particular value. 
There is so much you would like 
to do that planning a program be
34 
comes largely a matter of elimination. The question is, ‘What can 
you do with the instruments available in the limited time at your 
disposal?’ After pondering the possibilities I finally decided to try for 
the following observations: 
1. Large scale spectra of Mars. 
2. Direct photographs (snapshots) in light of different colors on 
high contrast plates. 
3. Photographs of the star field 
around Mars for positions of the 
two satellites, as well as a possible 
third satellite. 
4. Visual observations. 
It would seem that such an exceptionally close approach of Mars 
would be an ideal time for studying 
the canals. But the visibility of the 
canals depends upon other factors 
besides distance. The season on 
Mars has to be right. Experienced 
observers agree that the canals first 
appear satisfactorily when the date 
in the southern hemisphere of the 
planet corresponds to about April 1 
in the United States, and by the 
middle of June little is left of them. 
In 1956 south Martian April 1 
came on our May 23, when the 
planet was still 82 million miles 
away. And in September when 
Mars was closest the Martian date 
was about June 10. Hence, the summer of 1956 was not such a favorable opportunity for studying the 
canals as might be supposed. 
My first observations of Mars 
were taken on the morning of June 
3 when Mars was distant 75 million 
miles, so far away that my photographs were taken for test purposes 
more than anything else. The atmosphere was exceptionally steady 
DR. ROBERT S. RICHARDSON 
so that the south polar cap stood 
out with remarkable clarity. Presently I noticed something peculiar 
in the appearance of the disk. The 
bright red regions (“deserts”) were 
covered with innumerable irregular 
blue lines like veins extending 
through some mineral. Several minutes must have passed before it occurred to me these must be canals! 
I was taken completely by surprise 
as I had no thought of seeing canals 
at 75 million miles. The blue veins 
bore no resemblance to the fine 
straight lines as canals are usually 
depicted on drawings. Their color 
also was disconcerting. Martian observers, such as Schiaparelli, Lowell 
and W.H. Pickering, apparently 
never saw much color in the canals, 
but described them merely as dark 
or gray. But these lines appeared to 
me as distinctly blue, the same color 
as the large dark regions or maria 
(“seas,” as they were once thought 
to be) . 
This was exactly the opportunity 
T had been hoping for: a shot at 
Mars when the whole canal pattern 
was visible. But I hardly expected 
to have it happen on my very first 
night. I now got busy trying to get 
some photographs. A few images 
that showed the canals clearly 
might settle the controversy that 
had been raging ever since they 
were discovered in 1877. 
It would make a nice story to 
relate that I got some wonderful 
photographs that finally solved the 
mystery of the canals. Although 
some of my plates turned out pretty 
well the images of the planet about 
one-tenth of an inch in diameter 
were too small to show the fine 
THE FACE OF AAARS 
markings that were easily visible to 
the eye under high magnification. 
The blue lines made such a 
powerful impression on me that I 
wrote to some other observers describing what I had seen, and urging them to start work now while 
the canals were out. They answered, expressing polite interest in 
my canal observation, but I doubt 
if any were stirred to activity. They 
probably thought I was crazy, just 
as I would have thought, if one of 
them had written me a similar letter. 
I never saw the canals again as I 
saw them on that morning in June. 
By the time Mars was close in 
September a dust storm developed 
on the planet rendering its atmosphere so hazy it was hard to see 
some of the large-scale maria. On 
a night in October at the 100-inch, 
however, I did see distinctly the far 
southern canals Simois and Thermadon, I suspected others but I 
was able to hold these with my eye 
for a second or two. 
My most interesting photographs 
of Mars were probably those taken 
in orange light on August 10, when 
Mars was 39,800,000 miles away. 
The best images show the canals 
Gehon, Hiddekel, Cantabras, Aga-thadaemon, Ganges, Nectar, Nilokeras, Draco, and Jamuna, They 
appear on the negatives as light 
wispy streaks. From inspection of 
these photographs and my admittedly casual visual observations 
made hurriedly between exposures, 
I am convinced of the existence of 
streaks on Mars at approximately 
the positions of well-known canals. 
They convey to me the impression 
of being natural surface markings 
of some kind. 
The Rift in the Polar Cap 
I think one of the most impressive sights Mars showed us in 1956 
was the great rift in the south polar 
cap which became so conspicuous 
about the middle of July. One of 
my friends, who is an enthusiastic 
amateur astronomer, had given me 
a glowing account of this great gash 
in the polar cap which he had seen 
through his 8-inch telescope. Later, 
when I looked at Mars through the 
100-inch telescope in the early evening the polar cap presented its 
usual smooth unbroken appearance. I decided there must be something wrong someplace and started 
a long exposure photograph on the 
spectrum of the planet. But when I 
next looked at Mars directly about 
midnight, to my astonishment, 
there was a great gash in the polar 
cap that justified everything my 
friend had said about it. 
Although this rift in the polar 
cap was new to us, a little investigation in the library revealed that 
it has been known for at least a 
century. It appears regularly in the 
south Martian spring about a 
month before the beginning of 
summer. As the snow melts the rift 
lengthens until a portion of the cap 
is completely detached from the 
main snow field. This detached 
part breaks up into several white 
spots, presumably due to snow lingering on elevated ground. These 
white spots are the famous ‘‘Mountains of Mitchel,” the only markings on Mars that rate the name of 
mountains. They were so named 
by the English observer, N.E. 
Green in 1879, in honor of Major 
General Ormsby Mac Knight 
Mitchel of the U.S. Army, who 
published the first accurate description of them in 1845. It is 
possible, however, that they may 
have been seen as early as 1798 by 
Schroeter in Germany. 
The startling change in the visibility of the rift suggests it may 
consist of a long cliff running approximately east and west, and 
facing north. When Mars is turned 
so that we look along the cliff 
edgewise, it appears as a line too 
narrow to be readily visible. But 
about six hours later after Mars 
has made a quarter turn the cliff 
is facing us. It is now a conspicuous 
object since we are looking at it 
broadside. 
Photographs of the Satellites 
Information on the internal 
structure of Mars is greatly desired 
in the study of the evolution of the 
solar system. For example, does 
Mars have a dense central core like 
the earth? Or is it nearly uniform 
in composition throughout like the 
moon? Now we can get a clue as to 
the internal structure of Mars if 
we can determine its oblateness; 
that is, the amount it is bulged at 
the equator and flattened at the 
poles. But such measures are extremely hard to make no matter 
how you go about it. The colors 
vary so much over the surface that 
often images on a photograph have 
a misshapen appearance like a 
Japanese lantern. Strangely enough 
there is a method of determining 
the shape of Mars which has noth
DR. ROBERT S. RICHARDSON 
ing to do with the color of its surface, and errors arising from other 
effects. The planet’s equatorial 
bulge disturbs the motion of the 
satellites. Hence, if we have observations of the positions of the satellites over many years so that the 
disturbances in their motion can be 
determined very accurately, we can 
obtain valuable information on 
how Mars is constructed deep inside. I hope that measures of the 
positions of Phobos and Deimos on 
my plates will have some small 
share in the solution of this problem. 
While photographing the two 
known satellites there is always a 
chance of picking up a third. A 
satellite appears on the short exposure photographs as a tiny dot no 
different from a star image. But if 
comparison with another plate 
shows that some “star” has moved, 
and if a third plate shows continued motion, then you may have 
a satellite. You still cannot be sure 
for your moving object may only 
be an asteroid that happened to be 
near Mars. More observations 
would soon settle the matter, for a 
satellite of necessity would move 
essentially the same as Mars, while 
an asteroid would soon move off 
in an independent orbit of its own. 
Unfortunately a rather hurried examination of the plates failed to 
disclose any suspicious moving objects. 
The Atmosphere of Mars 
We know from direct observations of clouds and mist that Mars 
has an atmosphere of some kind. 
But does it contain oxygen, the 
THE FACE OF MARS 
element necessary for life as we 
know it? So far most of our knowledge of the atmosphere of Mars is 
negative in character. The only gas 
so far identified in the Martian atmosphere is carbon dioxide, the gas 
that comes bubbling out of soda 
water. We will have more to say 
about carbon dioxide presently. So 
far our best guess about the Martian atmosphere is that it consists 
mostly of nitrogen and a little 
argon, inert gases that are nonpoisonous but which will not support life. 
It would seem that this is a problem that could be settled with an 
instrument called the spectroscope. 
Does the spectrum of Mars show 
absorption lines due to molecules of 
oxygen (O2) ? 
Here we had better take time out 
briefly to explain what is meant by 
such terms as “spectrum” and “absorption lines”. Otherwise the 
reader is likely to be in the same 
befuddled state of mind as the actors in a motion picture for which 
I once served as technical advisor. 
The picture was about the astronomers in a large observatory. To 
give it the proper scientific flavor 
the script contained several lines 
about a “Cassegrain spectrograph”, 
an optical device attached to a certain part of the telescope. None of 
the actors had the remotest idea 
what a Cassegrain spectrograph 
might be. They went through their 
parts blithely tossing off lines to 
one another. “Well, Billingsley, how 
did you fare with the Cassegrain 
spectrograph last night?” or “Dr. 
Humphrey, will you check the Cassegrain spectrograph, please?”. 
Finally one of the actors asked me, 
“What the devil is a Cassegrain 
spectrograph anyhow?” 
I explained to him how this 
instrument is built, and how it produces the spectrum of an absorption line: 
Everyone must be familiar with 
Newton’s discovery that when light 
is passed through a triangular 
shaped piece of glass or prism it is 
spread out into a rainbow colored 
band, which is red at one end 
violet at the other. The spectrum 
also continues out into the infra-red 
and the ultra-violet, but light of 
this wave-length does not excite 
the sensation of vision in our eyes 
so we say it is invisible. But these 
regions can easily be photographed 
or detected by other means. A rainbow colored band or spectrum can 
also be produced by what is called 
a grating, consisting of a bright reflecting metal film on which has 
been ruled thousands of fine 
grooves. In fact, the grating has 
practically superseded the prism. 
The prism (or grating) is the essential part of a spectroscope. Other 
optical parts are needed to produce 
a “pure” spectrum. But the final 
result is a colored band which is a 
beautiful sight viewed on a piece of 
ground glass. If the spectroscope is 
equipped with a camera, and a sensitive plate is inserted at the position of the ground glass, the spectrum can be photographed and 
your instrument becomes a spectrograph. 
If you examine the spectrum of 
a body such as the sun you will find 
that it is crossed by many fine dark 
lines, like pencil lines drawn across 
a colored strip of ribbon. These 
lines mark places where light is 
lacking in the spectrum. They look 
dark because there isn’t so much 
light there. Why? Because it has 
been absorbed. The light from the 
intensely hot surface of the sun has 
to pass through the “cooler” solar 
atmosphere consisting of vapors of 
metals and hydrogen. The atoms of 
these elements absorb some of the 
sunlight. They absorb it in a very 
particular way, from certain colors 
only. For example, sodium absorbs 
light strongly at two places in the 
yellow part of the spectrum. With a 
little experience you can recognize 
the two dark lines of sodium in the 
yellow at a glance. Iron produces 
more than 3000 lines through the 
spectrum, from the ultra-violet to 
ths infra-red. 
A word of warning: 
All the lines you see in the solar 
spectrum are not produced in the 
sun. Some of them are produced 
in our own atmosphere. Thus oxygen molecules absorb sunlight 
powerfully in the red and near 
infra-red regions of the spectrum. 
Now a planet such as Mars or 
Venus slunes simply by reflected 
sunlight. Hence, the spectrum of 
these planets is the same as that of 
the sun PLUS absorption lines due 
to any gases that may be in their 
atmospheres. 
The Search for Oxygen 
in Mars' Atmosphere 
Does the spectrum of Mars show 
lines of oxygen? 
It certainly does. You will find 
a whole series or “band” of lines 
in the spectrum of Mars due to oxy
DR. ROBERT S. RICHARDSON 
gen molecules. The trouble is these 
oxygen lines originate — not in the 
atmosphere of Mars — ^but in the 
atmosphere of the earth. Light 
from the sun strikes Mars, where 
some of it penetrates the atmosphere and is reflected back into 
space. Light reflected from Mars 
in the direction of the earth penetrates our atmosphere down into 
an astronomer’s telescope, where 
its spectrum is photographed at 
the end. Now we know that the 
oxygen in our atmosphere produced their characteristic dark lines 
in the spectrum. The big question 
is: did the Martian atmosphere 
also contribute to the absorption 
in these lines? But how are we going to find out when they are all 
covered up by the powerful lines 
of our own atmosphere? 
The most sensitive method devised at present depends upon what 
is known as the Doppler effect, the 
slight change in position of spectrum lines due to the velocity of the 
light source toward or away from 
the observer. When Mars is approaching the earth, any lines 
originating in its spectrum will be 
slightly shifted toward the violet 
relative to the same lines originating in the atmosphere of the earth. 
If Mars is receding the shift is to 
the red. The higher the velocity the 
more the lines are shifted. 
Unfortunately Mars never attains a velocity high enough to shift 
a line in its spectrum entirely clear 
of our atmospheric oxygen lines 
where we can get a good look at 
them. But the shift may be enough 
to alter the appearance of the line 
slightly. A search for such small 
THE FACE OF MARS 
displacements was made at Mount 
Wilson in 1933 using an oxygen 
band in the red. The two astronomers who worked on this project 
were unable to find the least evidence for any displacements in the 
oxygen, and concluded that the 
amount of O 2 in the Martian atmosphere was less than 1 per cent 
of that in ours. (It is chiefly this 
piece of research that forces all 
expeditions to Mars to take along 
plenty of oxygen and breathing 
equipment for use after landing). 
There are oxygen lines in the 
infra-red region of the spectrum 
that furnish a more sensitive test 
for the gas than those in the red. 
The infra-red oxygen lines could 
not be photographed in 1933 but 
they are easily accessible now. Preliminary measures on my plates of 
these infra-red oxygen lines are not 
very encouraging. Our atmosphere 
absorbs so powerfully that it is 
doubtful if any possible weak Martian lines can be detected. If there 
were 5 per cent as much oxygen in 
the Martian atmosphere as ours it 
could hardly escape us. But if it 
is less than 1 per cent the method 
of velocity displacements is just not 
good enough. 
It would seem to me that we 
should try some entirely different 
technique. The rocket might be a 
hopeful research tool here. Above 
an altitude of about 65 miles the 
molecules of oxygen which produce 
the bands in the red and infra-red, 
are broken up into atoms of oxygen. 
These atoms of oxygen do not produce absorption lines in our atmosphere. Now suppose we could 
get spectra of the moon and Mars 
above 65 miles. (We use the airless moon as a control body here) . 
The spectrum of Mars shows the 
red oxygen bands faintly. The spectrum of the moon does not. Then 
we would have proof of the presence of oxygen in the atmosphere 
of Mars. I understand that some 
such project is being considered, 
starting with a skyhook balloon, 
and working up, as it were. 
Carbon Dioxide in the 
Atmosphere of Mars 
In 1932 a band of unknown origin was discovered in the spectrum 
of Venus just beyond the region in 
the red where the eye ceases to be 
sensitive to light. Laboratory research revealed the band was due 
to carbon dioxide. This band is an 
“over-tone’’ of a much more powerful band of carbon dioxide in the 
far infra-red. The fact that this 
near infra-red band shows distinctly in the spectrum of Venus means 
there must be a lot of carbon dioxide gas in that planet’s atmosphere. 
There is not enough carbon dioxide 
in our atmosphere to show this 
“Venusian” band at all. 
A few years ago the existence of 
carbon dioxide was discovered on 
Mars by the identification of some 
bands of this gas in the far infrared spectrum of the planet. Its concentration is estimated as 50 times 
as much as in our atmosphere. Is 
there enough to show the “Venusian” carbon dioxide band? It 
seemed like a fairly hopeful possibility. Worth looking for good 
and hard, at any rate. 
Spectra of Mars taken in July 
failed to show the band. I tried 
again in August using higher contrast plates. The technique was improved by exposing on the edge of 
the planet, where the light from 
the surface had to pass through a 
maximum thickness of Martian atmosphere. For this purpose the 
south polar cap was selected. These 
plates also failed to show a trace of 
the band. Two more plates were 
taken in October on the chance that 
the amount of carbon dioxide in 
the atmosphere of Mars might be 
variable, but without result. 
The Color of the 
Dark Markings 
The dark markings or maria are 
of great interest since it is possible 
that they consist of vegetation. If 
so the maria are the only evidence 
we have for life beyond the earth. 
Their color is usually described as 
blue-green or gray-green in textbooks. Most olwervations of Mars 
have been made with a lens or refracting type of telescope, with the 
lens corrected so that the yellowgreen light to which the eye is most 
sensitive is brought to a focus. In a 
mirror or reflecting type of telescope all colors are brought to a 
common focus. A reflector would 
therefore seem to be the more trustworthy when it comes to detecting 
differences in tint. In my observations of Mars made with the 60inch and 100-inch reflectors on 
Mount Wilson, from June 3 t6 
September 1 1 the maria always appeared to me as slate blue. This 
color was confirmed by others who 
happened to be present. But when 
I viewed Mars the next time on 
October 1 1 the blue tint was gone. 
v^DR. ROBERT S. RICHARDSON 
The maria looked light green or 
gray-green. Last night (December 
14) I was fortunate in getting another look at Mars through the 100inch under fairly good observing 
conditions. The maria had a kind of 
dirty ^ay-green appearance with 
no distinct color at all. The season 
in the southern hemisphere of Mars 
now corresponds to about August 
10 in the United States. The 
change in color is probably a seasonal effect. 
Summary 
What do all these observations 
mean? What do we know about 
Mars that we didn’t know before? 
I feel that the most important 
observation I was able to make was 
the one on the Venusian carbon 
dioxide band. The fact that this 
band does not appear in the spectrum of Mars can be used to set a 
limit to the concentration of carbon 
dioxide in the planet’s atmosphere. 
It is hard to fix this limit at present. 
This is a job for the laboratory. It 
may sound presumptions to talk 
about something you didn’t find as 
being important. But it gives us a 
definite bit of information that I 
think is worth knowing. 
From my preliminary measures 
on the red oxygen bands I feel that 
the method of velocity shifts suggested by Lowell some fifty years 
ago is not going to tell us much 
about oxygen in the Martian atmosphere. The amount present is too 
slight to be observable by this technique. Rocket spectra of the moon 
and Mars above 65 miles seem 
more hopeful. 
The distinctly blue tint of the 
THE FACE OF MARS 
maria in the Martian spring is of 
interest in connection with the possibility of plant life on Mars. It has 
been generally assumed that the 
maria consist of growing vegetation. (A rival hypothesis is that 
they are dark due to green minerals 
deposited by the wind from volcanic action). Against the vegetation 
hypothesis is the fact that the maria 
do not reflect light as our green 
plants do. The chlorophyll in green 
plants reflect near infra-red light 
powerfully. That is the reason why 
vegetation photographed in the infra-red comes out badly over-exposed so that it looks white when 
printed. But the maria reflect light 
about the same in all colors, like 
the dry mosses and lichens. From 
a recent investigation of vegetation 
growing under Mars-like conditions 
near the Arctic circle, Russian 
scientists have found them to be 
abnormally blue in color. Thus the 
whole question of plant life on 
Mars is still wide open, with much 
more experimental work to be done 
before we can make a positive statement one way of the other. 
Finally, whether anybody else believes it or not, I am convinced of 
the existence of streaks on Mars at 
approximately the positions of wellknown canals. These streaks look as 
if they were narrow extensions of 
the maria into the desert regions. 
They impress me as being some 
natural surface feature. What they 
are I wouldn’t even dare to guess, 
as of now, but Mars will come near 
enough to be studied again and 
again, and our instruments and 
techniques will grow more refined. 
Someday we will know. END 
When even the Fight Commission is in on the plot, 
and everyone knows that the is on, when no one will 
help him, what can a man do — except help himself? 
C HARLIE JINGLE walked into 
the long room with the long 
table and long Commissioners’ 
faces in it. He went to a chair at 
the head of the table, and sat 
down, a small man in loose, seedy 
clothing looking rather lost in a 
high-backed chair with a regal 
crest carved in the wood. 
“You,” asked one of the Commissioners, “are Charles Jingle?” 
Charlie nodded his head, a small 
nod from a small man sitting in a 
big man’s chair. 
“You are aware of course . 
began the Commissioner, but Charlie Jingle waved his fingers and 
cut him off. 
“Sure, sure, let’s can the bunko 
and get down to cases.” 
“You have been summoned 
here . began the same Commissioner, and Charlie Jingle 
waved his fingers again. 
“But I ain’t gonna anyway,” 
said Charlie Jingle. The Commissioners stirred, cleared their throats, 
slid their bottoms with unease on 
their chairs. 
“You understand,” said the 
Commissioner, “that your license 
may be revoked if you insist on being uncooperative?” 
“Sure,” said Charlie Jingle. “I 
understand.” 
A bulky man, who had been 
standing at a window with his back 
to the seated members of the Commission while they talked with 
Charlie, turned to face them. A 
man with a heavy, grey face that 
had no humor in it. Charlie Jingle 
watched him slowly cross to the 
table and recognized him as Commissioner Jergen, head of the Fight 
Commission. 
“Jingle,” said the man in a dry 
voice, “I’m going to make an ex
the jungle 
BY ALDO GIUNTA 
ample of you if you don’t come 
across. I’m going to smear your 
name from coast to coast. I’m going to blackball you so hard you 
won’t get a job anyplace, at anything! Get the message?” 
Charlie Jingle got up from his 
chair and walked to the door. 
‘This the way out?” he asked. 
“Hold on!” roared Commissioner 
Jergen, and Charlie Jingle stopped 
with his hand on the knob, looking 
back with polite inquisitiveness at 
him. 
“You goddam people think you 
can pull quick deals on the Public 
and on the Fight Commission. I’m 
here to prove you can’t!” 
Charlie Jingle laughed. 
“You’re here to make a big noise, 
and scare all the scrawny citizens 
into a confession, Jergen. Don’t kid 
me!” 
“I suppose you’ve got too many 
contacts to be frightened?” 
“Contacts? No, I don’t have a 
single damn contact. All I got is 
my two hands, and you already told 
me I ain’t gonna be able to make 
a livin’ with them, so why should 
I stick around here anymore?” 
Commissioner Jergen pulled a 
chair forward. 
“Siddown, Charlie. Let’s talk like 
reasonable men,” he said. Charlie 
Jingle searched his face for a lie 
or a trick. Finding none, he went 
back to the table and sat down. 
The Commissioner waited a moment, and then said earnestly: 
“Listen, Jingle. Seventy years ago 
this country outlawed prize-fighting. It was barbarous, they said. 
Men shouldn’t fight men. Men 
shouldn’t capitalize on other men 
as if they were animals. Okay. 
They changed it. Now we got the 
Pug-Factories. But we also have the 
same thing that went on before. 
We have the grifters and the shysters and the fixers operating at full 
tift all over the place. There’s a 
few honest guys in the game. I 
hear you’re one of them. All we 
want is to nail the crooks! We want 
to bust the Fix Syndicate wide 
open, get me? Now, if you love the 
game the way I hear you do — 
not for the money, but for the 
smell and the excitement — ^why 
won’t you help us bust them wide?” 
Charlie Jingle shook his head. 
“You got it wrong, Jergen. I 
know about the fixers. But I never 
consorted with them. If I did, I 
could’ve retired a rich man a long 
time ago.” 
“Then how about that Saturday 
night fiasco at the Golum Auditorium? You call that a straight 
fight?’’ 
Charlie Jingle shrugged his 
shoulders. 
“All I know is I sent my boy in 
there. He’s a Tank, okay. He’s up 
against the newest fighting machine 
invented. Okay. He drops him. 
I’m as much surprised as you. All 
the odds read against me. I got a 
rebuilt Tank in the ring. But he 
flattens one of the flashiest pugs in 
the business. Sure, I admit, it looks 
suspicious. Fifteen minutes after 
the upset, one of the biggest fixers 
in the game walks into my boy’s 
dressing-room . But don’t forget, 
I’m the best trainer in the business. 
I take a chunk of worn out fighting machine and make it over into 
something that buys me bread and 
ALDO GIUNTA 
coffee. Sd maybe I create a freak. 
How do I know? Maybe I twisted 
a wire wrong, and my Tank’s the 
toughest thing punching.” 
“You’re trying to tell me that 
fight was on the level, is that it?” 
“So far as I’m concerned, it’s 
level. So far as you’re concerned . Charlie Jingle 
shrugged. 
“How is it you happened to have 
your boy handy when the other 
fighter couldn’t go on?” asked the 
Commissioner. 
“I got my stable a block away 
from the arena. When I heard 
about Kid Congo getting smashed 
up in a auto accident, I called the 
arena. Before the fight, I had 
twelve cents in my pocket, a dime 
of which I used to call the arena. 
They told me ‘Sure, bring him 
down quick, Charlie’. So there I 
was . .” 
“So they put your Tank in 
against the Contender. Just like 
that?” 
Jingle snapped his fingers. 
“Like that.” 
“And Harry Belok had nothing 
to do with the upset?” 
“Ask Harry Belok.” 
“Why did he come to see you 
when the fight was over?” 
Charlie Jingle laughed. 
“He come to pay me off . .” 
The Commissioner looked at a 
sheet of paper on the table in front 
of him. 
“Nineteen thousand seven hundred and thirty two dollars worth 
of pay-off?” 
Charlie Jingle nodded. 
“And thirteen cents. You got the 
thirteen cents down?” 
“I’ve got the thirteen cents 
down. But how come he pays off 
so much money to somebody’s 
completely broke, Charlie-boy?” 
“Easy,” said Charlie Jingle. “The 
Tank’s end of the purse is four 
hundred bucks, win or lose. Before 
the fight, I bet the Tank’s end 
against Harry, at house odds. You 
figure it up, and see if it don’t 
figure out to the penny.” 
Charlie watched one of the Commissioners scribble quick numbers 
on a piece of blank paper. In a 
moment the man looked up, and 
handed the sheet across to Commissioner Jergen. Jergen looked at 
it quickly and grunted. 
“Okay?” asked Charlie Jingle. 
“Okay,” growled Jergen. 
“When we fight the Champ, I’ll 
send a couple tickets around free. 
See ya’ . .” Charlie Jingle went 
out. 
C HARLIE JINGLE came out 
of the underground tubes and 
walked down a block of chipped 
brick and colored plastic buildings, 
past picket fences and an empty 
street. He looked at the street, the 
pavement — dark, quiet, uncluttered by garbage, devoid of kids. 
On the roofs of the buildings 
was a jungle of neatly bent, squarely twisted, staunchly mounted aerials. The kids were under them, behind the picket fences, watching 
five-foot-square screens that flashed 
stories and news and the life 
histories of ring heroes like himself. A nice, clean-cut, handsome 
actor would act the part of 
Charlie Jingle, his fights, loves 
JINGLE IN THE JUNGLE 
and disappointments, all ending 
up in one glorious, stirring message. 
Charlie Jingle made it. From rags 
to riches in a single swipe ... So 
can you. 
He stopped in front of Hannigan’s Gym, looked up and down the 
street, and cautiously spat into the 
gutter. Then he went past the 
swinging doors into the building’s 
interior. 
Inside the door, he breathed 
deep the stale smell of oil and 
leather that permeated the atmosphere. Opening his eyes, he looked 
into the flat, grinning face of Emil 
McPhay. McPhay had been chalking schedules on a blackboard when 
he spotted the rapt expression of 
Charlie Jingle’s face. 
“As I live and panhandle!” exclaimed McPhay, his eyes rolling in 
their fat sockets. 
“Anybody to see me, Emil?” 
“Well you know as well as me 
somebody is, Charlie. The lovin’ 
picture-makin’ people ’re here. Got 
a whole staff wit ’em.” He leaned 
close, rolling his eyes shyly. “You 
gonna give ’em the story of yer 
bloody life, Charlie?” 
Charlie strode toward his shop 
at the back of the gym. 
“Not unless they make me lead 
man. And you the leading lady!” 
He went past a row of smokedglass doors to the last one with 
C. JINGLE, TRAINER printed on 
it, opened it, and went in. As Emil 
McPhay had said, the room was 
mobbed with smoking, suntanned 
Californians. An elegant-looking 
man rushed forward and jerked 
his hand up and down. 
“Glad . • • so glad . Pictures 
. Hope . Contract ... Of 
course. Your boy . Mister Jingle 
. Famous . .” 
Nobody had called Charlie 
Jingle mister for ten years. In one 
night, he’d graduated from flop to 
mister. He rubbed his fingers together, feeling the sweat on them. 
His eyes took in the walls painted 
their flat, drying green, the racks 
of tools on them, the pictures of 
great fighting machines all over 
them, the electrical diagrams, the 
Reflex-Analyses Patterns mapped 
out next to each one. Then he 
lowered his eyes to take in the grinning, smooth-faced men around 
him, doing nervous things with 
their faces and hands. He looked 
at the man in front of him, his 
mouth flapping open and closed, 
contorting this way and that, and 
suddenly Charlie shut his eyes 
tight, drew in a blast of air, 
screwed his mouth open, and yelled 
“Shaddap!” good and loud. 
There was stunned silence. 
Charlie looked around at them, at 
their poised, waiting faces. 
“Scram!” he yelled, and jerked 
his finger to the door. 
Slowly, the suntanned Californians drifted out of the room, 
watching him closely lest he maul 
them or loose another violation 
of the success story at them. One 
man broke the spell. 
“Of course. Mister Jingle, one’s 
life history is certainly something 
to be treasured. Not to be treated 
lightly. But I assure you we — ^my 
company, that is — ^we will make 
certain that we adhere to the facts, 
in our fashion. There will be no 
unnec — 
ALDO 6IUNTA 
Charlie Jingle grabbed the man’s 
jacket-front with his left hand, his 
trouser-seat with the other, and, 
taking advantage of the man’s total 
unpreparedness, threw him bodily 
out of the room, in the same 
motion kicking the door shut so 
hard, the glass cracked and a piece 
jumped out of the upper left hand 
comer. 
Then Charlie Jingle stormed into his shop, where Tanker Bell 
awaited him. 
When Tanker saw Charlie come 
into the room fuming mad, he shut 
off the reflex-machine and turned 
to watch him. Charlie Jingle paced 
back and forth in the room, in the 
small space between work-bench 
and wdl. Suddenly he stopped, 
spun savagely to face Tanker. 
“Well? What the hell you lookin’ 
at?” 
Tanker Bell grinned. “You, 
Charlie. I like to watch you when 
you’re mad.” 
“You do, eh?” 
Tanker watched the rage build 
up to a good healthy flush on 
Charlie’s skin. 
“Jeez,” Tanker jibed, “you look 
as red as those beets they sell over 
in the Old-Methods Market.” 
“Listen you! Just because you 
dropped that flashy character last 
night. Don’t let it go to your head! 
You get me sore, by God, I’ll have 
you piled up in the yard along with 
yesterday’s rusty pugs!” 
Tanker laughed. 
Charlie Jingle glared at the 
Tanker a moment, drew a deep 
breath, snorted it out, and paced 
JINGLE IN THE JUNGLE 
twice. Then he faced the Tanker 
again. 
“Sorry, kid. They got me goin today. First the fight commission. 
Then these soap-peddlers from 
Hollywood. Sorry I blew off.” 
“How’d it go with the Commission?” 
“Okay, okay, Jergen knows about 
me. He’s just hungry for a bust, 
you know? Wants to nail the 
Fixers.” 
The Tanker took a step toward 
Charlie. 
“The Champ call?” he asked, 
voice trembling. Charlie shook his 
head in the negative. 
“Why don’t you sucker him, 
Charlie? Force his hand!” 
“You want a bout with the 
Champ?” 
“Sure! Don’t you?” 
Charlie sat down on the workbench and pulled the Tanker down 
next to him. 
“Listen, Tank. Last night was a 
freak, you understand? Something 
happened last night, I don’t know 
what. But you ain’t the boy to 
fight the Champ — My God, boy, 
you’re older than me!” 
Tanker Bell looked at Charlie, 
his face puckering like a child’s. 
“No, now wait. Lemme make it 
clear, Tank,” said Charlie Jingle 
softly. You’n me been together fourteen years. We’ve fought in some 
pretty ancient Tank-towns. We’ve 
fought young and old alike, and 
you know as well as me that it was 
always an even toss whether or 
not you would get knocked cold. 
We’re mediocrities. Kid. When I 
bought you, you’d already seen 
your best days. Am I right?” 
Tanker Bell nodded, his head 
down on his chest. 
“Look, Tanker, I ain’t tryin to 
hurt you. I just don’t wanna see 
you get killed!” 
“Well who said anything about 
gettin’ killed, for God’s sake!” 
bawled the Tanker. 
“Look at it this way. You’ve been 
knocked to pieces a dozen times, 
and I’ve gone to work and put you 
back together a dozen times, I’ve 
twisted your wires, re-shaped your 
reflex plan, doubled yom* flexibility 
and your punch-power, co-ordinated and re-co-ordinated you and 
re-analyzed your nervous-pattern 
until I’ve exhausted every possible combination. You’re a fighting machine, and a good one, 
kid. But machines grow old. 
They get outdated, like me. I’m 
a Mechanical Engineer. Okay! 
There’s lots of new stuff I don’t 
know that these college kids know. 
What happens to them? They go 
to work for Pugilists Inc., inventing new machines with new systems. 
They got systems that I never 
dreamed of. Do you know that?” 
“Well what’s that got to do with 
me fightin’ the Champ, for God’s 
sake?” 
“Everything! They put machines 
in the ring now that are worth 
Five Hundred Thousand dollars! 
They’re almost indestructible!” 
“How come that punk I fought 
last night wasn’t so indestructible, 
then? How come about that, 
Charlie?” 
“I dunno, I dunno. Somethin’ 
musta gone wrong. Maybe he 
shorted out.” 
“Or maybe for once you hit the 
right combination, how about that, 
Charlie? Maybe I’m real ripe, now, 
after all these years of tankin’ 
around!” 
“But Tanker! Use your head! 
The Champ’s brand new, spankin’ 
young. He’s the newest-styled fighting machine in existence. What 
chance you think we stand against 
that?” 
“Listen. I fought that bum last 
night with ease, you know that? 
There I was, just glidin’ around 
him, punchin him at will — 
“Maybe it was an accident! Maybe somethin’ went wrong with his 
system last night ...” 
“And maybe I dropped him on 
the square, too . .” 
“OKAY!” shouted Charlie Jingle 
in desperation. “Maybe you did. 
And maybe, if you go in against 
the Champ, maybe he’ll kill you! 
Maybe he’ll smash you so hard I 
won’t be able to put you together 
again. You wanna take that 
chance? Or you wanna settle down 
nice and quiet in some Pug factory, 
supervisin young fighters?” 
“Naw!” yelled the Tanker. “I 
wanna take that chance! I want 
you to get me a fight with the 
Champ!” 
“Are you dumb, or what? Don’t 
you know they never come back?” 
“All I know is this,” began the 
Tanker. “Fourteen years we bin together. Fourteen years you stuck it 
out and starved it out, workin with 
scraps from a junk-heap, with 
stumble-bums like me who’ve seen 
their day. There was times when 
you went hungry because the junkheap needed oil, or wiring, or a 
pattern-analysis, or parts. Now you 
ALDO GIUNTA 
got something! Now you can be 
on top! You know damn well you 
don’t want any part of that Hollywood fiasco. You got a crack at 
big money. You gonna let it go bythe-by because you’re afraid a pile 
of wires might get killed? Naw! 
We fight, and that’s the way it 
stacks!” 
‘‘You mean it, don’t you, 
Tanker?” 
The Tanker said nothing. 
Charlie Jingle slowly rose, tired in 
his bones, tired in his joints. “Okay. 
I’ll arrange it. But don’t blame me 
if—” 
“I won’t.” said Tanker Bell 
tightly, and Charlie went out. In 
the hall, the Hollywood people 
were still waiting for him. Charlie 
shouldered past them with a halfspring to his step. 
H e sat in the waiting-room 
of the offices of Pugilists, Inc., 
on a plush powder-blue lounge 
chair chewing gum languidly. 
From time to time he shot a glance 
at the secretary sitting inside a 
totally enclosed desk, operating a 
Mento-Writer Machine, the electrical contact-buttons fixed to her 
temples. He watched in sleepy 
fascination as, every so often, she 
leaned over and pushed the button 
marked corrector, and there would 
follow an electrical hiss as the tape 
on the machine slid back, eliminating wrongly-formed thoughts. 
Charlie knew that somewhere in 
the room there was machinery 
observing him, measuring his pulse, 
emotional balance, probable intelligence, habits, and massing and 
JINGLE IN THE JUNGLE 
digesting the general information 
so that Pugilists, Inc., would know 
what kind of man they were dealing 
with, and what approach would be 
best. 
Somewhere in this building 
another machine was probably 
purring, feeding information from 
memory-banks, relating all known 
facts and incidents regarding 
Charlie Jingle, his birth, environment, social and political connections, moral status, business 
ethics, and bank account . Not 
that Charlie Jingle was so important to them, this he knew. 
But Pugilists, Inc., kept records 
and histories of every and any 
individual having even the remotest 
connection with the fight game. 
As Charlie Jingle sat there a 
smile twitched across his face. Let 
them figure that out, he thought, 
and then sank into a reverie. Over 
in the other part of the room, 
across the prairie of rug, the secretary Mento wrote efficiently, the 
machine going ZZZ CLK SSHHHH CLK CLK ZZZZ, hypnotic in 
it’s well-oiled quietness. 
“Jmgle?” 
Charlie Jingle looked across the 
room to the secretary. “What?” 
he asked. 
“Would you go in please. Mister 
Jingle?” 
Charlie followed the direction 
of the girl’s gesture to a panel in 
the wall. He got up and started to 
cross suspiciously toward it. As he 
slowed down, nearing it, he looked 
back at her, and she smiled and 
encouraged him on sympathetically 
toward the doorless wall. Just as 
Charlie thought It^d be funny if 
I break my nose on that goddam 
wall . the panel swung in quietly. 
Charlie walked through it into a room. In it there was another 
veldt of rug, at the far end of 
which was a bar, a lounge chair, 
a tremendous sofa, and a low, kneehigh table. The walls were decorated with modem paintings in a 
colorful, tasteful, executive way. 
Standing near the knee-high table 
were three men, one distinguished 
looking, the other two looking as if 
they’d stepped out of a Young 
Collegiate Magazine ad. 
The elegant one crossed to 
Charlie, his face a big, pleasant, 
well-groomed smile, hand extended. 
“Allow me. Mister Jingle. I’m 
Kort Gassel. These two gentlemen 
are Jerome Rupp and Eugene 
White. Would you like a drink. 
Mister Jingle?” 
Charlie Jingle shook their hands 
and sat down, crossing his legs 
comfortably. 
“You got gin, Mister ahhh — 
“Gassel.” said Kort Gassel, and 
crossed the three feet to the bar. 
“Soda?” he asked. 
“Straight.” said Charlie Jingle, 
and watched the other two sit 
down slowly as Gassel came back 
with his drink. 
“That’s quite a drink. I know 
few men who enjoy straight gin. 
Mister Jingle. It always comes as 
a surprise when I — ” 
“You gonna give us the fight. 
Mister Gassel?” interrupted Charlie. 
“The fight? You mean with 
Iron-Man Pugg?” 
“That’s right, with Iron-Man 
Pugg.” 
“Well Mister Jingle. Since you 
put the matter so straightforwardly. 
Pugilists Incorporated only owns a 
small block of stock in Iron-Man 
Pugg, as you know. Mister Rupp 
and Mister White here represent 
the other interests involved. As you 
must know. Pugilists Incorporated 
is a large-scale business, designed 
to function on a large-scale basis. 
Now, we, the stockholders in IronMan Pugg, have thought this thing 
out. We’ve come to the conclusion 
that it would rather — ^well, embarrass the Company to agree to such 
a match as you propose.” 
“So you won’t fight?” 
“No, no, Mister Jingle, don’t 
jump to hasty conclusions. I’m 
trying to explain something to you. 
It’s not simply a matter of matching your — ah — boy against ours. 
But we are concerned with the 
overall effect of such a bout. 
Frankly, our reputation as a manufacturing concern is more important to us than the outcome of any 
single bout — ” 
“Whadda you say you get to 
the point?” 
“Certainly. Tanker Bell, as we 
understand it, has a fighting history of forty-seven years. Now, 
I’m afraid we’d be made a laughing-stock if Tanker Bell were set 
into motion against one of our 
products.” 
“Especially if he won, is that 
it?” 
“Particularly then. But we rest 
secure in the fact that that outcome 
is highly improbable, not to state 
impossible.” 
Charlie Jingle sipped his gin, 
ALDO GIUNTA 
looking from one face to the 
other. 
“So?” he asked, anticipating 
what was about to come. 
“Suppose, Mister Jingle, you 
were offered a price for Tanker 
Bell, price far in excess of his 
actual worth. A price big enough 
to even make it possible for you to 
perhaps buy a second-rate fighter 
in good second-class condition.” 
Charlie Jingle closed his eyes and 
tapped his foot with horny, greasemonkey fingers. In a moment he 
opened them and slowly took in 
the three representatives of the 
champ, Iron-Man Pugg. 
“Lemme get this straight. You 
want me to sell Tanker for much 
more than he’s worth because 
you’d be humiliated at having to 
put one of your products in the 
same ring with him?” 
“Exactly.” said Kort Gassel. 
“But you’re sure your boy’d whip 
him in the ring?” 
“Well obviously we all know the 
knockout victoiy he scored over 
the Contender was an accident.” 
Charlie Jingle nodded. 
all know it. But there’s one 
guy in the world who don’t. You 
know who? Tanker Bell himself.” 
Kort Gassel laughed. 
“A robot. Mister Jingle? Surely 
you must be — ” 
Charlie Jingle shook his head. 
“Can’t do it, boys. I gotta consider the Tanker. You see. Mister 
Gassel, Tanker thinks he could 
take your boy. And not only does 
he wanna take him, but he won’t 
take no for an answer!” 
“Listen, Jingle, is this some kind 
of joke? What are you holding out 
JINGLE IN THE JUNGLE 
for? A price? When I said I’d 
make it worth your — ” 
Charlie Jingle shook his head, 
stubbornly and firmly. 
“No price, Gassel. Just an agreement-contract.” 
“Listen, you fool, don’t you realize what’s at stake here? We’re 
big business! We can’t afford to 
play around with lucky independents like you!” 
“Can’t take any chances, huh?” 
“Exactly that! Can’t, and won’t!” 
“Wanna bet?” 
“If you try to — ” 
Charlie Jingle got up from his 
seat. 
“Gassel . I’ve been in this 
racket so long I’ve got oil in my 
veins instead of blood, and a Reflex-Pattern Analysis for a brain. 
I know every angle there is to 
know. If I want a fight. I’ll get 
one. So don’t go try putting your 
big business pressure on me. I’m 
too old for college-boy antics.” 
Kort Gassel stared at him for 
a long, hostile moment. Then his 
face broke into a smile. 
“My friend, do you know what 
you’re bucking? These are the 
offices of Pugilists Incorporated 
you’re in. Don’t you realize what 
that means?” 
“Sure.” said Charlie Jingle. “It 
means that if Tanker Bell whips 
Iron-Man Pugg, Charlie Jingle 
will one day have as big a factory 
and as many orders for FightingMachines as Pug, Inc. .” 
Charlie Jingle crossed the desert 
of rug toward the exit-panel. 
“See you at Ring-side, Kids.” 
And he went out. 
M escha hannigan, owner 
and proprietor of Hannigan’s 
Jungle, watched from his tier^ 
office as Hammerhead Johnny put 
Tanker Bell through his paces in 
the ring. His eyes travelled from 
the laboring fighters in the ring to 
the crowd of spectators standing 
and sitting around, watching the 
Tank work. He was smooth and 
fast, without a kink, stabbing light 
quick jabs and those murderous 
body-rights that had stopped the 
Contender, breaking, the press had 
said after the fight, the metal ribcage inside the Contender’s body, 
Mischa Hannigan was happy. 
After fifteen years of obscurity, 
his gym was fast-becoming popular 
again. He had begun to charge 
admissions again to fans and promoters who were eager to see the 
Tank at work. Once again during 
the afternoon workouts there was 
the hum and roar of spectators, the 
slap-slur of springing feet on the 
canvas followed by the booming of 
fists echoing from rib-cage and jawbone structure. There was the smell 
of money in his gym now, along 
with the smells of leather and oil. 
The door behind him opened and 
Hannigan turned to Charlie Jingle. 
“ ’Lo, Charlie.” 
** ’Lo, Mish . How’s he look?” 
‘‘Terrific! If I didn’t know him 
for twenty years, I’d swear he was 
brand, spankin new!” 
Charlie Jingle grunted quietly 
and walked to the plate-glass window. He looked down at them there 
in the white-roped square, watched 
the Tanker attack with a quickreflex attack, block a flurry of counter-blows, weave under a right
52 
hand smash to the head, and rock 
Hammerhead Johnny to the ropes 
with a combination of shoulderstraight jabs to the stomach and a 
cross-hand right to the chest. A 
hum of approval and amazement 
went up from the spectators. 
“Charlie!” shrieked Mischa 
Hannigan. “Charlie, did you see 
that? And that Hammerhead 
Johnny is supposed to be the most 
stable Pug in the business. They 
say he’s got magnets in his feet, 
can’t nobody break the contact 
of—” 
“Calm down, calm down, it’s only 
practice.” 
“Practice he calls it! If Hammerhead could bust up the Tank, don’t 
you think he would?” 
“Hammerhead’s an old junkpot, Mich, and you know it!” 
“Old he may be, Charlie, but 
junkpot he’s not. Crafty as a damn 
president of Pugs, Inc., he is, and 
everybody in the business knows it. 
He ranks with the best sparrin’ 
partners in the world, he does.” 
In the ring below something 
happened that drew a roar of uncontrollable excitement from the 
crowd. It was over in a flesh and 
nobody saw quite how it happened. 
Hammerhead Johnny’s body described a rigid, dark arc in the air, 
hovered suspended a second in a 
completely horizontal position, and 
then crashed with a hollow boom 
to the deck. The Hammerhead did 
not move. 
^ “BEGREE!” howled the delighted Mischa Hannigan. “BEGREE, he’s knocked him cold!” 
He began to dance around the 
room in a jig that shook his frame 
ALDO GIUNTA 
with every jolt and pirouette. 
Charlie Jingle laughed. 
“Fll be dammed! The Tank’s 
really got it! He really has got it!” 
‘‘Oh, we’re rich, we’re rich, we’re 
rich!” chanted the hysterical Hannigan, dancing his macabre dance 
of the human puff-ball. There was 
a knock at the door and Hannigan, 
still chanting, danced to the door 
and opened it. The relaxed puffy 
flesh drew tight, his back stiffened. 
Charlie Jingle peered around his 
girth to see who stood there. 
Harry Belok, in a black Homburg and a blue pin-stripe suit, 
stepped smiling into the room, 
twirling an ebony cane. He doffed 
his hat, bowing slightly. Behind 
him a small man slid in next to 
the wall, his whole body screwed up 
tightly into his neck. Hannigan, 
with a pale, sickly smile, shut the 
door, 
“If it ain’t Harry Belok! Hello, 
Harry.” 
Harry Belok, smiling, looked 
straight at Charlie Jingle. “Whadayasay, Hannigan! How’s things, 
Charlie? Long time no see, hah?” 
Charlie Jingle, with a tightness 
in his throat, mirrored the sick 
expression of Mischa Hannigan. He 
smiled a smile so forced his flesh 
stretched like a rubber mask out 
of control. 
“Hello, Harry. What can I do 
for you?” 
“ ’S this way, Charlie-mo. I 
just seen your lx)y work out. I 
just seen him club the Hammerhead to the deck with the weirdest 
combination I ever seen. It’s somethin’ new, he’s got. Somethin’ original! Know what I mean?” Harry 
JINGLE IN THE JUNGLE 
Belok stopped pacing, stopped 
twirling, to look at Charlie Jingle. 
Charlie Jingle waited. 
“Well — I hear around the grapevine that Pugs, Inc., don’t relish 
the thought of givin your boy a 
crack at Iron-Man. Is that true, 
Charlie-mo?” 
Charlie Jingle shrugged. 
“It don’t mean a thing, Harry. 
You know that as well as anybody.” 
“Yeah, Charlie-mo. But you 
know as well as anybody that the 
Fight Commission has got a rules 
book as thick as this room. If 
Pugs, Inc., really wants to, they’ll 
find some kinda statute that disqualifies your boy for the championship. Now, you don’t want that to 
happen, do you?” 
Charlie Jingle began to feel 
the heat flushing up behind his 
eyeballs. “What’s the pitch, 
Harry?” 
“I think maybe what you ought 
to do, Charlie-mo, is lemme b^uy 
a chunk out of your boy. Then I 
guarantee you get the match.” 
“What makes you think I don’t 
get the match anyway, Harry?” 
Harry Belok turned, pointing his 
stick through the glass to the gym. 
“Look down there. You see any 
reporters there? You see any 
cameras shootin’?” 
Charlie Jingle did not move, 
keeping his eyes unblinking on 
Belok. 
“Okay. There’s no reporters. No 
press build-up. Pugs, Inc., has put 
the freeze on. So? What’s the 
point?” 
“The point,” said Harry Belok, 
tapping Charlie Jingle’s chest with 
the white-tipped stick, “the point, 
is that you don’t get no match from 
Iron-Man unless you play ball with 
me!” 
Charlie Jingle squinted at him 
through a cloud of brown-blue 
smoke. “Can’t do it, Harry-mo.” 
he said quietly. 
“You serious?” 
“Dead serious,” said Charlie 
Jingle. 
“You get too serious, that’s the 
way you liable to wind up.” said 
Harry Belok through his teeth. 
He turned and stomped toward the 
door and went out. The little man 
against the wall slid out after him. 
Charlie Jingle walked nonchalantly to the door, hooked his foot 
behind it, and kicked it shut with 
a loud slam. Mischa Hannigan took 
a handkerchief from his pocket, 
wiping his brow. 
“You’ve gone crazy, Charlie. 
You’ve gone stark ravin’ mad!” 
Charlie Jingle whirled. 
“All these years, Mish, I starved 
and sweated in tank-joints. All 
these years I broke my back, and 
nobody lifted a finger except a 
choice one or two. Now I’ve got 
a crack at somethin’ good and 
everybody wants in. Well I don’t 
want them in! I want them to stay 
clear, and lemme go my own way! 
Is that crazy?” 
“But Charlie,” moaned Mischa 
Hannigan. “You can’t go laughin’ 
at the Fixer like that! Don’t you 
have enough worries without gettin’ 
killed?” 
Charlie Jingle looked at him a 
blank moment and then laughed. 
He turned, looking toward the 
ring below. The Tanker was on the 
Gym floor, looking up. He waved. 
Charlie turned to Hannigan. 
“Can you get me the Jawbreaker 
to spar with Tanker, Mish?” 
Hannigan sank slowly into his 
leather chair behind the beat-up, 
rusting metal desk. He rubbed a 
patch of rust with his thumb. 
“Sure. Sure I can get the Jawbreaker. Can you get the match?” 
“You just watch my dust.” said 
Charlie, and went out. 
Mischa Hannigan crinkled his 
nose. He began to feel his asthma 
coming on. 
66 A RE YOU CRAZY, Jingle?” 
roared the apoplectic Commissioner Jergen. “I can’t get myself wrapped up in ring politics! 
I’m a fight commissioner, not a 
goddam promoter!” 
Charlie took a few steps toward 
the Commissioner, leveling a finger 
at him in indictment. 
“Now you lemme tell you somethin’. You run the fight game, but 
the only thing you’re interested in 
is your own goddam reputation. 
The only time you ever get up off 
your fat keister is when somebody 
publicly pulls a quick deal that 
looks phony. Then you roar up 
from die saddle and start screaming ‘foul ’ — only because it makes 
you look bad if you don’t!” 
“I can have you cited for contempt — ” 
“I don’t give one damn in hell 
what you can have me cited for! 
I thought you were one square guy. 
But all you are is a bloody politician like all the others! You’re 
here to make sure the fight racket 
ALDO GIUNTA 
gets a fair-deal. Well I’m getting 
the old freeze-away, and you still 
sit on your keister and don’t do 
a damned thing!” 
“You damn midget!” croaked 
the Commissioner, and Charlie 
Jingle whirled, fists cocked, his face 
working up a nice purple color. 
“What’d you call me. Fatso?” 
“I called you a damn midget, and 
if you don’t like it, I dare you take 
a poke at me!” said the Commissioner, and coming around his desk 
he thrust his jaw out toward 
Charlie Jingle’s cocked fists. 
Jingle drew his fist back and 
stopped. Slowly he dropped the 
cocked hand by his side. 
“Oh, no! Oh, no you don’t! 
You’d just love me to do it, 
wouldn’t you? A half-hour later I’d 
lose my license for conduct unbecoming a fight trainer.” 
The Commissioner straightened 
up slowly, glaring out from under 
thick grey eyebrows at Charlie 
Jingle’s face. 
“You think I’d pull that?^" 
“Goddam right you’d pull it! 
For all I know, you may even be 
working for Pugs, Inc.” 
Fight Commissioner Jergen 
rocked back on his heels as if he 
had just taken a blow between the 
eyes. He sank slowly into his chair, 
staring in stillborn amazement at 
Charlie Jingle. 
“Wait a minute, Charlie. You 
mean to say — Listen, boy, what’s 
happening to you? You know better 
than to say something like that to 
me! 
Charlie Jingle suddenly felt a 
hollowness in his stomach. 
“I’m sorry, Jergen. I don’t know 
JINGLE IN THE JUNGLE 
what’s the matter with me. This 
thing’s got me sore. They got me 
goin’, and there’s nothin I can do 
about it. I called the press. I told 
them that Pugs, Inc. and Tanker 
Bell had come to an agreement. I 
even quoted a fight date. I look 
in the papers the next day. Nothing! They got me sewed up tight. 
I come here as a last resort . 
I’m sorry I shot off my mouth!” 
Charlie Jingle turned and 
started out. 
“Now wait a minute, Charlie 
« . .” Charlie Jingle turned. “You 
see, I know all about these kinds 
of deals in the game. Have known 
about them for years. But they 
keep me shut out because I can’t 
prove anything. If you go to court 
as a witness. Pugs, Inc. will have 
fifteen other witnesses. They’ll even 
have a taped recording of your conversation with them, which they 
juggle and splice to fit their purposes. You’ll hear things coming 
off a tape which you damn well 
know you didn’t say or mean. But 
you’ll have to admit it’s your voice ; 
you were there, the other guys in 
the room were there — and they got 
you nailed. See what I mean? 
They’re big business. They got it 
sewed.” 
“You mean there’s nothing to 
do?” 
“I mean there are ways. All 
you’ve got to do is sneak yourself into the public eye. Once that happens, the public asks questions. 
What happened to Tanker Bell? 
Why isn’t, he fighting the Champ? 
Know what I mean?” 
“Don’t you think they’re askin’ 
questions now?” 
“Sure. But they ain’t doin’ it 
en masse. See?” 
“Yeah,” said Charlie Jingle 
softly. “Yeah. What I gotta do is 
hit Pugs, Inc. where they ain’t got 
control of the situation. Where 
they don’t have their stooges workin’ to keep things quiet.” 
“Now you’ve got it.” said the 
Commissioner, grinning. 
“Okay. See you around.” said 
Charlie, and started out. 
“Take care.” warned the Commissioner. But by that time Charlie 
Jingle was on his way. 
At one o’clock of that afternoon, 
Charlie Jingle boarded a coast-tocoast rocket. Fifty five minutes 
later, at ten fifty-five A.M. West 
Coast Time, Charlie Jingle set foot 
on the pavement of Los Angeles’ 
Municipal Rocket-Port, hopped a 
cab, and got out on the lot of 
Galaxy Films. His business there 
took him two hours and twelve 
minutes, by which time he hopped 
another cab, was bom back to the 
Rocket-Port, and bought a return 
ticket on the eastbound Rocket, 
scheduled for takeoff at five P.M. 
Charlie found a few hours on his 
hands. He chose to divert himself at 
the Jet-Car Races in Culver City. 
He dropped forty dollars on the 
first two races, and had just bought 
another ticket when, as he walked 
away from the betting window, he 
saw a familiar profile marking 
possibilities on a racing sheet with 
a well-chewed pencil. He nudged 
up to Rabbit Markey, and in a 
half-whisper, asked: 
“Got anything hot today, Jack?” 
Rabbit Markey looked up with 
an annoyed frown, blinked, and 
when Charlie Jingle’s face registered, laughed. 
“Lo, Charlie? How’s things out 
on the Coast?” 
“Things,” said Charlie, shaking 
his hand, “are lousy. But they’ll 
get better real fast. How about you. 
Rabbit? Out of the fights for 
good?” 
Rabbit Markey sighed slow and 
long, nodding his head. 
“I dumped my whole stable, 
Charlie, and when I come out 
here, I figured Jet-Car racing was 
a clean way to make a buck. So I 
bought me a Jet outfit. But it’s the 
same tie-up as the fights was.” 
“I can imagine,” said Charlie 
Jingle. 
“No you can’t, neither. For instance, you know who Jet-Cars 
Incorporated happens to be an 
affiliate of?” 
“Wait! Don’t tell me. Lemme 
guess.” Charlie shut his eyes. “Pugs, 
Inc.?” 
“Bingo.” said Rabbit Markey 
dispiritedly. “You know who makes 
the drivers for the Jet-Cars?” 
“Wait! Don’t tell me! . Pugs, 
Inc.?” 
“Bingo.” said Rabbit Markey 
sadly, and Charlie laughed. 
“That’s the way the bugle blows, 
eh. Rabbit?” 
“You know who’s got the Commissioner of Jet-Car Races bought 
out?” went on Rabbit Markey. 
“Wait! Don’t tell — How do you 
know that, Rabbit?” 
“Whatsa difference. I know. 
For sure! I happened to find out. 
Just like the old Fights Racket, 
eh, Charlie?” 
ALDO 6IUNTA 
“Yeah.” said C2iarlie Jingle 
nervously. “Except that nobody’s 
got Jergen bought out.” 
“Hunh?” exclaimed Rabbit Markey. 
“What I said — nobody’s got — ” 
“I heard ya, Charlie. I heard ya 
the first time. You mean you never 
heard about Jergen?” 
“Heard? Heard what?” 
“Boyo boyo boy! Buddy, you 
are in the middle of the neatest 
fix in history. You mean to say 
you don’t know what’s happening?” 
“Fix? What kinda fix, Rabbit? 
. Are you kidding? I can’t even 
get my boy a fight, and you’re 
talking fix!” 
“Aw Boyy! Awww Boyyyy are 
you a dummy! Lissen! Whatta you 
doin out here onna Coast?” 
“Doin? I’m tryin to set it up so 
I can get Tanker a fight, that’s 
what I’m doin!” 
“You worked out a deal with 
some film company, huh?” 
“That’s right. Why?” 
Rabbit Markey shot a glance to 
the right of him and one to the 
left, hunched his shoulders, pulled 
his trousers up, took Charlie by 
the lapel, and drew him close to a 
post. The buzzer sounded outside to 
announce that the race was within 
one minute of starting time. 
“Charlie, you’re about to be 
had. Now you’re playin’ it the way 
you was supposed to in the beginning. You was supposed to play 
ball with the Hollywood boys to 
begin with. Now you done it. Now 
the fix is in!” 
“How the the hell can there be 
a goddam FIX?” screeched Char
J INGLE IN THE JUNGLE 
lie Jingle. “Tanker’s level. Are you 
kiddin?” 
“Sure! Tanker’s level! But how 
about the Contender? How about 
Hammerhead Johnny? How about 
Steamroller Jones?” 
“You’re crazy!” shouted Charlie 
Jingle. “It can’t be! How the hell 
would you know?” 
“You wanna know how I know? 
My daughter Marie — ^you remember her, she was a kid when you 
seen her — ^she’s a secretary to Mike 
Bretz, the East Coast Assistant Vice 
of Pugs, Inc. She’s got the 
whole map out, from the word go. 
Pugs, Inc. is puttin things in your 
way so that everybody thinks you 
got a real thing in the Tank. 
They’re helpin you get a build-up, 
you see, as if they wanted to 
freeze you out. When you finally 
break through the freeze-out one 
way or the other, they’re gonna 
have one hellofa drawing-card! 
Get it now, Charlie?” 
Charlie Jingle walked away from 
Rabbit Markey, went some twenty 
paces, kicked a dent in a refusechute, and walked back. 
“I don’t believe it!” whispered 
Charlie Jingle hoarsely. “I don’t 
believe it!” 
The bugle blew outside. Rabbit 
Markey looked at Charlie, looked 
at his ticket, and started toward 
the race-tracL 
Charlie Jingle caught his arm. 
“Wait a minute. Rabbit.” 
Rabbit Markey shook his head. 
“I already said enough to float 
me in blood, Charlie. Now lemme 
go and watch the bloody no-good 
fixed races.” 
^*No, Rabbit Tell me more. 
Tell me who else is swingin’ this 
deal?” 
“Don’t you know?” 
“Har^ Belok?” 
Rabbit Markey nodded. 
“Jergen?” asked Charlie Jingle 
with bated breath. 
Rabbit Markey nodded his head. 
“How they do it? Tinker with 
the Fighters?” 
“You ever see Hammerhead get 
knocked off his feet?” 
“I don’t get it — they lemme buy 
my own way into the news, is that 
it? I think Fm perfectly legitimate. 
So does everybody else in the 
game. What then?” 
“Then a story breaks someplace 
about the way Pugs, Inc. tried 
not to give you a fight. Everything 
looks like Pugs, Inc. is scared stiff 
of you because you can ruin them. 
Big build-up. Even Jergen goes 
to bat, confesses he tried to help 
you get the fight. Everybody’s sore 
as hell at Pugs, Inc. TTiey force a 
fight, Tanker goes in — and gets 
slaughtered. See?” 
Charlie Jingle felt his guts deflate in a rush. 
“Yeah.” he said, dead-toned. “I 
see.” 
“What you gonna do?” 
“I dunno. I got it set up with 
Galaxy Films to be waitin’ in New 
York Rocket-Port with cameras. 
Couple of friends of mine are gonna 
fake a shootin with me when I 
get there. Guess I’ve got no choice. 
I’ll have to go through with it 
now.” 
“Okay now,” said Rabbit Markey. “Now lemme go and get ulcers 
over the cars.” He gave Charlie 
his hand and they shook slowly. 
“Take care, kid — and thanks.” 
“Nahhh! Forget it! Forget you 
even saw me here! But don’t forget what I told you. Harry Belok’s 
got friends in LA, too. I got racing-ulcers, but I don’t mind bein’ 
alive with them. You get me?” 
Charlie Jingle nodded again, and 
Rabbit Markey walked out into 
the roar of the Jet-Races. Charlie 
Jingle looked down at the ticket 
in his hand, ripped it in two, 
and let the pieces flutter to the 
floor. 
Outside, he hailed a cab. 
To board the Eastbound Rocket 
would have been to play into the 
very hands of his enemies. And he 
needed time to think — to figure 
his way out of the fix that had 
been planned for him. Perhaps by 
avoiding the Rocket trip, he would 
avoid the pre-planned shooting, 
the filming of which was also preset, and so avoid the press, and 
whatever consequent notoriety 
would follow the whole affair at 
the Rocket-Port. 
So he hired a car and started to 
drive East. 
T here arose a great hue 
and cry at the disappearance 
of Charles Jingle, who had been a 
registered, scheduled passenger on 
the Eastbound Rocket. What had 
happened to him? What mystery 
cloaked his disappearance? Galaxy 
Films made it known that Charles 
Jingle suspected an attempt on his 
life. Why? asked a conscientious 
columnist. Who might have reason 
enough to threaten the life of a 
Robot-Trainer? Mischa Hannigan, 
ALDO GIUNTA 
innocently and in a moment of 
anger at what he thought must be 
vengeful murder, stated that attempts had been made to intimidate 
Charles Jingle into selling out 
Tanker Bell. Who had done so? 
Mischa Hannigan would not say, 
though hinting darkly that a ^‘wellknown fixer” was at the bottom of 
it 
The Press probed deeper into the 
mystery. What about Charles 
Jingle’s property. Tanker Bell? Was 
it so valuable that the proprietor 
should be murdered for not parting with it? If it was, why had 
there been no offer of a match 
from the Champion? 
It was then that some bright reporter conceived the idea of questioning the Fight Commission as 
to it’s views on the shamefully 
clandestine affair. What had it 
to say? Nothing, was the reply. The 
bright reporter launched an attack 
on the Commission. The fight 
public wanted to know what the 
Fight Commission thought it’s 
function was, if not to expose 
underground tactics in the game? 
Commissioner Jergen addressed 
the citizenry via television. He admitted that Charles Jingle had been 
to see him. He a^itted he was 
unable to move due to a lack of 
tangible evidence. He would not 
name the parties accused by Charles 
Jingle because there was no real 
evidence at this date. He would 
further investigate the situation, 
using every resource at his command. 
When Charlie Jingle arrived in 
New York two days later the lid 
was off the town. Everyone was 
JINGLE IN THE JUNGLE 
fuming at what had been perpetrated against him. Everyone understood why he had come into town 
imobtrusively. 
What Charlie Jingle had sought 
to avoid had happened anyway. 
The play was in motion. There was 
no stopping it. 
He watched the day-to-day developments in a state of paralyzed 
horror. It was a nightmare in which 
he was the principal, and yet, the 
bystander, the spectator. He had no 
choice but to follow. Rabbit Markey had shown him the truth, so 
that all things now had a double 
meaning, a reality and an unreality, another dimension, another 
depth. 
When the press came to question him, Charlie fought the only 
way he knew. He denounced Pugs, 
Inc. as cheats, liars, and fixers. 
He denounced Commissioner Jergen, Harry Belok, the press, the 
Hollywood people, the prize-fight 
game, and the public in an attempt to break the whole business 
wide open. 
But everyone understood. 
“Mister Jingle is justified in his 
bitterness,” said a reporter. 
“Of course Charlie’s sore. He’s 
got a right to be sore!” said Commissioner Jergen. 
“A horrible injustice. We were 
concerned over our reputation.” 
said Kort Gassel of Pugs, Inc. 
“The guy deserves a break!” said 
the fight public. 
And Hollywood said, “We don’t 
understand what prompted this unwarranted attack.” 
So there it was. Charlie Jingle 
spoke the truth, but nobody he
59 
lieved him. Tanker Bell was 
granted a match. The fix was in. 
As a last resort, Charlie Jingle 
refused to let the Tanker fight. 
An uproar went up from the public. It was a matter of ethics. 
Tanker Bell was now their champion. He was the embodiment of 
everyman against the Organization, 
against injustice. Tanker Bell must 
fight! 
It was then that Charlie Jingle 
understood. This was not simply 
a fight. This was part of a longrange plan to bring the public man 
to heel. This was part of a scheme 
to break the mass-individual spirit, 
because if Everyman stood with 
Tanker Bell as the champion of 
independant justice, and Tanker 
Bell were beaten — so would the 
public-independent spirit be. 
But Charlie Jingle had his hands 
tied. 
O N THE DAY of the fight, 
Charlie Jingle corralled the 
Tanker in the workshop and ordered the amazed Tanker to lie 
down on the work-bench for a 
“tune up”. The Tanker protested. 
“You crazy, Charlie? Whuffor? 
I never felt so good in my life!” 
“Don’t gimme any arguments. 
Tank. Stretch out and shuddup.” 
“But Charlie . .” 
“Stretch out, for God’s sake!” 
“What you gonna do?” 
“Re-vamp you. I’m gonna run 
the tapes on the bout with the Contender, and stuff your memory 
banks with tapes on every fight 
was ever had with a Pugs, Inc. 
product. Then I’m gonna run tapes 
on Hammerhead Johnny. I’m gonna key up your reflex-pattern to 
the point where you’ll be operating 
so fast your joints are liable to 
break down in the ring.” 
Tanker stared at him, openmouthed. “What for? Will you 
please tell me that? What for?"' 
“After I’ve fed you the tapes on 
the Contender and Hammerhead, 
you’ll know, if those goddam memory-computers of yours ain’t so 
rusty they can still work.” 
“You tryin’ to teach me somethin’ I don’t know?” 
“That’s right.” 
“Why can’t you just tell me?” 
“If you figure it out yourself, 
you won’t like it any more than if 
I told you; but you’ll know it the 
hard way.” 
“What a hellofa way to teach 
me somethin! Jazzin me up! My 
coordination is perfect, analysissystem is workin’ like a voodoo 
charm, and you wanna jazz me 
up! It’s like committin’ suicide!” 
Something in the Tanker’s face 
changed, quickly and suddenly, as 
if a diamond-bright idea exploded 
inside his steel-plated head. 
“Charlie?” 
Charlie Jingle looked up from 
his assortment of tools. “WW?” 
“Is this a fix?” 
Charlie Jingle looked at him, 
the flush of anger brightening his 
eyes. “Is that a joke, Tanker?” 
“No, Charlie. A question.” 
“Stretch out.” said Charlie 
Jingle gruffly. 
“Answer me first, Charlie. Is 
it?” 
“Whatta you think?” 
“I dunno.” said the Tanker, 
ALDO GIUNTA 
stretching out slowly. 
“You really wanna win that 
fight, kid?” asked Charlie Jingle, 
sad and tender. 
“You know I do!” 
“Trust me then, hah?” 
The Tanker laughed, stretching 
out on the bench. 
The light glittered cold on the 
smooth worn steel of the tools in 
Charlie Jingle’s hands. 
When the first Mechanical Pugilist was made, the Fight Commission made a number of demands. 
First, through each robot’s sightmechanism, it was established that 
each machine should be equipped 
with cameras by which they would 
record the activity of their opponent in the ring. If a foul was 
committed which had escaped the 
judges, the proof would thereby be 
recorded on the camera-tapes, 
which could easily be confiscated 
by the Fight Commission. 
Secondly, there was a coordination system in each machine which 
could not be slackened without a 
noticeable difference in the conduct of the fighter, thus acting as a 
safeguard against the TrainerOwner’s voluntarily slowing their 
fighters down for illegal purposes. 
However, there were ways to slow 
a pug down. There were circuitshorting devices, reflex-sabotaging 
devices, analysis-pattern disturbances, muscle-flexibility tensions — 
all of which cut down the fighter’s 
efficiency to some degree. The 
trick, of course, was to do so without exposure, since all fighters 
were examined moments before 
they entered the ring, and were 
JINGLE IN THE JUNGLE 
subject to further investigation if 
the Judges deemed a fight suspiciously under expectation-level. 
The machines then were constructed, so that, in essence, they 
were totally ‘honest’, and every 
part in them was recorded in a 
master plan, filed with the Fight 
Conunission, so that nothing could 
be added, and certainly, nothing 
be subtracted from them, since 
their balance depended completely on very essential parts. 
They were also constructed so 
that they had their weakness-points 
in exactly the same places men had 
theirs. If a machine struck hard 
enough and exactly enough on the 
point of its opponent’s jaw, it 
would jar wires and electrical contacts badly enough to stop its 
operational function — thus the 
“knockout”. 
To all intents and purposes the 
fighting machine was constructed 
as much along human lines as was 
possible, even to the point of corruptibility. They all had a desire 
to be great fighting machines, and 
to go down in the annals of fight 
history. They were, each and every 
one, made for the purpose of 
practicing a deadly, brutal art by 
which men could sublimate the 
brutality that nested like a sleeping tiger in their own persons. 
Provision had even been made for 
the sight of flowing blood. The 
tough rubber skin that made the 
robots appear human contained 
the red oil that lubricated the steel 
“innards”, and if the rubber skin 
split the more the bloodthirsty 
members of the audience were 
satisfied. 
What Charlie Jingle did, when 
he operated on the Tanker, was 
what might be called, in human 
terms, “over-conditioningf’ him. 
He tightened and sped his reflexes, shortened the length of his 
wires so that electrical responses 
had shorter distances to travel, 
sped up his Analysis-Pattern, 
hyper-toned his muscle-flexibility, 
and generally made him a nervous 
wreck. 
Then, as a final touch, he ran 
the tapes he had promised to 
run, striving to bring the truth 
to the Tanker. 
“How do you feel?” asked Charlie as he watched Tanker Bell sit 
up, his face twitching. 
“Like a damn screwball!” said 
the Tanker. 
“Did you get the message?” 
“Yeah. Hammerhead never 
fought like the way he fought me 
in his life! Whad they do to him?” 
“Fixed him:” said Charlie Jingle 
soberly. 
“The Contender too?” 
“Well you saw the tapes. They’re 
all stuck away in that memory bank 
of yours. Whatta you think?” 
Tanker nodded, his head jerking 
up and down uncontrollably. 
“Fixed him too. But I don’t 
get the picture yet. Do you, Charlie?” 
“Sure, I get it. The night I 
called the Arena to match you 
against the Contender because Kid 
Congo got squashed in that accident, they had a fix workin between them. Kid Congo was supposed to upset the Contender, see? 
But they must’ve both been fixed a 
little to fool the Judges. So there’s 
diis accident, see? This throws the 
whole plan into a panic — Congo’s 
out, it’s too late to im-fix the Contender. If the Auditorium puts in 
a fighter who’s strictly legitimate, 
everybody will know it was a fixed. 
I call. They figured I had a Tank, 
maybe you’d look pretty bad in 
there, and nobody would know the 
difference. Okay, what happens? 
You nail the Contender, because, 
after all, you ain’t that bad — 
does it figure?” 
“Boy! Does it!” said the Tanker, 
his head jerking. “Why can’t you 
go to the authorities, Charlie?” 
“Because this fix is piled a mile 
high. Tanker, in all directions.” 
“Whadda you mean?” 
“I mean I can’t go to the Commission.” 
“What we gonna do? Just get 
belted around?” 
“We got no choice.” said Charlie 
Jingle with a shrug. 
“The hell we ain’t! If you think 
I’m gonna go into a ring and get 
mauled, you’re off your rocker!” 
“We can’t call the bout off.” 
said Charlie Jingle dejectedly. 
“Well who said anything about 
callin’ it off?” shouted Tanker. 
“I did the best I could! I tuned 
you up. I timed you. I jazzed you 
up good — 
“But you still don’t think we can 
beat that Iron-Man Pugg!” 
“That’s right.” 
“So whattam I supposed to do 
when I go inter the ring tonight? 
Throw down my hands and give 
it up?” 
“You do what I did. Do yoxxr 
best” 
ALDO GIUNTA 
‘‘Alla while knowin’ I don’t stand 
a chance?” 
“If I did it, you can do it.” 
“You know what you don’t have, 
CJharlie? You don’t have faith!” 
Charlie Jingle snorted in disgust. 
“Who hatched you? Some 
preacher?” 
“No, no, that’s the truth, and 
you know it!” 
“The truth,” roared Charlie 
Jingle in a white rage, “The truth 
is that everything’s a lie! The truth 
is that everything’s fixed from 
the word go, from the bottom up 
and the top down. That’s the goddam truth for you!” 
Tanker shook his head stubbornly. 
“Boy, you sure are singin’ a 
different song, all of a sudden. I 
dunno what the hell happened to 
you, but you don’t even sound like 
yourself!” 
“Okay! Okay! Wait and see 
when they klobber you with it 
tonight. Tank, my boy! Wait and 
see when it hits you square between the eyes.” 
The Tanker leaped up from the 
bench, jerking his fists in the air 
uncontrollably. 
“I’ll murder him!” 
“No you won’t. Listen, I been 
fighting against fixes and fixers all 
my life. Tanker. I never believed, 
and I never wanted to believe, 
that they had it sewed away, that 
the big operatoi4 had us tucked 
away into their pockets. Now I’m 
convinced! They sold me their dirty 
bill of goods. I’m sewed in with 
the rest of them.” 
The Tanker shook his fist under 
Charlie Jingle’s face. Oil had 
JINGLE IN THE JUNGLE 
drained from his system up into 
his face and head, lubricating his 
head-mechanisms as protection 
from strain, as his head-parts were 
being overworked. His “skin” 
looked blotchy. 
“Charlie! After this is over, I 
want quits with you! You hear 
me? I want quits!” 
“Suits me fine.” said Charlie 
Jingle. 
“I’ll bet — began Tanker Bell, 
“ — I’ll bet you ain’t even gonna 
bet on me! Are you?” 
“Sure! I’m gonna bet a thousand 
on you in the open market. Then 
what I’m gonna do is let Hannigan 
bet five thousand for me on the sly 
on the Champ. That way, at least 
rU come out with somethin’. ” 
“Even Belok’s better than you! 
At least he’s got guts enough to 
fix fights. You ain’t even got guts 
enough to fight one!” 
Charlie Jingle walked to the door. 
“You better rest up,” he said, 
and swung the door open. 
“Don’t worry about me,” said 
the Tanker. “I can take care of 
myself!” 
Charlie Jingle looked at him a 
moment, a cloud of inexpressible 
something in his eyes. 
“See you later,” he said quietly, 
and shut the door. 
C HARLIE JINGLE strode, 
shoulder to shoulder with 
Tanker Bell, down the long cluttered corridor of Golum Auditorium toward the roped ring. There 
swelled, to either side of them, 
the surging roar of the crowd, 
and it seemed to Charlie that 
the sound lifted the bitterness 
of his expression from his face 
and floated it forcibly toward 
the rafters overhead, for all to 
see, and to know that Charlie 
Jingle had given up the good 
fight, Charlie Jingle was tired, had 
been had, was through, inside and 
out. The fix was in. There was no 
way to stop it. That was the way the 
bugle blew. 
They climbed into the ropes and 
the roar of the crowd boomed and 
grew, electric with the mood and 
feel of battle. Swiftly Charlie disrobed the Tank, sat him on a stool, 
and looked over at the Champion’s 
comer. Iron-Man Pugg was already 
seated. On his face, as on Tanker’s, 
there was the brooding look of 
combat, of dead-sure certainty that 
he, and he alone would win. And 
Charlie felt a jolt of sick depression 
in his stomach, because he knew it 
was true. 
The robot-referee came into the 
ring, and the crowd immediately 
hushed. A dime-sized microphone 
on an almost invisible wire dropped 
down from the batteries of overhead lights (this was more in the 
line of tradition than need, since 
the robot-referee had a built-in 
mike of his own), and the referee 
held up his hands for complete 
silence. The crowd shushed itself to 
a murmer, and the referee went 
through his introductory piece. 
After each fighter had received the 
crowd’s roar of approbation, the 
referee signalled for them to come 
to the center. 
They went back to their comers. 
Charlie shook the robe from the 
Tanker’s back as a hum of excite
64 
ment charged through the crowd. 
The buzzer sounded and the 
fighters rose, ready. Charlie stepped 
through the ropes, slapped Tanker 
on his back. 
“Do your best. Tank.” 
The Tanker looked at him, face 
grim and solitary, shut away from 
Charlie. 
“My best ain’t enough, Charlie. 
I’ll do more than my best.” 
Charlie Jingle was about to say 
something else when the bell 
banged away. He scooped the stool 
out of the ring and watched the 
Tanker shuffle into center to meet 
the Champion. 
Thirty rounds of fighting is tough 
work. Even for machines. Thirty 
rounds of fighting, at five minutes 
per round, is one hundred and fifty 
minutes, two and a half hours, of 
solid, shattering labor. A machine 
overheats the way a man does under 
constant stress. It’s joints expand, 
its lubricant thins, things begin to 
stick, friction wears parts. While 
a fight-machine’s tedy works 
against time, its opponent pounds 
it, jars it, jolts it. Wires loosen. 
Gears slip. Tubes shatter. The 
machine slows, becomes gawky. Its 
timing is a split second off. Its 
flexibility, its speed, are worn down. 
When its pattern-analysis system 
becomes damaged, it cannot decipher the feints, the systems and 
combinations of its opponents’ 
strategy. An eye is shattered, and 
the Trainer replaces it, since he 
carries a spare pair. The same one 
is smashed again, and he cannot 
replace it, because the Commission 
only allows a single replacement 
ALDO GIUNTA 
during a fight. Its “skin” is split 
and the colored oil flows, the lifeblood of the machine. The Trainer 
is allowed one vulcanizing skin repair job per bout. If it happens 
again, the fighter must go on, fighting against the time when the loss 
of oil will endanger his operating 
efficiency. 
Sometimes the machines strike 
each other with such deadly impact, 
they dent the inner frame-work of 
the body, putting strains on a 
section of wiring or electrical tubing. Then the damaged machine 
must fight defensively to protect 
its weakened section. The offender 
will work out elaborate pimchpattems to trick the defender into 
somehow thinking he understands 
the aim of each pattern of punches 
and where the final concentration 
will be. And suddenly, with uncanny craftiness, the offender 
switches its attack to an unexpected area. 
This is the function of the pattern-analysis system in each 
fighter. To map, plan, digest the 
opponent’s habits of fighting, then 
compute them, set up a given system of punches itself which will 
clutter the opponent’s memory 
banks, and then radically change 
the mode of attack and system of 
fighting. The process is mathematically complex. It is the process of 
the human brain operating at high 
speed. 
The first fifteen rounds of fighting are generally devoted toward 
“faking” patterns. Each fighter 
labors to out-fox the other. In a 
sense, the first fifteen rounds of 
fighting are preliminary. They give 
JINGLE IN THE JUNGLE 
the fight fans an^ opportunity to 
warm up to what is coming. Then 
it begins. The lightning-fast pace 
shifts, becomes slower. The fighters 
seem to be gliding through water. 
Then one unleashes an attack, sets 
an impossibly fast pace. The game 
has started . • 
Charlie Jingle gripped the edge 
of the ring hard, digging his hands 
into the canvas, straining and twisting in tortured anguish with every 
slashing blow that struck the 
Tanker. He watched the two 
fighters weave, jerk, dart — bodies 
and arms flashing blurs, smashing 
blows one to the other in sequences 
that were too complex for the eye 
to follow in detail. He groaned, 
cursed, hoped, bellowed, roared 
and screamed along with two thousand nine hundred and seventy four 
other human beings in the arena. 
The round was the twenty-sixth. 
This was the stretch. The final, 
ineradicable stretch. The bell 
banged away and the fighters 
parted imder the glare of the lights, 
dancing away from each other to 
their comers. Charlie shot the stool 
into the ring and went through the 
ropes. Tanker dropped like a chunk 
of hot lead onto the stool. 
“How do you feel, boy? How do 
you feel?” prompted Charlie, 
pumping the cooling-fluid into 
Tanker’s insides. 
“Hot,” rasped the Tanker. “Hot 
as hell.” 
“Want me to throw in the towel?” asked Charlie, working fast, 
working the pump up and down 
quickly. 
“No, goddamit. Wrap it around 
your eyes if you can’t take it.” 
Charlie worked the body, stimulating the free flow of oil through 
the system. 
“How’m I doin’?” asked the 
Tanker grudgingly. 
“Well at least you’re still in 
there.” 
“By God, Charlie! Fighting 
Machines ain’t supposed to be too 
emotional, but if anybody gets me 
sorer than you do so help me, I’ll 
murder him!” 
Charlie Jingle worked the body 
fast, checked the heated joints for 
too much strain. 
“Favor the right. The elbow’s 
gettin’ creaky. And save the fight 
for the Champ. You’ll need it.” 
The buzzer sounded, Charlie 
shoved his tools through the ropes 
onto the edge of the deck, climbed 
out, and holding onto the edge of 
the stool, he said, “Watch his 
Three-Six combo. He’s gonna angle for your jaw pretty soon.” 
Tanker turned, looking down at 
him. 
“You don’t trust me at all, do 
you?” 
The bell banged and quickly 
Tanker was on his feet, moving 
in his curious, side-long motion. 
By the end of the twenty-seventh. 
Tanker came back to his corner 
lame. The Champ had dented his 
forehead. 
“How is it?” asked Charlie 
Jingle. 
“Fine,” said Tanker thickly. “It’s 
fine.” There was a slur to his voice, 
which tipped off what was beginning to happen. Tanker’s co-ordination system had been damaged. 
“He’s crackin’ down, now. He’s 
got all his power behind them 
punches. You can see it when he 
pivots.” 
“Yeah? Well 7 kin feel it when 
he punches,” said the Tanker. 
Charlie pumped him up with 
cooling fluid, worked his body. In 
the pit of his stomach was a sickness, a feeling of helplessness because Tanker’s trouble was not 
where he could reach it, now. Now 
it was inside. 
“He’s gonna knock your head off, 
this one. Tank. You got a dent in 
it.” 
“I know I got a goddam dent. 
You don’t hafta tell me.” 
Charlie put his gear out of the 
ropes. 
“I told you it was a fix. Don’t 
blame me for nothin’.” 
“Yeah. You wash your hands of 
it. Just like that guy in the whuddayacall . .” 
“Bibfe,” said Charlie Jingle. 
“Yeah,” said Tanker. The bell 
sounded and he sprang to his feet. 
At the end of the twenty-eighth. 
Tanker was dragging his feet, hanging on by a thread of will, except 
of course that there was no will in 
a fighting machine except the 
mechanistic desire to be a great 
fighting-machine. 
“He’ll nail you this one.” said 
Charlie Jingle. 
“Thass what you think,” challenged Tanker. 
“That’s what I know. The fans 
are already going to the windows 
to collect their bets.” 
“Yeah? They got another guess 
com — Why ain’t you collectin’?” 
ALDO GIUNTA 
“I gotta stick it out, you know 
that!” 
“You mean to say you really 
bet on Iron Man?” 
“Sure,” said Charlie Jingle, pulling a ticket out of his shirt pocket. 
“See?” 
Tanker bent close, scrutinizing 
the ticket. He looked up into 
Charlie’s face, his own blotchy with 
color. 
“Five thousand dollars you bet 
on that bum?” 
Charlie Jingle laughed. 
“He don’t look like no bum from 
where ! am.” 
The buzzer sounded, drowning 
out the string of curses the Tanker 
loosed at him. Charlie calmly 
shoved his equipment out of the 
ring. 
“Make it look good right to the 
end, you hear?” 
The bell banged. Tanker Bell 
got up slowly, moving in a clumsy 
waddling gait toward the • Champion, arms hanging like stiffened 
lead weights by his sides, head 
bulled forward, shoulders hunched. 
He did not spring, did not dance. 
He shuffled forward, shoulders 
rocking from side to side. 
Iron-Man Pugg saw the stance 
of the beaten fighting-machine. He 
knew the dead-locked expression 
in the face, knew the shuffling, 
springless walk that indicated that 
the opponent was cold, was dead on 
his feet, jammed away inside, 
locked and frozen. But there was 
always the suspicion of trickery in 
him when he saw it. 
He danced in lightly, speared 
the Tanker’s head with a long series 
of jabs, chopped away at his mid
J INGLE IN THE JUNGLE 
section, and then, as if he himself 
were absolutely cocksure, lowered 
his guard just a fraction of an inch 
out of the Tanker’s reach. Nothing 
happened. The Tanker moved toward him, dead on his feet, arms 
limp. The Champion had to blast 
him back with a murderous right 
to prevent a head-on, chest-on 
collision. The Tanker staggered 
back, wobbled, his knees threatened 
to unflex and buckle, then the 
built-in instinct to go on picked 
him up, and he straightened. 
Iron Man could hear, behind 
and around him, the swelling roar 
of the crowd. He knew it was for 
him. He had won. A hard, good 
fight. He had won. It remained 
now for him to put the trimmings 
on the package. Artfully he flirted 
in and around the Tanker, jabbing 
him lightly, ripping powerful righthand shots to his head, toying with 
him. The crowd was roaring for 
blood. They wanted the finish. The 
Champion moved forward, wound 
up. He started his famous knockout sequence of punches, landing 
the first and second carefully, playing to his audience so that they 
could see what was happening and 
appreciate from the beginning what 
was about to happen. The Champion was enjoying himself. He 
worked with flash and flourish, 
and the crowd began to love it. 
Then Tanker Bell came alive. 
The Champion was first to see the 
expression of his face, and a splitsecond before it happened, he knew 
he had been tricked. He would forever remember that expression. It 
was almost human. It was an expression of hatred. Of murderous, 
long-controlled rage, diabolical and 
letl^l. 
Tanker Bell ripped a blow to his 
jaw so well-set, so precise, so accurate, that when the Champion’s 
head snapped back, the cable at the 
back of his neck broke. The Champion fell over on his back, striking 
the deck like fallen thunder. The 
Champion was not only ‘out’ — 
he was ‘dead’. 
There was a great, still silence 
in the arena as Tanker Bell strode 
back to his corner. It was as if the 
air, and . sound, and people had 
been frozen. The Referee came 
to his senses first, stood over IronMan, and counted, with long 
strokes of the arm. At the last 
stroke, chaos broke loose. Fans and 
officials swarmed into the ring. 
The spectators roared. But Tanker 
Bell had eyes for one single human 
being in that arena. Charlie Jingle. 
When he turned. Tanker saw 
Charlie Jingle doubled over the 
ropes, laughing. 
A reporter pulled Tanker to the 
middle of the ring before he could 
get to Charlie. While they quizzed 
him and prodded him, Charlie 
Jingle remained doubled over the 
ropes in a violent fit of hysteria. 
Finally they drew Charlie Jingle 
into the circle at ring-center. Had 
he had any doubts that Tanker 
would win? 
“Never!” 
Did he know that Tanker was 
faking toward the last? Certainly, 
came the laughing reply. 
How much money had he bet 
on his fighter? 
Ten thousand dollars, came the 
uproarious reply, and Tanker Bell 
bellowed, “He’s a liar! He never 
bet a thing!” 
The Press was astonished. 
The Officials perked up their 
suspicious noses. 
What did Tanker Bell mean? 
“Ask him!” accused the glaring 
Tanker. 
Did Charlie Jingle have the bet 
ticket with him? After all. Mister 
Jingle — news. 
Charlie Jingle, laughing, with 
a flourish, produced a ticket from 
his shirt pocket. 
Tanker Bell stared at it, goggleeyed. 
What would Charlie Jingle do 
with the money from the proceeds? 
“Ruin Pugs, Inc.,” said Charlie 
Jingle. “Me and a California Rabbit are goin into business together. 
Ruinin’ Pugs, Inc.” 
“Psychology.” growled the 
Tanker. “The bum used his goddam psychology on me.” 
What was Tanker Bell referring 
to? 
“Leave him alone,” said Charlie 
Jingle, putting his arm around 
Tanker’s shoulders. “Can’t you see 
he’s punch-happy?” END 
FAVORITE PUZZLES AND QUIZZES 
The largest, most varied and interesting selection of puzzles, word 
games, math games, quizzes and brain teasers ever published at the 
price! Hundreds of exciting ways to test your wits and talents! Months 
and months of fun and entertainment! Puts pep into parties. Order 
today! Send only 50c to QUINN PUBLISHING CO., Inc. Kingston, N. Y. 
BY ISAAC ASIMOV 
Even 8000 years is not too 
long when instinct drives a 
creature. And Kane was willing to wait . 
DOES A BEE 
CARE? 
T he ship began as a metal 
skeleton. Slowly a shining skin 
was layered on without and oddshaped vitals were crammed within. 
Thornton Hammer, of all the 
individuals (but one) involved in 
the growth, did the least physically. 
Perhaps that was why he was most 
highly regarded. He handled the 
Illustrated by Ed Emsh 
mathematical symbols that formed 
the basis for lines on drafting 
paper which, in turn, formed the 
basis for the fitting-together the 
various masses and different forms 
of energy that went into the ship. 
Hammer watched now through 
close-fitting spectacles somberly. 
Their lenses caught the light of 
the fluorescent tubes above and 
sent them out again as high-lights. 
Theodore Lengyel, representing 
Personnel of the corporation that 
was footing the bill for the project, 
stood beside him and said, as he 
pointed with a rigid, stabbing 
finger, 
“There he is. That’s the man.” 
Hammer peered. “You mean 
Kane?” 
“The fellow in the green overalls, holding a wrench.” 
“That’s Kane. Now what is this 
you’ve got against him?” 
“I want to know what he does. 
The man’s an idiot.” Lengyel had 
a round, plump face and his jowls 
quivered a bit. 
Hammer turned to look at the 
other, his spare body assuming an 
air of displeasure along every inch. 
“Have you been bothering him?” 
^'Bothering him? I’ve been talking to him. It’s my job to talk to 
the men, to get their viewpoints, to 
get information out of which I can 
build campaigns for improved 
morale.” 
“How does Kane disturb that?” 
“He’s insolent. I asked him how 
it felt to be working on a ship that 
would reach the moon? I talked a 
little about the ship being a pathway to the stars. Perhaps I made 
a little speech about it, built it 
up a bit, when he turned away in 
the rudest possible manner. I 
called him back and said, ‘Where 
are you going?’ And he said, ‘I get 
tired of that kind of talk. I’m going 
out to look at the stars.’ ” 
Hammer nodded. “All right. 
Kane likes to look at the stars.” 
“It was daytime. The man’s an 
idiot. I’ve been watching him since 
and he doesn’t do any work.” 
“I know that.” 
“Then why is he kept on?” 
Hammer said with a sudden, 
tight fierceness, “Because I want 
him around. Because he’s my luck.” 
“Your luck?” faltered Lengyel. 
“What the hell does that mean?” 
“It means that when he’s around 
I think better. When he passes me, 
holding his damned wrench, I get 
ideas. It’s happened three times. I 
don’t explain it; I’m not interested 
in explaining it. It’s happened. He 
stays.” 
“You’re joking.” 
“No, I’m not. Now leave me 
alone.” 
Kane stood there in his green 
overalls, holding his wrench. 
Dimly he was aware that the ship 
was almost ready. It was not designed to carry a man, but there 
was space for a man. He knew that 
the way he knew a lot of things; 
like keeping out of the way of most 
people most of the time; like carrying a wrench until people grew 
used to him carrying a wrench and 
stopped noticing it. Protective 
coloration consisted of little things, 
really, — like carrying the wrench. 
He was full of drives he did not 
fully understand; like looking at 
ISAAC ASIMOV 
the stars. At first, many years back, 
he had just looked at the stars with 
a va^e ache. Then, slowly, his 
attention had centered itself on a 
certain region of the sky, then to 
a certain pin-pointed spot. He 
didn’t know why that certain spot. 
There were no stars in that spot. 
There was nothing to see. 
That spot was high in the nightsky in the late spring and in the 
summer months and he sometimes 
spent most of the night watching 
the spot until it sank toward the 
southwestern horizon. At other 
times in the year he would stare at 
the spot during the day. 
There was some thought in connection with that spot which he 
couldn’t quite crystallize. It had 
grown stronger, come nearer the 
surface as the years passed and it 
was almost bursting for expression 
now. But still it had not quite come 
clear. 
Kane shifted restlessly and approached the ship. It was almost 
complete, almost whole. Everything fitted just so. Almost. 
For within it, far forward, was a 
hole a little larger than a man; 
and leading to that hole was a 
pathway a little wider than a man. 
Tomorrow that pathway would be 
filled with the last of the vitals and 
before that was done, the hole had 
to be filled, too. But not with anything they planned. 
Kane moved still closer and no 
one paid any attention to him. 
They were used to him. 
There was a metal ladder that 
had to be climbed and a catwalk 
that had to be moved along to 
enter the last opening. He knew 
DOES A BEE CARE? 
where the opening was as exactly 
as though he had built the ship 
with his own hands. He climbed the 
ladder and moved along the catwalk. 
It was dark in the hole and, of 
course, there was no ventilation, 
but Kane paid no attention to that. 
With the sureness of instinct, he 
clambered upward toward the hole 
that would receive him, then lay 
there panting, flitting the cavity 
neatly as though it were a womb. 
In two hours they would begin 
inserting the last of the vitals, close 
the passage and leave Kane there, 
unknowing. Kane would be the 
sole bit of flesh and blood in a 
thing of nietal and ceramics and 
fuel. 
Kane was not afraid of being 
prematurely discovered. No one in 
the project knew the hole was 
there. The design didn’t call for 
it. The mechanics and construction men weren’t aware of having 
put it in. 
Kane had arranged that entirely 
by himself. 
He didn’t know how he had 
arranged it, but he knew he had. 
He could watch his own influence 
without knowing how it was exerted. Take the man, Hammer, for 
instance, the leader of the project 
and the most clearly influenced. Of 
all the indistinct figures about 
Kane, he was the least indistinct. 
Kane would be very aware of him 
at times, when he passed near him 
in his slow and hazy journeys about 
the grounds. It was all that was 
necessary, — passing near him. 
Kane recalled it had been so 
before, particularly with theore
71 
ticians. When Lise Meitner decided to test for barium among 
the products of the neutron bombardment of uranium, Kane had 
been there, an unnoticed plodder 
along a corridor nearby. 
He had been picking up leaves 
and trash in a park in 1904 when 
the young Einstein had passed by, 
pondering. Einstein’s steps had 
quickened with the impact of sudden thought. Kane felt it like an 
electric shock. 
But he didn’t know how it was 
done. Does a spider know architectural theory when it begins to 
construct its first web?” 
It went further back. The evening the young Newton had stared 
at the Moon with the dawn of a 
certain thought, Kane had been 
there. And further back still 
HE PANORAMA of New 
Mexico, ordinarily deserted, 
was alive with human ants crawling 
about the metal shaft lancing upward. This one was different from 
all the similar structures that had 
preceded it. 
This would go free of Earth more 
nearly than any other. It would 
reach out and circle the Moon before falling back. It would be 
crammed with instniments that 
would photograph the Moon and 
measure its heat, emissions, probe 
for radioactivity, and test by 
micro-wave for chemical structure. 
It would, by automation, do almost 
everything that could be expected 
of a manned vehicle. And it would 
learn enough to make certain that 
the next ship sent out would be a 
manned vehicle also. 
Except that, in a way, this first 
one was a manned vehicle after all. 
There were representatives of 
various governments, of various 
industries, of various social and 
economic groupings. There were 
television cameras and feature 
writers. 
Those who could not be there, 
watched in their homes, and heard 
numbers counted backward in 
painstaking monotone in the manner grown traditional in a mere 
three decades. 
At zero, the reaction motors came 
to life and ponderously the ship 
lifted. 
Kane heard the noise of the rushing gases, as though from a distance, and felt the gathering acceleration press against him. 
He detached his mind, lifting it 
up and outward, freeing it from 
direct connection with his body in 
order that he might be unaware of 
the pain and discomfort. 
Dizzily, he knew his long journey 
was nearly over. He would no 
longer have to maneuver carefully 
to avoid having people realize he 
was immortal. He would no longer 
have to fade into the background, 
no longer wander eternally from 
place to place, changing names and 
personality, manipulating minds. 
It had not been perfect, of 
course. The myths of the Wandering Jew and the Flying Dutchman 
had arisen, but he was still here. 
He had not been disturbed. 
He could see his spot in the sky. 
Through the mass and solidity of 
the ship he could see it. Or not 
ISAAC ASIMOV 
‘%ee” really. He didn’t have the 
proper word. 
He knew there was a proper 
word, though. He could not say 
how he knew a fraction of the 
things he knew except that as the 
centuries had passed he had gradually grown to know them with 
a sureness that required no reason. 
He had begun as an ovum (or 
as something for which ‘‘ovum” 
was the nearest word he knew) , deposited on Earth before the first 
cities had been built by the wandering hunting-creatures since 
called men. Earth had been chosen 
carefully by his progenitor. Not every world would do. 
What world would? What was 
the criterion?” That he still didn’t 
know. 
Does an ichneumon wasp study 
entomology before it finds the one 
species of spider that will do for 
her eggs and stings it just so in 
order diat it may remain alive? 
The ovum spilt him forth at 
length and he took the shape of a 
man and lived among men and 
protected himself against men. And 
his one purpose was to arrange to 
have men travel along a path that 
would end with a ship and within 
the ship a hole and within the hole 
himself. It had taken eight thousand years of slow striving and 
stumbling. 
The spot In the sky became 
sharper now as the ship moved out 
of the atmosphere. That was the 
key that opened his mind, the piece 
that completed the puzzle. 
Stars blinked within that spot 
that could not be seen by a man’s 
eye unaided. One in particular 
shone brilliantly and Kane yearned 
toward it. The expression that had 
been building within him for so 
long burst out now. 
“Home,” he whispered. 
He knew! Does a salmon study 
cartography to find the headwaters 
of the fresh-water stream in which 
years before it had been born? 
The final step was thus completed in the slow maturing that 
had taken eight thousand years, 
and Kane was no longer larval, 
but adult. 
The adult Kane fled from the 
human flesh that had protected 
the larva, and fled the ship, too. 
Kane hastened onward, at inconceivable speeds, toward home, 
from which some day it, too, might 
set off on wanderings through space 
to fertilize some planet with its 
ovum. 
It sped through Space, giving no 
thought, to the ship carrying an 
empty chrysalis. It gave no thought 
to the fact that it had driven a 
whole world toward technology and 
space-travel in order only that it 
might mature and reach its fulfillment. 
Does a bee care what has happened to a flower when the bee 
has dcme and gone its way? 
END 
In the August IF: A sensational new guided missile article so hot it has 
to be anonymous! Plus fiction by Alan E. Nourse, Tom Godwin, Charles 
L. Fontenay, Lloyd Biggie, Jr., and others. 
DOES A BEE CARE? 
. ON THE 
If you’ve sometimes found salesmen irresistible, 
it may come as quite a severe shock to you 
to find out why you never had a chance to say no. 
BY LLOYD BIGGLE, JR. 
Illustrated by Virgil Finlay 
DOTTED LINE 
1. ERF ZEDDEN 
I ’VE BEEN sleeping one off, stretched out nice and comfortable in some shrubbery on a rise that overlooks the 
Detroit River. It’s been a balmy night, and I wake up feeling good and lie there looking around, and — ^Zip! This fellow comes stumbling out of nowhere, trips, and flops down 
on top of me. 
Out of nowhere, I said. I’m watching, and one second he 
isn’t there, and the next second he is. Never saw anything 
like it. 
I roll out from under him and get my breath back and 
look up, to see if maybe he fell out of an air car. There 
aren’t any air cars. 
He sits up and looks at me, and rubs his eyes. “Where 
am I?” he says, and he talks like his mouth is wired shut. 
“That’s a real easy one,” I say, 
“Let’s talk about how you got 
here.” 
He stands up and takes a few 
steps, craning his neck and staring 
in all directions, and then he comes 
back. “Where am I?” he says again. 
“New Detroit,” I say. “Down 
by the river, as maybe you’ve noticed.” 
He takes another look around, 
and gets mad. “Look,” he says. “I 
know Detroit backwards, and there 
isn’t any park that looks like this. 
Where’s die Civic Center? And 
how come I can’t see the Penobscot 
Building? This shouldn’t be far 
from the center of town.” 
I’m looking him over, trying not 
to laugh at the way he talks and at 
the queer clothes he’s wearing. He’s 
not a bad-looking fellow, young 
and well-built, though he has his 
hair cut straight across the top in 
the weirdest haircut I’ve ever seen. 
I’m beginning to wonder if maybe 
he hasn’t escaped from somewhere, 
if you know what I mean. 
“Never heard of those places,” I 
say, “and you’re about twenty miles 
from the center of town.” 
He sits down again, looking so 
bewildered I begin to feel sorry for 
him. 
“This is Detroit, Michigan, 
U.S.A.?” 
I tell him that it’s New Detroit, 
and I’ve heard it was Michigan 
Province, though I can’t make any 
guarantee. And the letters he mentions don’t mean anything to me. 
He tries again, like a child trying 
to get something straight. “This 
is Detroit . 
“New Detroit.” 
“Michigan . .” 
“Michigan Province — maybe.” 
“It’s July fifteenth . .” 
“Somewhere around that time,” 
I say. I haven’t been keeping a 
close count on the days. 
I decide maybe I’d better get 
him out of sight until I make up 
my mind about him, so I take his 
arm and start walking, and he follows along without saying anything. 
He keeps looking around, 
though, like he’s never seen New 
Detroit before. And if he hasn’t, I 
can’t blame him for looking. It 
was rough on those cities that got 
wiped out in the big war, but they 
had the advantage of a fresh start. 
New Detroit is a beautiful place — 
the whole city is one big park, with 
all of the commercial places and 
ground transportation and a lot of 
the dwellings underground, and 
just the apartment communities 
stretching up into the sky at regular 
intervals. 
He looks back at the river. “Are 
we far from Lake Erie?” he says. 
“Not far. You can see it from an 
air car, if you go up high enough.” 
“And Lake Saint Glair?” 
“You mean Lake Clair. Real 
close.” 
“And that’s the Detroit River?” 
“Never heard it called anything 
else.” 
“And this is Detroit?” 
“New Detroit.” 
He takes a deep breath. “What 
year is this?” 
“2337,” I say. 
And so help me, the man passes 
out. 
I signal an air cab, and he comes 
LLOYD BIGGLE, JR. 
to a little later, and I get him down 
to the seventh level to my hotel 
room without any trouble. I drop a 
coin in the visiscope, and leave him 
sitting there in front of the screen 
watching while I go out to get him 
some presentable clothes. When I 
came back he’s still sitting there, 
but he looks about ready to explode. 
“No advertising!” he says. 
“What’s that?” I say. 
“Why, advertising. You know — 
they talk about a product, or sing 
songs about it, to try and make 
people want to buy it.” 
“Sounds silly to me,” I say. 
“Never heard of it. Don’t think 
it would work. Singing a song 
wouldn’t make me want to buy 
anything.” 
“But it does work,” he says. 
Damned if the man isn’t serious. 
“You see . .” 
Then he takes a long look at me, 
and says, “Skip it.” And after a 
while he starts in again. “This is 
Detroit?” 
“New Detroit,” I say. 
“And there’s no advertising?” 
“Never heard of any.” 
“How do things get sold?” 
“Why, there are salesmen all over 
the place. They don’t bother me, 
of course, because I’m a space bug, 
and our credit isn’t worth much. I 
go to a merchandise center when 
I want something, and pay cash. 
Now let’s get these clothes on.” 
I get that funny outfit off of him, 
and get him into die clothes I’d 
bought. He doesn’t mind the shorts, 
but he raises a big fuss about the 
cape. “What’s the sense in wearing 
a transparent cape?” 
“Everybody wears them,” I say. 
... ON THE DOTTED LINE 
“I don’t think much of it, either. 
We wear more practical things in 
space.” 
“Everybody — ^you mean women 
wear them?” 
“Sure,” I say, and give him a 
wink. “Some wear more transparent 
ones than others.” 
“My name is Mark Jackson,” he 
says slowly. “I’m an automobile 
salesman — a good salesman. I live 
in Detroit, and the year is 1957, and 
I want to go home.” 
“My name is Erf Zedden,” I 
say. “I’m a space bug, but probably 
not a very good one. I work on a 
Mars-Gallisto ore freighter, and I’m 
on a six-month leave. First time 
on Earth in over five years, and the 
year is 2337. And what the hell is 
an automobile?” 
He doesn’t say anything, so I 
slap him on the back and tell him 
I could use a drink and he looks 
like he could use more than one, 
so we go up two levels to a bar 
that’s run by an ex-space bug. 
This fellow Jackson acts real 
queer. He keeps staring at the 
women, and while I must admit 
that in that bar their capes are more 
transparent than in most places, I 
begin to wonder if he’s ever seen 
a woman before. 
“This is 2337?” he says finally. 
“Until next January,” I say. 
“I’ve been trying to think what 
could have done it,” he says. “There 
was that fall-out from the Nevada 
Hydrogen Bomb test, and all the 
papers were screaming about it, 
though the scientists said it wasn’t 
dangerous. And then there was 
that damned X-ray machine . .” 
He stops to take a good drink of 
Martian Gin, and I don’t say anything, though I’m wondering what 
the hell he’s talking about. 
“I went to sell a car to a doctor,” 
he goes on, “and while I was waiting to see him I leaned against the 
X-ray machine, and somehow the 
damned thing got turned on. The 
doctor said it was only a few seconds, and there was no harm done. 
I can’t think of anything else peculiar, but there probably was something. It was that kind of day. And 
the automobile accident finished 
everything off*. I was driving away 
from the doctor’s office, and this 
kid ran smack out in front of me. 
The top was down on my convertible, and when I swerved I hit a 
utility pole, and it threw me clean 
over the fence into a Detroit Edison 
Company transformer. I just had 
time to think, ‘This is it, boy!’ and 
then here I was. 2337, you say?” 
“Until next January.” 
He takes another man-sized drink 
of gin. “I don’t believe it.” 
I tell him he’ll forget his troubles 
if we pick up a couple of girls, but 
he says no, he wants to think things 
over. So we go back to my hotel 
room, and the place is jammed 
with police. Someone saw me bringing him in, and reported it. They 
take the two of us, and all of those 
queer clothes of his, to Police Central, and it takes me two days to 
convince them that I don’t know 
anything about him. When I leave 
they won’t tell me what they’ve 
done to him, so I figure they’re 
holding him for psych-conditioning. 
Well — I know I did the best I 
could for him. My leave still has 
four months to run, and I have 
money left, so I take the next rocket 
to New York. 
2. PROF. JOHN PARKINS 
I T WAS EARLY August of 2337 
when I had a letter from my 
old friend Bran Rastin, Police Commissioner of the Michigan Province. 
The case which he described to me 
was psychologically routine, but it 
had its intriguing aspects. I was, of 
course, happy to be of any possible 
assistance. There was no BostonNew Detroit rocket service at that 
time, so I took the shuttle plane to 
New York, when I caught the New 
Detroit rocket. 
What I found was astonishing. I 
spent three days, all told, studying 
the various artifacts that the alleged man-from-the-past claimed 
to have brought with him, and 
listening to recordings of the various interviews which he had had. 
I also discussed his case in detail 
with the doctors in charge, and 
then I requested an interview. 
Attendants brought him into the 
room. It was obvious that they considered him violent. His face was 
young and good-looking, in spite 
of its sullenness. His physique was 
impressive. He appeared to be a 
leader, a man accustomed to dominating. 
“I don’t recognize you,” he said 
angrily. “What’s your specialty? 
Lie detector tests? Sanity tests?” 
He took a step forward, and the 
attendants leap^ to restrain him. 
I waved them away and dismissed 
them. I had already decided that 
this Mark Jackson, whatever else 
he might be, was not insane. 
LLOYD BIGGLE, JR. 
“Sit down, please,” I said. 
We sat down facing each other 
across a long table, where Jackson’s 
personal effects and odd clothing 
were spread out. 
“Fm John Parkins,” I told him. 
“Professor of American History at 
Harvard University. Fve examined 
your property, and listened to the 
recordings of the interviews you’ve 
had.” 
“And like everyone else, you 
think Fm nuts!” 
I stared at him. “What a quaint 
way to put it! But no, I don’t doubt 
your sanity. I believe you’re telling 
the truth. There’s no denying the 
genuineness of these things. The 
monetary value would not be tremendous, but a number of museums 
would be delighted to have them. 
And then there’s your amazingly 
detailed knowledge of certain aspects of twentieth century life 
which have always puzzled me. Yes, 
I believe you, incredible as your 
story seems.” 
He jumped to his feet and paced 
back and forth for a moment. 
“That’s a switch. Does that mean 
I get out of here?” 
“Switch ...” I murmured. Everything the man said left me more 
convinced. Even his odd accent 
should have been conclusive; I said 
reluctantly, “No, it does not mean 
that you can be released. I have 
been unable to convince the doctors.” 
“Oh, great You believe me, and 
now I suppose they have you in 
here with me!” 
I smiled and shook my head. “No. 
I’ve come to give you some advice. 
The doctors are determined to cure 
... ON THE DOTTED LINE 
you of your delusions. Let them 
cure you.” 
“How?” 
“Just accept what they say, and 
learn as much as you can about 
present-day civilization. The authorities are rather disturbed about 
you, you know. The mere fact that 
your fingerprints are not registered 
anywhere has thrown four branches 
of the government into confusion. 
Don’t disturb them further. Just do 
what you’re told, and pretend to 
believe what you’re told, and 
eventually you’ll be released. Then 
come to me, and I’ll manage a 
teaching position for you. You 
should make an excellent histo
* 
nan. 
“No, thank you,” Jackson said. 
“I’m a salesman — a good salesman. 
Teaching wouldn’t interest me.” 
“Think it over, anyway. And remember — the sooner you cooperate, 
the sooner you’ll be released.” 
The attendants took him away, 
and I returned to Boston. I continued to give considerable thought 
to this Mark Jackson, for a more 
perplexing problem has not come 
to my attention in all my years of 
scholarly investigation. Finally I 
wrote to Arnold Stephens, a cousin 
of my wife, who is personnel manager of the Terra Sales Corporation. 
I outlined what I believed to be 
the facts in the Jackson case, and 
asked him if he would be able to 
give the young man assistance in 
establishing himself. 
He wrote back that he would be 
happy to interview him, but that he 
could promise no more consideration than would be extended to 
any other applicant for a sales 
position. I immediately contacted 
the New Detroit police, and found 
that I was too late. Jackson had 
been certified cured and released, 
and as far as they were concerned 
he had disappeared. I gathered 
that they were only too pleased to 
have him off their hands. 
3. ARNOLD STEPHENS 
M ark JACKSON came to the 
offices of Terra Sales Corporation only a few days after I had 
received Professor Parkins’ letter 
concerning him. I recognized his 
name immediately, of course, and 
assumed that the Professor had 
sent him. 
For many years I have interviewed all sales applicants myself, 
as I am considered an excellent 
subject for this task. I had him 
sent into my office, and never have I 
seen a more solemn, determined 
young man. Other than this singular quality, there was nothing obviously different about him. The 
odd inflection in his speech I could 
have overlooked, and otherwise he 
seemed quite normal. If I had not 
known Parkins so well personally 
and professionally, I might have 
considered myself the victim of a 
joke. 
“Professor Parkins sent you to 
see me?” I asked. 
He looked surprised. “Why, no. 
I talked with a gentleman of that 
name three or four weeks ago, but 
we discussed — other things.” 
“I see. And now you wish to be 
a salesman.” 
He jumped to his feet. “I am 
a salesman,” he said firmly. And he 
started in. Never have I witnessed 
such an amazing performance. He 
handled himself with the skill of a 
trained elocutionist. He spoke 
eloquently, and he was brilliantly 
persuasive. Had it not been for 
his odd manner of speaking, and 
his frequent use of strange words, 
I might have been carried away. 
Much of his discourse concerned his 
skill and experience in selling automobiles, which I later found to be 
an obsolete type of conveyance. 
It was wonderful, and it was 
also pitiful. I heard him out to the 
end, and shook my head sadly. 
“Sorry,” I said. “I can’t use you.” 
“Why not?” he demanded. 
Salesman qualifications were then 
the most carefully guarded secret in 
the business world. I couldn’t give 
him a direct answer, but I felt 
obligated to tell him something. 
“Have you applied at any other 
sales corporation?” I asked him. 
“Hell, yes! This is the twentythird, and I have six to go. I 
started in by going around to the 
manufacturers. No go. None of 
them have any salesmen. The Cadrovet Air Car Company in New 
Detroit offered me any one of five 
different jobs, but it wouldn’t hire 
me as 2 i salesman. Told me it’s 
been a hundred and fifty years 
since they used their own salesmen. 
All selling is done by sales corporations. All right. I came to New 
York, and I started calling on the 
sales corporations. They all told 
me the same thing. ‘Young man, to 
be a salesman, you must first be able 
to sell yourself.’ That’s sensible, so 
I rented a recorder, and last ni^ht 
I was up most of the night working 
LLOYD BIG6LE, JR. 
on a sales talk to sell myself. You 
just heard it. I think it’s good. 
Damn it! I know it’s good. But I 
still get the same story. Sell yourself. 
At my last stop, a fat old geezer 
leered at me, and said, ‘Make me 
hire you. I dare you!’ ” 
I chuckled. “That would be 
Barlow, of Sales, Unlimited.” 
“Look. I know I can sell. All I 
want is a chance. You can hire me 
on a commission basis, and it won’t 
cost you a thing if I don’t deliver. 
What’s wrong with that? Am I 
poison, or something?” 
“Professor Parkins wrote to me 
about you,” I said. “He thinks you 
were transferred somehow from 
the twentieth century.” 
He gestured disgustedly. “I’m not 
admitting anything. I spent enough 
time in that hospital.” 
“I understand,” I said. “But even 
if you were a good salesman in — 
well, somewhere else — I’m afraid 
you’ll have to find some other way 
to make a living. I’d advise you to 
take one of these jobs at Cadrovet. 
As a salesman, you’d starve to 
death.” 
“All I want is a chance,” he 
snapped. “I know what I can do. 
I can sell anything.” 
“To everyone?” I said. 
“What do you mean?” 
I thought for a moment, and 
got to my feet. “Because of your — 
shall we say unusual background — 
I’m going to make an exception 
and show you what is required of 
our salesmen. Follow me, please.” 
I took him into the records room, 
and pulled a file at random. “Here’s 
last week’s record of one of our 
men. He’s a below-average sales
... ON THE DOTTED LINE 
man, but he’s improving. You can 
see that he made a hundred and 
seven calls — that’s about twentyone a day. He made two hundred 
and forty sales, of which twentytwo were majors — sales amounting 
to two thousand dollars or more.” 
“Didn’t anyone say no?” Jackson exclaimed. 
“Of course not,” I said. “We 
have no use for a salesman to whom 
people can say no. Now, I don’t 
know what your sales record may 
have been back in the — elsewhere — 
but unless you can do almost as 
well as this, no sales corporation 
could afford to waste time with 
you. And you couldn’t afford to 
waste your time. This salesman is 
making a living, though not a very 
good one. He’ll get better, of course. 
He’ll have to.” 
“I see,” Jackson said, but it was 
obvious that he didn’t see at all. 
Suddenly he looked terribly weary 
— crushed. 
“Better go back to Cadrovet,” I 
told him. “They’re a good company, and they must think you 
have ability, or they wouldn’t have 
offered you your choice of five 
jobs.” 
“They gave me aptitude tests for 
two days. But I’m a salesman. I 
wouldn’t be happy sitting behind a 
desk, or riding herd on an assembly 
line. I’ll have to think this over, I 
guess.” 
“You have to eat, man! You’ll 
have to work at something.” 
“I know. Well — this morning I 
ran into a fellow I met in New Detroit. Erf Zedden. He’s a space bug, 
and he thinks he can get me a 
job on a Mars-Callisto ore freight
81 
er. Right now, that sounds pretty 
good.” 
“That’s no place for a man with 
ability,” I said. 
“I suppose not, but I feel like 
getting away from things. I think 
ril take him up on it.” 
I talked with him for a few minutes, trying to cheer him up, but 
without much success. Then he 
thanked me, and left. It was two 
years before I saw him again. 
4. ERF ZEDDEN 
I RUN INTO this Mark Jackson 
again in New York, and he 
looks miserable. In fact, he looks 
like he is about to go down and 
jump in the river. My money is 
running out, and he tells me the 
money he got from selling some of 
his stuff to a museum is running 
out, too, and I say, “What the hell! 
I’m going back to Mars in a couple 
of days. Come along, and I’ll get 
you a job. The Mars-Callisto run is 
an easy one, the pay is good, and 
when you’re too old to push the 
ore they retire you on a good 
pension. What can you lose?” 
He says he’ll think it over, but he 
has a few more people he wants to 
see. And later that day he comes to 
my hotel, and says, “When do we 
leave?” So we’re off for Mars. 
Believe me, this Jackson is a good 
man. Two months on the job, and 
he’s my boss. And at the end of a 
year he’s running the whole show 
on the Callisto end, and the Jovian 
Mining Company calls me into the 
Martian Office and gives me a 
bonus for bringing them such a 
good man. Never saw a fellow go 
up so fast, but somehow he doesn’t 
seem happy about it. No matter 
how high he goes, though, we’re 
still good friends, and whenever I 
hit Callisto I stay with him. 
So it’s natural when I start talking about a leave on Earth he 
thinks he could use a vacation himself, after two years, and we make 
arrangements to go together and do 
the old planet up good. 
I get to Earth first, because he 
insists on stopping off for a tourist’s tour of the moon. I say, 
“What’s so special about Earth’s 
moon? And when you’re on Earth 
you can look up and see the damned 
thing any old night.” But no, he 
has to stop off on the moon. 
So I get to Stellar City a day 
ahead of him, and get us a room 
at the Martian Hotel. The next 
morning I leave a note for him to 
meet me at the Rocket Club, and 
go out to line up a couple of 
girls. And that’s the day things 
really start jumping on Earth. 
These girls I get are some characters — tall, hefty creatures, with 
capes so transparent they might as 
well not wear any. They have 
their hair piled up in one of these 
odd Venusian hair styles, and they 
look like they’re nuclear propelled, 
and I think this is one leave that’s 
going to be worth remembering. 
We sit around having a few 
drinks, and after while Jackson 
comes in, and we start back up 
Pluto Boulevard towards the hotel. 
And all of a sudden this mob comes 
charging down on us. 
As I said, this is the day things 
start jumping on Earth. We back 
up against a building as the mob 
LLOYD BIGGLE, JR. 
tears past, and we get a quick 
look at the chalky face of the man 
they’re chasing. He’s running for 
his life, and the mob is the most 
hate-twisted bunch of murderers 
I’ve ever seen. 
“Good riddance,” one of the girls 
says. “Let’s watch them finish him 
off.” 
Jackson lets out a yelp. “Hey! 
What’s this all about?” 
The mob gallops past, and I 
manage to hail an air cab, and we 
climb aboard and drift along with 
the small fleet that’s hovering above 
to watch the show. 
“Why are they chasing him?” 
Jackson says. 
“He’s a hypno,” I tell him. 
He’s a pretty good hypnotist, 
and he makes it a good show. He 
glances over his shoulder, now and 
then, and freezes two or three of 
the mob. But the others just bowl 
them over and trample on them, 
and keep on going. Off in the distance I spot some air patrol units 
coming in at top speed, and I 
wonder if they’ll make it in time. 
They don’t, of course. The hypno 
runs as long as he can, and then 
he turns to face the mob. Maybe 
he’s good, but even a Grade I 
hypno wouldn’t have stood a 
chance. They climb all over him, 
and knives flash, and they cut him 
to pieces. 
The mob has scattered by the 
time the patrols land, and there’s 
nothing left for them to do but 
clean up the mess. 
The cab drops us at the hotel. 
The girls still squealing excitedly, 
and Jackson looks sick. We go up 
to our room, and he drops into a 
... ON THE DOTTED LINE 
chair and takes a good gulp of 
Martian Gin out of a bottle. 
“Why?” he says. 
“Why what?” one of the girls 
says. 
“Why did they murder that fellow?” 
We stare at him. “Haven’t you 
heard?” I say. 
“I haven’t heard anything. I 
just got in from the moon a couple 
of hours ago — remember?” 
I go over and drop a coin in the 
visiscope, and we settle down to 
watch. Paris. Six hundred hypnotists murdered, and the total rising. 
Shots of mobs chasing hypnos. Applause and snickers from the girls. 
London. More than two hundred 
hypnos murdered. Uncontrolled 
mobs chasing about the streets. The 
International Institute of Hypnology burning brightly. New York. 
Martial Law declared. No estimate of casualties available. And 
so it goes. 
“The congressional committee 
released its report this morning,” 
one of the girls says. “Millions of 
hypnotists on Earth, and eightyfive per cent of them are salesmen. 
Every time you turn around, one 
sells you something, and you wonder why you bought it until the 
next one sells you something. I 
came here from Venus three 
months ago. Know how many air 
cars I’ve got? Three. I haven’t 
even got use for one, but I’ve got 
three. Bought the last one a week 
ago, along with a two-year lease 
on a garage a mile and a half 
from my apartment. Did I trade in 
one of the two I already have? No. 
So I keep asking myself, ‘Why? 
Why do such a stupid thing?’ Then 
this report comes out this morning, 
and I know. Everyone else knows, 
Hypnos sold them to me. Fve got 
two food synthesizers in my apartment. One of them will feed ten 
people, and I live by myself — 
most of the time, anyway. Lousy 
hypnos. I’ve got four watches, and 
enough clothes to last me for ten 
years. I’ve got a visiscope in every 
room. I’ve got so much junk in the 
place I can’t get in and out. I 
came to Earth with plenty of 
money, and after three months 
it’s all gone and I’ll be paying for 
this stuff for the next twenty years. 
Hypnos!” She hisses like one of 
them snakes I see in a zoo the last 
time I’m on Earffi. 
“My sister has three carpets on 
the floor,” the other girl says. 
“Expensive carpets, one right on 
top of the other. She would have 
had a rough time with her husband, 
if he hadn’t bought four air cars.” 
We turn back to the visiscope. 
The crisis is planet-wide, and from 
Moscow to Honolulu hypnos are 
being chased through the streets 
or smoked out of their homes. 
“I’ll tell you one thing,” one of 
the girls says. “When this is over 
with, the hypnos — if there are any 
left — ^won’t be selling anything. If 
the government won’t put a stop 
to it, we’ll have ourselves a new 
government.” 
All of a sudden I notice Jackson 
has an odd look in his eyes. He 
slaps his hands together, kisses 
both of the girls, and pounds me 
on the back. “And I’ll have myself 
a job as a salesman,” he says. 
“Drink, anyone?” 
The next morning we throw out 
the girls, and take a rocket to New 
York. The girls aren’t happy about 
it. They’re looking forward to a 
month, maybe, with well-charged 
and well-heeled space men, but we 
throw them out. And all the way 
to New York Jackson keeps his 
nose in newspapers, reading about 
the riots. 
I do some reading myself, and 
I don’t see anything very exciting 
about that congressional report. 
It just says that hypnos make up 
a bigger hunk of the population 
than they’d thought, and it gives a 
breakdown of the occupations of 
hypnos: two per cent politicians, 
eight per cent working in some 
branch of medicine, three per cent 
criminals, two per cent in various 
odd jobs, and eighty-five per cent 
salesmen. 
This doesn’t mean much to us 
space bugs. Our credit isn’t worth 
much, and salesmen never bother 
us. But the rest of the population is 
in debt up to its ears from buying, 
buying — things it doesn’t need and 
can’t afford. When the report 
comes out, people start putting two 
and two together, and they don’t 
like the answer. Neither do the 
hypnotists, salesmen or otherwise. 
In New York, Jackson drags me 
along with him to a fancy office 
building. I see Terra Sales Corporation over the door just as we go 
in, and inside everything is a mess. 
Police guards, men replacing broken windows, men sweeping debris 
in the big lobby, and all the employees looking like a rich uncle 
has just died intestate. 
Jackson seems real happy about 
LLOYD BIGGLE, JR. 
everything, and he talks his way 
past the guards and the secretaries, 
and we end up in the office of a 
man named Stephens. He seems 
like a nice old man, but he also 
seems like he doesn’t much care to 
talk to us, or anyone else. 
“Oh, yes,” Stephens says. “I 
remember. The man from — ^how 
are you getting along?” 
Jackson pulls up a couple of 
chairs, and we sit down, and Jackson leans across the desk just like 
it belongs to him instead of this 
Stephens. After seeing him operate 
on Gallisto, I wonder if maybe he’s 
going to take over this place. 
“I understand, now, why you 
wouldn’t hire me,” Jackson says. 
“I suppose you do,” Stephens 
says. “Of course all of our salesmen 
were hypnotists. Have been as long 
as I’ve been with the firm.” 
“And if a man couldn’t hypnotize 
you into hiring him, you turned 
him down.” 
“Naturally. I have more than a 
normal resistance to hypnotism, 
and if a man can hypnotize me, I 
know he’s good. Of course, we 
wouldn’t hire just any hypnotist 
but he . .” 
“According to this morning’s 
papers, the government will take 
action before the day is out — and 
you won’t be hiring any hypnotists 
at all. So I want a job.” 
“The answer is still no,” Stephens 
says. 
I can see Jackson getting mad. 
“If hypnotists can’t sell, you’ll have 
to hire someone else, or go out of 
business.” 
“We had a policy meeting this 
morning, and the General Council 
... ON THE DOTTED LINE 
of Sales Companies also had a 
meeting. We’ve agreed to go out 
of business, if it comes to that.” 
He grins at us, but he doesn’t 
look particularly happy. “The 
restriction can’t last more than a 
month. It’ll result in an unimaginable business slump, and then 
we’ll be able to put the hypnotists 
back to work. Our economy can’t 
function without them. There’s no 
other way to make the population 
consume our enormous output of 
material goods. So I’m sorry, but 
the recommendation I gave you 
two years ago still stands. Find 
something else to do.” 
“I think you’re a little out of 
touch with the situation,” Jackson says. “I’ll wait around for 
awhile, and see you later.” 
Stephens told him he’d be wasting his time. 
“What happens now?” I say, 
when we get outside the building. 
“We contact the Jovian Mining 
Company, and arrange for an indefinite leave of absence,” Jackson 
says. “Then we get jobs — something in the government service, 
I think, where this slump won’t hit 
us. And we wait. I’m going to get 
a job as a salesman. Maybe I’ll 
even make a salesman out of you!” 
I don’t think much of that idea, 
but I like the fellow, so I go along 
with him. We don’t have any trouble about a leave of absence. I’ve 
been with the company eighteen 
years, and I have a lot of accumulated leave time. And Jackson is a 
good man, and they want him 
back. So we get jobs with the 
postal service, and wait to see 
what will happen. 
5. ARNOLD STEPHENS 
A t the time Mark Jackson 
came to see me, we actually 
thought we could ride out the 
trouble and get our hypnotists back 
to work. The slump developed rapidly. Our economy changed over 
night from one in which everyone 
bought everything to one in which 
no one bought anything. Ten million workers were unemployed by 
the second week, and they happily 
settled down to collect their unemployment checks, make grudging payments on the things they’d 
already bought, and try to save a 
little money. The number of unemployed continued to rise daily. 
By the third month the economy 
was in a catastrophic condition, 
and congress still refused to consider repealing its anti-hypno laws. 
One congressman attempted to introduce new legislation, and withdrew it the next day when his constituents started circulating recall 
petitions. 
We broke down, then, and 
started hiring non-hypnos as salesmen, I made an effort to locate 
Jackson, but he hadn’t left an 
address, and the mining company 
he’d been working for knew nothing 
about him except that he’d requested a leave of absence. 
In the middle of the fourth 
month, Jackson came to see me 
again. 
‘T see that you’re hiring nonhypnos,” he said. 
“Yes,” I admitted. “How did 
you know?” 
“One tried to sell me an air car 
today. Most miserable performance 
I’ve ever seen. He stopped me on 
the street, and hemmed and hawed, 
and finally said, T suppose you 
wouldn’t want to buy a new air 
car.’ I said no, and he thanked 
me kindly and walked away.” 
He laughed uproariously, and 
there wasn’t much that I could 
say. 
“And look here,” he said, and 
waved a newspaper under my nose. 
There was a small box set in 
the center of the first page. The 
first line ordered me to look at 
my shoes. I didn’t, and read on. 
“Looking shabby? Worn out? Buy 
a glimmering new pair of EXCONS!” 
“What the devil is that?” I 
said. 
“Advertisement. First twentyfourth century advertisement I’ve 
ever seen. Not bad, either, for an 
infant profession. Hell of a lot 
better than that salesman did.” 
I pulled out the sales chart for 
the past four weeks, and shoved it 
across my desk. Jackson stared at 
it. “No sales?” 
“Not one. We’ve had a thousand 
non-hypnos out selling, and they 
haven’t made one sale. People are 
so delighted to be able to say no 
that they just aren’t buying anything. Think you could do something about that?” 
“Your darned right I could!” 
I looked at him carefully. “I 
can concede that in a society where 
there was no hypnotic selling the 
salesmen would necessarily develop 
highly specialized and efficient 
techniques. I’m not convinced that 
those techniques would be successful in a society where all 
LLOYD BIGGLE, JR. 
selling has been hypnotic, but I’m 
happy to give you a chance to show 
me. Let’s go down to the warehouse, and you can pick out anything you want to sell.” 
He grinned. “I’ve been waiting 
over two years for this. Let’s go!” 
We went to the warehouse, and 
Jackson selected a stunning household ornament — a miniature portable fountain which contained its 
own power supply and furnished a 
dazzling display of colors at the 
touch of a button. I explained 
the use of our order forms, and he 
asked for a pocket recorder to take 
along with him. 
“Do you mind if I watch you 
work?” I said. 
I think the idea pleased him. 
He spent some time selecting an 
apartment building, and when he’d 
made up his mind, I asked him 
why that particular one. 
“Government workers,” he said. 
“They’re still employed, but they’re 
not in such a high income class 
that the doors have viewing screens. 
If you want to sell to a housewife, 
you have to be able to get your 
foot in the door.” 
He started with the first apartment, and met the housewife with 
a sweeping bow. “We’re making 
a Consumer Survey,” he said. “May 
we come in?” 
I don’t know which of us was 
the more astonished, myself, or 
that plump housewife. She backed 
away dumbly, and allowed us to 
enter. 
I stood by the door, and he 
circled around the living room 
studying the drapes, and checking 
on the furniture, while the house
... ON THE DOTTED LINE 
wife trailed along behind him. 
“Rather cramped for space, 
aren’t you?” Jackson said. 
“Why, no ... ” she stammered. 
“This color scheme clashes badly. 
Did you select it yourself?” 
“I . ” 
“And the fiuniture arrangement. 
All wrong. No, I’m sorry, but I’m 
afraid you can’t qualify.” 
“Qualify for what?” she said. 
Jackson pulled the fountain out 
of a satchel. He set it on the table 
and touched the button, and the 
room sparkled with color. I looked 
at the childish delight in that housewife’s face, and thought, “Damned 
if he isn’t going to do it!” And the 
next moment he completely dumbfounded me. 
“I’ve been authorized to place 
a limited number of these wonderful fountains in deserving homes,” 
he said. “But as I told you, yours 
can’t qualify. Sorry.” 
He turned off the fountain, stuck 
it back in the satchel, and started 
for the door. 
I’ve rarely seen a woman get so 
angry. Face flushed, arms waving, 
she planted herself in the doorway, 
and refused to let him go. They 
argued for a few minutes, and 
finally he relented and allowed her 
to sign an order form. 
There were sixty-two apartments 
in that building, and Jackson sold 
sixty-two fountains without varying 
his technique by one syllable. Then 
he handed me the order forms. 
“I’m tired,” he said. “I think 
I’ll call it a day.” 
I was tired, and I was also 
speechless. I thought, “Is that how 
they sold things in the twentieth 
century? By insulting the customer 
and trying to keep him from buying?” I went home myself, and 
went to bed early. 
And Jackson called me out of 
bed at ten o’clock. “Better come 
down to Police Central,” he said. 
“Pm under arrest” 
It took me a moment to collect 
my thoughts, and I finally managed 
to ask him what he’d done. 
“Hypnotic selling,” he said. 
“Twenty-one husbands are down 
here complaining that I hypnotized 
their wives into buying those fountains. And they keep coming in. 
They tell me the maximum penalty 
is life imprisonment. I’m surprised 
it isn’t death.” 
At that moment I had a flicker 
of doubt — his odd performances, 
and the peculiar reactions of those 
women, I suppose. “Jackson,” I 
said, “you didn’t by chance hypnotize those women, did you?” 
“Certainly not!” he bellowed. 
“I’ll be right down,” I said. 
I contacted the firm’s legal advisor, and we went down together. 
Police Central was in an uproar. 
There were more than forty complaining husbands by the time we 
got there, and they kept coming in. 
Some had their wives along. The 
men ranted angerly. The women 
confessed that Jackson hadn’t sold 
them anything. In fact, he’d tried 
not to sell them. They’d bought 
because they wanted the fountain. 
They still wanted it. The police 
contacted Central Records, and 
found Jackson wasn’t listed as a 
hypnotist. Jackson produced his 
pocket recorder, and played back a 
few of those sales interviews. A 
hastily summoned psychiatrist heard 
the evidence, and declared that it 
was shrewd psychology, but not 
obviously an example of hypnotic 
selling. Reporters gleefully took 
notes and photographs and interviewed the women. And of course 
Jackson was released. 
The next morning his photo was 
on the visiscope, and the front 
page of every newspaper. “Master 
Salesman,” the caption read. Jackson stormed into my office and 
angerly slammed down a paper. 
“We’ve got to put a stop to this!” 
“You’re news,” I told him. “Except for absolute necessities, that’s 
the first time anyone has bought 
anything for months — on the entire planet! We can’t keep the 
papers from talking about that.” 
He shook his head. “I don’t like 
it, but — coming along today?” 
He went down to the warehouse 
and took his own photos of the 
latest model air car, and we went 
off to prowl around a government 
parking lot. A somewhat battered 
vehicle came gliding in, and Jackson stopped the driver — a portly, 
important-looking government official. 
“This your car?” Jackson said. 
“Yes. Say — where have I seen 
you before?” 
Jackson scowled. “Couldn’t say. 
I’m a little surprised to see a man 
in your position flying a beat-up 
job like that. Now look at that 
car over there.” He pointed to a 
shining model that obviously had 
been purchased just before the 
riots. “People judge a man by the 
car he flies. I’ll bet that man’s 
neighbors think he’s somebody/^ 
LLOYD BIGGLE, JR. 
The man’s face modulated 
through several stages of perplexity. “Never thought of that,” he 
said. “Kids really wear out a car 
in a hurry. Fve got five teen-agers, 
and they have every one of my 
five air cars in a mess.” 
“That’s easily solved,” Jackson 
said. “Get a new car, and keep it 
for yourself. When it starts looking 
shabby, you can give it to the kids, 
and get another one.” He gestured 
at the other car. “Really beautiful, 
isn’t it?” 
“It certainly is,” the man admitted. 
Suddenly Jackson had an order 
form in his hand. “Sign here,” he 
said, “and I’ll have a better one 
delivered to you this afternoon.” 
The man signed. I watched Jackson sell seven air cars, and then 
I had to go back to my office. He 
came in early in the afternoon, with 
thirty-nine signed orders. 
Thirty-nine majors! No hypnosalesman had ever been able to extend control over that many men 
in one day who qualified for major 
sales in spite of credit restrictions 
and prior purchase commitments. 
“Amazing,” I said. “You’re certain 
you don’t have some latent hypnotic ability?” 
“If I did, I wouldn’t be a salesman,” he said. “Where’s the pleasure in selling if the customer can’t 
say no?” 
“All right. I’m convinced. I 
want you to start right away training salesmen.” 
“No,” he said. “I need to do 
some more experimenting. There’s 
something about all this that 
bothers me.” 
“What could be wrong? You’re 
selling, you’re making an excellent 
record. Isn’t that what you wanted 
to do?” 
“The people are too naive,” he 
said. “They don’t say no. And a lot 
of them should, with the childish 
approaches I’m using. Tomorrow 
I’m going back to selling fountains.” 
Jackson was in the news again 
the next morning, along with interviews with men who’d bought 
air cars. Some of them were chagrined, and some of them thought 
it was a good joke. One or two 
thought they needed a new air 
car. All of them had their reactions to Jackson’s selling technique 
publicized on page one. 
“I wish they’d quit that,” Jackson said. 
“They won’t. You’re news, and 
even the people that buy from you 
are news. Evidently they enjoy 
that. Might as well get used to it.” 
We went out again with the 
fountain. The first housewife met 
us at the door, stared, and squealed 
with delight. 
“You’re the salesman!” she said. 
“I saw your picture. Do come in!” 
Jackson looked at me, shrugged, 
and followed her into the living 
room. She hovered around him excitedly. “I read all about it. Do it 
to me, just like you did to all those 
other women.” 
Jackson glanced about the room. 
“No. I’m sorry. I’m afraid you can’t 
qualify . .” 
She shrieked with laughter. 
“That’s it!” she giggled. “Thafs 
exactly it. I read all about it. Do it 
some more!” 
. ON THE CXDTTED LINE 
“Your living room is much too 
small.” 
Another giggle. “That’s it!” 
“The color scheme clashes badly.” 
“That’s it!” 
He placed the fountain on the 
table. “It’s a beautiful ornament, 
but I’m afraid you can’t qualify.” 
“That’s all right,” she said. “My 
husband wouldn’t want me to buy 
it. But thank you ever so much for 
showing it to me.” 
And we were back in the hallway, both of us thoroughly unnerved. We had ten more sessions 
with fascinated, giggling housewives before Jackson gave up and 
went home. He sold no fountains. 
The next morning he went out to 
sell air cars, and he was back before noon — with no orders. 
“They slap me on the back,” he 
said. “They buy me drinks. I had 
more free drinks this morning than 
in any six months I can remember. 
They take me around and introduce me to their friends. And when 
I try to point their thinking towards 
a sale, they laugh in my face, and 
say, ‘So you’re the salesman! Sell 
me something!’ ” 
“The publicity,” I said. 
“Yes. I’ll have to think of something new.” 
He did. The next day he was 
sensational. The following day he 
failed to make a single sale. As the 
days went by, that pattern was repeated over and over. He would 
try out a new approach, and enjoy phenomenal success. Invariably 
one of his customers would delightedly contact a reporter, and 
the next morning all of the details 
would be revealed to the reading 
and listening public. And that particular approach never worked 
again. 
“I think I understand it,” he said 
finally. “If I can catch this twentyfourth century customer unawares, 
he’s incredibly naive. He can’t say 
no. But if he’s forwarned, he has a 
terrific sales resistance. If we could 
only get rid of the publicity . .” 
“We can’t,” I said. “The question is, could you teach other salesmen to come up with something 
new every day?” 
“No. In time, some of them 
could. But it takes native ability, 
and lots of selling experience. All I 
could do at the start would be to 
teach them an approach I’ve tested 
myself.” 
“But once you’ve tested it, it 
won’t work again.” 
“That seems to be true.” 
“Then I’m afraid we’re beaten. 
One man can’t stop an economic 
slump all by himself.” 
Jackson got to his feet wearily. 
“There must be some way to lick 
the problem. And if anyone can 
find it, it’ll be me.” 
But he didn’t find it. He worked 
incessantly, and he grew increasingly irritable. He seemed to be wearing himself away, day by day, and 
finally I made him take a week’s 
rest. 
And during that week congress 
took courage and acted. It drew up 
a detailed code of what could be 
sold to whom, and how much, and 
let the hypnos go back to work. 
When Jackson returned, the economic slump was on its way out, 
and — ^much as I regretted it — so 
LLOYD BIGGLE, JR. 
was Jackson. 
“You can have your job back, 
and carry on any way you like,” I 
told him. “I appreciate what you 
tried to do. No one denies that your 
performance was remarkable. All 
the same, you’d have a bad time 
competing with hypnos.” 
He took it amazingly well. “I 
know I would,” he said grimly. 
“But I still think I can lick the 
problem. I’ll keep working on it. 
And I promise you — I’ll be back.” 
I never expected to see him 
again. 
6. ERF ZEDDEN 
J ACKSON gives me a pretty bad 
time while he’s being a salesman, and it gets worse by the day. 
He climbs all over me if the least 
little thing goes wrong around the 
apartment, and he sits up most of 
the night figuring out ways to sell 
things. I think the fellow is killing 
liimself, and I’m damned glad 
when his boss makes him take a 
week off. We go to one of those luxury hotels on the moon for the 
whole week, and though I hate the 
place, I don’t say anything, because I figure he needs the rest. 
And then on the day we get back 
he goes down to the sales company, 
and comes back a little later to tell 
me the whole thing is off. We’re 
going back to Mars. I consider this 
the first good news since we hit 
Earth. 
The Jovian Mining Company is 
glad to have us back — him, anyway. They make him take a demotion for being away so long, but 
in no time at all he’s back where 
... ON THE DOTTED LINE 
he was, and he keeps going up. It 
takes him just five years to work all 
the way up to President. 
So we go to live on Mars, and I 
get a promotion and a raise in salary to be his right-hand man, as 
he calls it, though I don’t do anything but run errands for him. And 
I can see he isn’t happy, no matter 
how high he goes. He wants to be a 
salesman, and he’s convinced himself he’s going back, some day, and 
show all those hypnos how it’s done. 
He paces the floor with that odd 
look in his eyes. He sits up late at 
night thinking out ways to sell 
things, and making up sales talks, 
and planning what he calls sales 
promotions. 
He practices his sales talks on 
me, and I keep telling him they’re 
good, though after I hear the first 
one they all sound alike. 
Things go on that way for a couple of years, and I’m getting worried about Jackson’s health, and 
all of a sudden a crisis develops in 
the Jovian Mining Company. The 
mines on Callisto start paying out. 
Now the company expects this 
for the last fifty years, and new 
operations are underway on Ganymede and Europa and lo long before I first hit space, and the company makes maybe ten million per 
cent profit on its Callisto operations, and nobody feels bad about 
pulling out. 
Nobody but Jackson. He thinks 
it’s a crisis, and he drags me off to 
a directors’ meeting. 
“It’s a scandalous waste,” he 
says. “We have six good-sized 
towns on CalUsto, and the cost of 
salvaging that fused plastic would 
be terrific.” 
“Don’t give it a thought/’ they 
tell him. “If it costs too much to 
salvage, just forget it.” 
“It isn’t good business to forget 
about an investment of that size.” 
“My dear fellow,” they say. “Our 
investment on Callisto was amortized a hundred years ago. The 
company never thought the mines 
would hold up this long. It’s excellent business to forget about it.” 
Jackson shakes his head, and I 
see that odd look in his eyes. “Callisto is the sole property of the 
Jovian Mining Company,” he says. 
“If it’s no longer of use to us, I’m 
asking the board of directors for 
permission to sell it.” 
There’s about two minutes of silence, followed by the wildest 
laughter I’ve heard since the antihypno riots. Those old men just 
lean back and laugh themselves 
silly. Sell Callisto? Why not sell 
Mars? Or Earth? 
Jackson just sits there calmly, 
and when they quiet down, he puts 
it in the form of a resolution, Callisto to be sold, if possible, with 
the company retaining all mineral 
rights. The directors can’t see anything wrong with the idea, except 
that it isn’t possible, and Jackson 
gets unanimous approval. The next 
morning we leave for Earth. 
Jackson spends a few days in the 
New York Library, where he fills a 
ledger with notes and statistics, and 
it takes him a week to get these organized. Then we call on a Mr. 
Whaley, who is president of a large 
travel bureau. 
“I understand you people have 
had a tough time since that legis
92 
lation on hypnotic selling went into 
effect,” Jackson says. 
This Mr. Whaley is glad to have 
a shoulder to cry on, and he tells 
us all his troubles. Before the antihypno riots he has hypno salesmen 
out selling travel tours to people 
who don’t want to take them. A lot 
of people don’t even want them 
after they buy them, so they don’t 
use the tickets, which adds up to 
nice slices of pure profit for the 
travel agency. After the riots, the 
government puts a stop to this. 
“Ever since then, you’ve been 
looking for an attraction to make 
people want to travel,” Jackson 
says. 
“We have,” Whaley admits. 
“And right now, you’re thinking 
of building a luxury Honeymoon 
Hotel on the moon.” 
“We were thinking about it,” 
Whaley says, “but it would be too 
expensive to build. We’d have to 
charge rates that young couples 
couldn’t afford.” 
“I have an answer to your problem,” Jackson says. “Take your 
honeymooners to Callisto, where 
excellent accommodations are already built. You’d have to make 
a few alterations, but the expense 
would be minor.” 
“Wouldn’t work,” Whaley says. 
“It’s too far. Most of the honeymoons would have to be over 
before the young people could get 
there.” 
“I believe I have some statistics 
that would interest you,” Jackson 
says, and he hauls out his ledger. 
He tosses statistics at Whaley for 
twenty minutes. He shows him that 
ninety per cent of the immigrants 
LLOYD BIGGLE, JR. 
to Mars are young and unmarried, 
and what the Martian marriage 
rate is. He shows him how much 
money the government is spending 
to interest the citizens of Earth in 
setding elsewhere in the solar system, and how the government 
would joyfully furnish subsidies for 
a Callisto honeymoon fleet 
equipped with fast military drives. 
‘‘With the high marriage rate on 
Mars, and government assistance 
on transport from Earth, you’ll 
operate at full capacity from the 
start,” he says. “And what’s more, 
you’ll have something to sell. Something that will interest and excite 
people.” 
“Think of the slogans you can 
use,” Jackson says. “Honeymoon 
among the hnoons — the twelve 
moons of Jupiter. Honeymoon under Jupiter, the biggest moon in the 
universe. Man, it’s a natural!” 
Whaley shakes the dreamy look 
out of his eyes, and says, “Just 
what are you trying to sell?” 
“Callisto,” Jackson says. 
Whaley shakes his head. “We 
aren’t big enough. No travel agency is big enough.” 
“All the agencies together are 
big enough,” Jackson says. “And 
you can ^1 profit. This is a plan to 
create business.” 
“I have no authority,” Whaley 
says. “Fd have to take it up with 
the council.” 
“Just introduce me,” Jackson 
says, “and I’ll take it up with the 
council.” 
It ends, of course, with his selling 
Callisto. For a few days we’re overrun with reporters, and Jackson 
gets in all the papers. MASTER 
... ON THE DOTTED LINE 
SALESMAN SELLS THE MOON 
— that sort of thing. The directors 
of the Jovian Mining Company 
send Jackson a bonus and a chunk 
of stock, and tell him as long as he’s 
already on Earth, to take a vacation. I’m afraid Jackson will get 
ideas about being a salesman again, 
but he doesn’t. He just takes a vacation. 
Then one day this man Stephens, 
of Terra Sales Corporation, invites 
us to have dinner with him. I think 
maybe he wants Jackson to come 
back to work, but no — we just 
have a good dinner, and Jackson 
meets his daughter, and from the 
way they react on each other I 
think Jackson will be in the market 
for one of those Callisto honeymoons. 
“I see you’ve solved your problem,” Stephens says. 
“Yes,” Jackson says. “I’ve solved 
it. If my sales presentations won’t 
work more than once, why — all I 
have to do is sell something that 
only needs to be sold once.” 
At the time I don’t understand 
this, but right now I’m giving it 
some thought. Jackson marries the 
Stephens girl, and brings her back 
to Mars. He settles down to raise a 
big family and increase the profits 
of the Jovian Mining Company. 
He’s a cinch to be the next chairman of the board, which is a neat 
achievement for a young man, but 
I can see he’s not satisfied with 
himself. 
And lately I see that odd look in 
his eyes, and I know he’s figuring 
out a way to sell something. 
So help me, I think it’s Jupiter. 
END 
Illustrated by Paul Orban 
BY DAN GALOUYE 
T he frenzied bustle of Sector Headquarters hit Coordinator Vance McGune like a stifling blast as he stepped 
reluctantly into the arena-like control room. 
He paused and wearily scanned the bulky correlator machines, the clerks and technicians scurrying about like distressed ants, the video-communication operators, the endless 
procession of control crewmen and survey-detection personnel. 
A ripple of poised motionlessness swept across the room as 
they discovered his presence. The delayed reaction was somewhat like an assault wave. 
“Old Man’s called a board meeting Thursday at the Secretariat.” 
“Crew Forty-Eight needs more shields south of Denver. Can 
I shift the plates from Flagstaff?” 
“The Central Russian Sector wants us to run a high altitude current check.” 
“Commissioner Carmath wants a spot run down.” 
“Here’s that 
oceanographic report . 
Before McCune 
reached his desk, 
he had taken in tow 
a scampering retinue of more than a 
dozen — all clamoring for preferential 
attention. 
The Coordinator was a tall, rangy man with sagging, despondent lines in his face. If his hair seemed sparse and unkempt, it wasn’t due as much to carelessness at to resignation 
to the inevitable. 
He calmly held up his hands and quieted the restless mob. 
The job, he had learned, demanded a certain amount of 
forced detachment; otherwise it would be insufferable. 
“One at a time,” he admonished. “What’s the latest on the 
tote board, Woolcut?” 
The Detection Supervisor indicated the items with a stabbing finger. “Four new spots ranging from lukewarm to 
damned hot. One — an East Seattle area — ^might call for partial evacuation.” 
“All in our Sector?” 
“Three are. One overlaps the Western Canadian area.” 
“What’s the trouble?” 
Woolcut made a demonstrative gesture of wiping his blunt 
95 
SHUFFLE BOARD 
brow. “A front’s sweeping down 
the coast with a trace of warm 
rain. Not too much — it’ll probably 
add only about a twentieth of a 
roentgen to the average exposure 
badge. But there’ll be more if we 
don’t cap the source.” 
McCune dropped into his chair 
and began thumbing through a 
sheaf of reports. “Where do you 
figure it’s coming from?” 
“Probably a mid-arctic disposal 
dump used by an early Alaskan 
reactor.” 
“One of those outfits with records that don’t go back more than 
a hundred years, I suppose,” the 
Coordinator offered dismally. 
Woolcut’s nod was commiserating. “When we track it down we’ll 
probably find an exposed pile of 
light garbage. My guess would be 
selenium 79, with a half-life of 
six hundred thousand years.” 
“Send up all the crews we can 
spare.” 
McCune turned to the second 
in line. It was going to be another 
“just dandy” day — as they all had 
been in the eight years since he 
had taken over the Western U.S. 
Sector. 
Somehow it all struck him as 
being a paradox — a monotony of 
newness. The scores of detection 
and control problems that surged 
to the surface every day were all 
different. But the differences 
merely added up to the ennui of an 
eternal job that had to be done by 
the Radioactivity Control Commission (or Shufflle Board, as it 
was facetiously known) if greatgrandson was to be of the same 
genetic stock as great-grandpop. 
But today, he reminded himself 
with a grim sense of desperation, 
would be different . Beth had 
gone to the hospital. The thought 
and his inescapable reaction of selfabasement were like a cold sweat 
steaming deep under his tanned 
skin. 
The first avalanche of details 
attended to, McCune settled back 
in his chair and loosened his 
collar. He lit a cigarette and 
took a deep, exhilarating draught. 
But his respite was short-lived as 
the Detection Supervisor elbowed 
his way through the scurrying 
workers. 
“Here’s the latest on the 
Hawaiian Subsector,” Woolcut offered in strained tones. “Geology’s 
recorded another fault shift during the night. They’re working out 
a probability table on whether 
Haleakala’s going to blow.” 
“How much proctactinium has 
been dumped in that crater to 
date?” 
Woolcut gestured uncertainly. 
“We’ve only got a rough estimate 
from the eight reactor companies 
on the islands — something like 
seventy-two thousand tons.” 
The Coordinator winced. 
“Damned fools! They were warned 
fifty years ago not to use that hole 
on Maui as a disposal site. Just 
because a volcano hasn’t acted 
up since 1750 doesn’t mean it 
won’t ever bust loose again. What’s 
three hundred and twenty-five 
years in the life of a volcano?” 
The other shrugged noncommittally. “It’ll sure raise hell if it 
starts blowing now. I hate to think 
DAN GALOUYE 
of evacuating five hundred thousand people on that island.” 
‘‘Or maybe six million on the 
whole chain.” McGune dismissed 
him and motioned for his Control 
Supervisor. 
“What sort of standby complement do we have on Maui?” he 
asked. 
“Three complete shuffle crews,” 
Fordham disclosed. 
“Any suggestions on what we can 
do with all that hot Pa^®^?” 
Fordham spread his hands helplessly. “The only safe place I could 
find was Diamondhead Crater on 
Oahu.” 
McCune looked up sharply. “But 
that’s right in Honolulu — under 
the noses of over a million people!” 
“I know. But it’s the best we 
can arrange on a temporary basis. 
We’ll line the crater and cap it, of 
course.” 
McCune leaned back in solicitous thought ... It was an endless game. After the emergency was 
over, public reaction would demand that the stuff be taken out 
of Diamondhead and dumped elsewhere. But the new disposal site 
would probably leak contamination 
into the environment and some 
harassed shuffle crew ten years 
hence would have to gather it up 
and find another place for it. And 
all the while the accumulation of 
reactor waste would continue inexorably. 
“Who’s in charge of the Maui 
operation?” 
Fordham grimaced apologetically. “Nobody. “We’re fresh out 
of supervisory personnel, what with 
the Denver and Seattle deals and 
SHUFFLE B’OARD 
the New Mexico — 
McCune swore disgustedly. Then 
his blunt fingers drummed Ae desk 
meditatively. 
“I know what you’re thinking. 
Chief,” the other broke in with 
concern. “Don’t try it. If the Commissioner finds out he’ll dump you 
off the board. It’ll mean your job.” 
“It won’t be the first time I had 
to supervise a UN shuffle detail.” 
“It won’t even be the first time 
this month. But, hell — six years ago 
you were four times over your 
maximum allowable roentgen level. 
I’ll bet you’ve absorbed eight hundred R’s in the fifteen years you’ve 
been with the Commission.” 
“Two or three more won’t hurt,” 
McCune offered laconically. 
“Won’t even show up on my badge 
— if I can arrange another switch'^ 
He glanced down at the black 
square clipped to his lapel. Then 
he looked over at the rack where 
Miss Jarred’s badge was visible 
against the light material of her 
coat . Someday his secretary 
would begin wondering where she 
was picking up so much radiation. 
Briefly, he considered how she 
might react when the inspectors 
told her she was rapidly moving out 
of the “genetically safe” range. 
Fordham went off frowning disdainfully. “It may be all right for 
you, since you don’t expect to raise 
a family,” he mumbled over his 
shoulder. “But I’m keeping my 
level down. I’ve got two fine kids. 
And I’m going to make damned 
sure the third will be normal too.” 
This brought McCune’s thoughts 
back to the inescapable and, hesitatingly, he dialed the hospital. 
He spoke low so the others wouldn’t 
learn Beth hadn^t been visiting her 
mother after all. 
“No, Mr. McCune,” the head 
jnatemity nurse assured. “Your 
wife hasn’t left the labor room. 
We’ll call you when she goes into 
delivery.” 
“No!” he shouted. Then, more 
softly, “No— I’ll call back.” 
Numbly, he let the receiver dangle from his hand for a long while 
. He’d never intended having 
a baby. Beth, however, always had. 
And, after his carelessness, she had 
furtively kept her condition to herself until it was too late to do anything about it • • • Damn her! 
I T WAS mid-moming when Miss 
Jarred ushered in the reporter 
from the wire service. The Coordinator recognized Neil Lancer, one 
of the top spot news men, even before she announced him. 
McCune regarded him with a 
half-venomous look of resignation 
and reluctantly offered a chair. 
Diffidently, the other eased his 
hat up off his forehead and lit a 
cigarette. “Office wants me to get 
your views on those statements by 
Dr. Puang.” 
“Who’s Dr. Puang?” 
“The Pakistanian geneticist.” 
Lancer leaned forward. “Maybe 
you haven’t run across the articles, 
so I’ll brief you. The boys back in 
the L.A. bureau are anxious for 
your reaction.” 
Like hell they were, McCune decided. Lancer wasn’t the kind of 
man they’d send out on a feature 
assignment . They’d gotten wind 
of the Hawaiian situation. 
“Puang,” the newsman said, 
crossing his legs, “has come out 
with a treatise on adaptive evolution. He seems to think the human 
race is inherently equipped to take 
care of any reasonable change in 
its environment.” 
If there was a Puang, McCune 
felt sure, he would have heard of 
him. Furthermore, it was obvious 
from the way the reporter was 
glancing alertly around the room 
that he was trying to pick up 
answers to questions he wasn’t 
going to ask. 
“Make it short,” the Coordinator 
snapped. “I’m busy.” 
“Well, Puang believes humanity 
will eventually adjust itself to living in a radioactive environment.” 
Lancer abstractedly fingered his 
radiation-tabulator badge. “He 
sees adaptive evolution producing 
a strain that’ll withstand increasingly higher levels of radiation without going off the deep end with 
runaway mutations.” 
Woolcut pushed up to the desk. 
“We’ve located that garbage heap 
in the arctic!” 
“The one causing the hot rain?” 
The Detection Supervisor nodded anxiously. “Just as I guessed — 
selenium. They had it capped under 
the edge of a glacier on Victoria 
Island. But erosion exposed the 
dump and arctic winds are beginning to pick up contamination.” 
“Good work. Give your data to 
Fordham. Tell him to set up liaison with the Western Canadian Sector and get the stuff recapped until 
we figure out what to do with it.” 
DAN GALOUYE 
McCune faced the reporter 
again. “All right, Lancer. Let’s 
bury this Puang guy and call off 
the play acting. But first I’m going 
to read you the riot act • . • Section Twenty-One of the Public 
Panic Law deputizes — 
Lancer moaned dismally, took 
up the chant, “ — deputizes all 
ShuflSe Board members to classify certain data as restricted in 
the interest of public safety . ♦ . 
But hell, McCune, give me a 
break!” 
“Under the protective provisions 
of Section Twenty-One,” the Coordinator continued dispassionately, 
“I’m charging you with the information that a critical situation is 
making up in the Hawaiian Islands. A dead volcano crater that 
has been used as a dump for reactor waste is now showing signs of 
erupting.” 
One of Woolcut’s assistants 
called over from a desk halfway 
across the room, “Another R-level 
increase in the coastal waters off 
Oregon!” 
McCune’s shoulders fell dejectedly . Punch the ball in on one 
side and it bulges out the other. 
You couldn’t win; couldn’t even 
get ahead long enough to relax. 
The assistant came over. “You 
suppose it’s the Portland reactor 
cluster?” 
“What else? They’ve been sluicing off Fe®® solute through the Columbia River into the Pacific. But 
hunt it down to make sure before 
we get them on the carpet.” 
TTie assistant hesitated. 
“Yes?” McCune asked. 
“Just wondering what they’ll do 
with the stuff now.” 
“That’s our problem. They’ll 
probably still be able to sluice off 
half of their garbage. We’ll just 
have to find a place for the otiher 
half.” 
Watching the man return to his 
desk, McCune let his thoughts drift 
back through the years to his uncle’s farm . They’d had a hound 
dog that used to make a ritual out 
of burying a bone. It would dig 
first here; decide it didn’t like the 
spot after all; pick up the bone 
from the half-excavated hole, and 
try another location. After four or 
five false starts, it would finally 
shuffle the morsel to what it considered an adequate cache. 
The RCC was confronted with 
much the same problem as the 
hound dog. Only, the adequate 
place seemed eternally elusive and 
the shufiling endless. 
He remembered the reporter. 
“All right, Lancer. You’re charged 
with top confidential information. 
If it gets into print, you and your 
bureau chief could get up to twenty years.” 
Disgusted, Lancer strode toward 
the door, brushing past Woolcut 
who was on his way to McCune’s 
desk. 
The Detection Supervisor’s face 
was drawn and haggard. “Volcanology has confirmed the subterranean rumblings in the vicinity of 
the Haleakala Crater.” 
McCune sprang up. “Send out 
Crews Four, Seven, Thirty-Three, 
Thirty-Four and Forty-One.” 
He cupped his hands and shouted over to the communications sec
SHUFFLE BOARD 
tion, “Get Volcanology and find 
out when we can take our men into 
the crater. 
“Miss Jarred/’ he tossed at his 
secretary, “call Supply and have 
them ship all available shielding 
material to the Hawaiian Subsector. 
“Woolcut — tell Flight Operations to service my ship.” 
With each shouted order, Coordination Headquarters had seemed 
to shift into a more agitated tempo 
of scurrying activity — until now the 
huge room was a blur of erratic 
motion. 
But, for McCune, there was 
nothing to do but await the “go 
ahead” from Volcanology. He 
couldn’t shrug off the sensation of 
denial and thwarted purpose 
brought on by the delay. Impatiently, he clawed at the armrests 
of his chair. 
Remembering Beth, however, he 
jolted erect and grabbed the phone. 
“Yes, Mr. McCune,” the nurse 
said indulgently, “she’s in delivery 
now. But it’ll be another hour — ” 
He dropped the receiver back in 
its cradle . He’d been a damned 
fool too. He should have ensured 
against anything like this happening. Then he would have avoided 
the months of worry — months during which they couldn’t see a doctor for fear their identity would 
become known and they’d be 
turned into objects of public curiosity. 
The papers would have liked 
that. Even now he could visualize 
the headlines: “Sector Coordinator, Four Times Over Safe Genetic 
Level, To Have Baby.” 
Not seeing a doctor until the last 
minute had been a source of constant apprehension. He was sure 
Beth had worried as much as he 
had over the fifty pounds she had 
gained. 
TARING ROCKETS crescendoed to an ear-splitting roar 
and died off abruptly, like a reverberating peal of thunder. The craft, 
a mile over Los Angeles Headquarters of the Western RCG Sector, 
shifted to its rotor and McCune listened to the fluttering grumble of 
the blades as it cushioned to a landing on the apron outside. 
Commissioner Carmath, formidably stocky and bristling with a 
bearing of intense purpose, pushed 
his way toward the main building. 
McCune met him at the entrance and was promptly brushed 
aside as the Chief of the UN Radioactivity Control Commission 
plowed a furrow through the scampering workers and drew up before 
the main tote board. 
“This Hawaiian thing — that the 
only emergency situation you got 
working?” he demanded. 
“The only one of any consequence. We’ve got twenty-six other 
operations — ” 
The Commissioner silenced him 
with an indignant stare. “This 
thing had better be worked out, 
McCune,” he threatened. “I’m 
holding you responsible for the 
whole affair!” 
“But they’ve been dumping in 
that crater for a whole generation!” 
“If you had the merest suspicion 
DAN GALOUYE 
something like this might develop,” 
Carmath went on uncompromisingly, “y^u should have taken preventive steps.” 
McCune stiffened with resentment. “Is that the way the Commission feels?” 
“That is the considered opinion 
of every single member of the 
board except yourself!” 
The Coordinator smiled bitterly 
. They hadn’t wasted any time 
in tagging their scapegoat. Well — 
to hell with the job. Let somebody 
else shuffle the stuff around for a 
change. Anyway, if they had run a 
total on his actual accumulated exposure, he would have been pensioned off years ago. 
“Let’s be reasonable about this. 
Commissioner,” he began nevertheless. “In the past week this Sector 
has had to control environmental 
radiation increases in more than a 
hundred — ” 
Carmath threw up his hands impulsively and moved toward the 
door. “I’ve no time to listen to you 
complain about routine control 
measures • . , A ten-thousand 
square-mile patch of Japanese 
fishing waters was declared contaminated today because some 
crackpot Coordinator picked the 
wrong spot in the Pacific to dump 
niobium®^ fifteen years ago. 
“In France, an entire dairy 
farming section has to be moved, 
lock, stock and barrel. Why? — 
Because the pastures are picking up 
radiation from God-knows-where — 
probably in rain from some hidden 
dump in the Alps.” 
He stopped and propped his 
hands on his hips. “You’d think 
SHUFFLE BOARD 
shuffling ameiicum^^^ a hundred 
miles into the Everglades would be 
a safe proposition for Miami, 
wouldn’t you? But what happens? 
— Hot insect life crops up in the 
area and now we’ve got one hell of 
a capping job, if not an all-out 
shuffling operation!” 
Carmath scowled. “And you try 
to tell me about your petty problems!” 
McCune wished to hell he’d get 
out. If the okay on the Haleakala 
Crater shuffle came through while 
the Commissioner was still around, 
he might learn there was nobody 
but McCune to supervise the operation. 
Fortunately, the Commission 
Chief turned and stormed out. 
McCune headed for his desk, almost colliding with the Detection 
Supervisor. 
Woolcut flashed a smug smile of 
satisfaction. “We’ve finally licked 
that hot artesian water problem in 
the Clovis-Tucumcari area.” 
“Well, don’t bother me with it!” 
McCune rudely waved him off. 
“Take it to Fordham.” 
Immediately contrite, though, 
he gripped the other’s arm. “Sorry. 
The Commissioner crawled all over 
me . What’s the deal in New 
Mexico?” 
Woolcut grinned. “An oil well 
ran dry about seventy-five years ago 
and someone pumped it full of 
promethium^^®. That stuff has a 
short half-life, but not short 
enough. It finally worked its way 
into the subterranean water sup
ply.” 
McCune shrugged hopelessly. 
“Then there isn’t too much we 
can do, except padlock the artesian 
wells and pipe in water from a 
clear area.” 
Disconsolately, he returned to his 
desk ... Was the world radiation 
level increasing astronomically? Or 
did it just seem that way because 
he was thoroughly tired of working out the day-to-day challenges? 
Real or imaginary, he conceded, 
everything was in one hell of a 
mess. Civilized humanity had been 
reduced to four billion radiationexposure badges with one person 
attached to each ... at least, that 
was the burlesque impression he 
carried around. 
. Four billion badges that had 
to be replaced monthly so the radiation they had absorbed could be 
measured and the figures entered 
on a million ledgers. That was the 
only way tabs could be kept to see 
that the natural mutation frequency wasn’t being knocked out of kilter. 
When he looked up, Fordham 
was standing in front of his desk. 
“Volcanology says we’d better 
start the Haleakala shuffle,” the 
Control Supervisor announced 
tensely. “They figure we got ten 
or eleven hours to move the Pa^^^ 
from the crater.” 
McCune nodded resignedly and 
glanced over at Miss Jarred’s coat. 
Whistling abstractedly, he rose and 
strolled to the rack. 
His back toward the secretary, 
he undipped her badge and pinned 
it to his lapel, replacing it with his 
own. With the designation on the 
reverse side, it was hardly likely 
she’d notice that the one on her 
coat wasn’t hers. 
Before he left the building, he 
called the hospital again . No, 
Mrs. McCune hadn’t come down 
from the delivery room yet. 
Five minutes later, the Sector 
Headquarters apron fell away beneath as the blades of his shuttle 
craft churned the air with a muffled 
roar. A mile up, he hit the powershift stud. The rotor retracted and 
the tubes took over with a furious 
grip of acceleration. 
W ITHIN THE hour, Coordinator McCune stood on the jagged rim of the crater, zippering up 
his plastic envelope and sealing off 
the seams. The Haleakala shuffle, 
he wearily acknowledged as he 
broke open the compressed air 
valve, was going to be one of the 
damndest operations he’d ever 
seen. 
Already the emergency crews had 
set up their equipment along the 
bowl of the crater. Their positions, 
behind mobile shields, were as he 
had assigned them over videocom 
while en route. 
Across the bowl, a steam shovel 
and a half-dozen bulldozers started 
down the slope, heading for the 
piles of Pa^®^ that glistened like 
blue-steel hills in the early morning 
sun. Beyond, the sky was dense 
with hovering shuffle craft, waiting to be called for loading. 
The crater itself was like a dismal plain of hell, with everything 
there but the heat . No, McCune corrected himself — the heat 
was there too. Only, it was a kind 
the traditional hell had never seen. 
DAN GALOUYE 
But curlers of gray smoke streaming from crevices in the bowl’s floor 
were a derisive indication that even 
fiery heat would soon make the illusion of Hades complete. 
“Attention all crews/’ he directed over the radio as he started 
down the slope. “Keep the hot 
stuff in front of your shields. Take 
the outermost piles first and work 
in.” 
The ground rumbled as tractors 
lumbered in from the rim, hauling 
empty packing crates. Then there 
was a softer but more ominous 
rumble and denser smoke ciurled 
from the fissures. 
Two bulldozers joined forces 
with one of the mobile shields and 
advanced on the nearest piles. The 
steam shovel and three tractors 
with packing cases took the cue 
and clumsily charged in. 
“That crew on the left!” McCune shouted, squinting to discern 
the number on its shield. “Crew 
Forty-One — ^your flank’s exposed! 
Either square around or back up.” 
He started forward again, drawn 
hypnotically toward the intense activity. But a special instinct of fear 
and danger held him back. 
Trapped between the two impulses 
that were like magnets, he was 
painfully strained with indecision. 
“You there — in Crew Seven,” he 
ordered. “Get back behind your 
shield . Outpost, send in two 
more shovels . Crews ThirtyThree, Sixteen and Two — take the 
third pile on the left . Shuffle 
Craft Number One — stand by to 
load.” 
Apprehensively, he fanned his 
radiation detector ahead of him. 
Its clatter rose to a steady^ alarming whine. 
It was going to be a disastrous 
job for the men in the Haleakala 
shuffle. No longer would it be a 
matter of fighting for genetic safety. Such a petty consideration, McCune realized, had long been exceeded. For, when you spoke of genetic purity, you were speaking in 
terms of only forty or fifty roentgens. These men would sop up 
radiation in the hundreds of roentgens. Now it was a fight for physical survival. 
Shuffle Craft One plummeted 
down, drew up sharply and hovered above the crane that was 
shoveling Pa^^^ into the cases. 
A thousand frantic voices suddenly shouted a hoarse alarm. 
McCune swore desperately as he 
watched the blast from die craft’s 
rotor buffet the blue-steel hills and 
scatter pulverized protactinium like 
dust. 
The swirling cloud of gray powder spread over the crater like a 
pall of death. 
“Get that copter out!” the Coordinator bellowed, retreating before 
the deadly dust. “All crews fall 
back!” 
But the men had already broken 
and were fleeing in frenzied disorder up the slope. 
He drew up as the copter skittered beyond the rim. “Outpost! 
Call in all shuttle crafts and lay 
dolly tracks down into the crater. 
We’ll have to cart the stuff out.” 
Volcanology came in. “We expect a major eruption within eight 
SHUFFLE BOARD 
hours, Coordinator. You’d better 
rush it up.” 
McCune forgot about his plastic 
encasement and tried to wipe his 
forehead. He only succeeded in 
smearing perspiration over the 
transparent surface so that he 
could hardly see through it. 
“Communications!” he called urgently. “Get out a general alarm. 
Have all Sectors send Class 1 emergency crews and equipment. 
“Supply — break out the doubleshielded manipulator suits and mobile platforms; we’re going to have 
to wallow in this damned stuff. 
“Civil Control — evacuate Maui 
and have your forces on the other 
islands stand by.” 
He took another reading from 
his R-detector and estimated the 
amount of radiation being absorbed 
by Miss Jarred’s badge on his lapel .. There was bound to be an 
investigation at the end of the 
month! A civilian turning up with 
a hundred and nine R’s in thirty 
days’ time would raise a stink anywhere. His years of badge switching were sure to be discovered. 
The last crews to leave the bowl 
were straggling past him. Watching 
them clamber up the slope, pale 
and haggard, he was thankful now 
that he had ordered a full Medical 
Standby complement assigned to 
the Outpost. 
Making doubly sure that the 
crater was unmanned, he climbed 
up to the ridge. 
A huge red and white shuttle 
craft roared in from the east, kicking over from rocket power at only 
a thousand feet above the crater. 
The blast of its rotor further agi
104 
tated the hot dust and the Coordinator swore volubly. 
“McCune!” came the enraged 
response. “Is that you down there?” 
He winced as he recognized the 
heavy voice of Commissioner Carmath and noticed the UN-RCC 
symbol on the craft. 
Watching the ship land he numbly peeled off his plastic envelope 
and, holding it by an inside fold, 
dropped the thing into a disposal 
bin. 
Carmath stormed over, sweeping 
the area before him with a counter. “McCune, you’re cashiered as 
of now! I’ll take over until another 
operation supervisor gets here.” 
The Coor^nator shrugged indifferently and started back toward 
his shuttle craft. 
Doggedly, Carmath followed. “I 
told the Chief Correlator you were 
pulling something like this. But 
Ronson said no. He said he investigated and found nothing.” 
McCune paid no attention. Instead, he grinned as he realized 
suddenly that the magnets he had 
fought for nearly half his life — the 
alternate poles of duty and selfconsideration — were no longer pulling. It was like a great burst of 
freedom. He would never again 
have to worry about operational 
radiation. 
S HE WAS asleep. Beneath the 
white sheet, McCune’s wife 
looked strangely small and helpless. Her face was wan and the lingering scent of the anesthetic was 
heavy in the room. 
For months he had feared this 
DAN GALOUYE 
moment. But now that it was here, 
he felt hardly any emotion at all 
. The baby had been born, as it 
inevitably would have been come 
hell or high water or fifty shuffle 
emergencies. And now that it was 
over, all the anxiety was gone, even 
though he hadn’t seen his daughter 
yet. 
Instead, there was the calming 
realization that Beth had been 
right all along; that they had desperately needed a child. And if the 
baby were something less than human, they would only love it all the 
more. 
His shoulders were squarer than 
they had ever been in all his thirtyeight years as he kissed his wife on 
the forehead. 
“Dr. Logan says you may see 
your daughter now, Mr. McCune.” 
He turned toward the nurse in 
the doorway. “Is — is the baby all 
right?” 
“There’s — ” the nurse hesitated 
awkwardly. “Dr. Logan is waiting.” 
She led the way down the corridor and he followed ... So there 
was something wrong. Still, he felt 
no dejection. After all, hadn’t he 
sincerely expected some sort of deformity? 
She motioned him to a halt in 
front of the glass partition of the 
nursery and went inside. He 
watched her cross to a doctor who 
was bending over one of the cribs. 
Then she spoke against the back of 
her hand and the physician looked 
up sharply and started anxiously 
toward McCune. 
But he paused and gestured for 
the nurse to follow with the baby. 
Her eyes widened apprehensively 
SHUFFLE BOARD 
and she shook her head. 
Tensing, McCune strained to see 
over the side of the crib. He was 
suddenly sick inside at the portentious pantomime he was witnessing. 
Why, he wanted to shout, was she 
afraid to pick up the baby? 
She was spared the apparently 
repulsive task, though, as five men 
wearing the arm bands of the UN 
Medical Research Commission 
swept down the corridor and 
barged into the nursery. Three of 
them crowded around the crib 
while two held X-ray plates up to 
the light. Astonished, they pointed 
with shaky fingers at details on the 
negatives. 
Good God! 
He hurled the door open and 
charged in. But his presence went 
unnoticed in the din of excited 
voices. 
“. compensative muscular development . .” 
“. completely enclosing the 
stroma and replacing the serous 
membrane . .” 
“. might be mistaken for 
splenomegaly, if it weren’t for the 
other decisive evidence . .” 
Nudging two of the medical men 
out of his way, McCune gripped 
the side of the crib and stared 
down. 
Dr. Logan came over and 
grasped his shoulder. “This isn’t the 
first case. There was one in Germany eleven years ago. But that 
one died. Oh, it wasn’t because of 
this,” he added hastily, waving his 
hand over the child. “It was a perfectly normal infant mortality. 
Then five years ago there was an( Continued on page 114 ) 
Illustrated by Paul Urban 
BY LEO KELLEY 
OING TO THE circus?” the man with the sallow comVF plexion asked. 
Kevin nodded but didn’t look at his questioner. He nervously brushed back the lock of gray hair from his lined forehead 
and pushed his rimless glasses into a more secure position on 
his nose. His worried expression made him look older than his 
forty-eight years. 
It was absolutely amazing what science could do. 
The last century of progress had been wonderful! 
Why even the circus was far better — or was it? 
“Hear it’s better than ever,” the 
man continued in a flat toneless 
voice. ^^The Great Golden Ball is 
supposed to be really something. 
Or so they say. I go every year. It’s 
really amazing what they can do 
nowadays — science, I mean. Even 
the circus is better for it.” 
Is it? thought Kevin as the 
speeding, robot driven monorail 
transport rocketed past the brilliant 
pastel buildings shining slimly in 
the sunlight filtering through the 
plastic dome covering New New 
York. Oh, is it? 
The man next to Kevin, discouraged by the lack of response 
to his attempts at conversation, 
quieted and both men relaxed in 
the privacy of their own thoughts. 
At any rate, the other man did. 
Kevin couldn’t relax. His son and 
daughter-in-law with whom he 
lived could not be aware of his 
absence yet, Kevin reassured himself. No one knew he was here. And 
when the men came for him, and 
Sally, perhaps with tears in her 
eyes, went to fetch him and his 
small suitcase it would be too late. 
And that would be that. 
The transport slowed noiselessly to a stop and most of the passen
gers rose to leave. The robot driver 
sat motionless until the last of the 
people, Kevin among them stepped 
from the loading platform to the 
ground. The electronic currents 
whirred, the doors closed and, the 
circuit complete, the transport 
moved off into the shining caverns 
of the city. 
The people hurried forward and 
passed quickly through the entrance 
to the amphitheater over which 
hung a sign: 
MAIN ENTRANCE TO 2088 
VERSION OF CALDWELL’S 
GIANT CIRCUS 
Kevin watched the people file 
through the entrance and slowly, 
almost reluctantly, followed them. 
He presented the red plastic coin 
to the robot at the entrance, but 
hardly heard as its electrical voice 
crackled, “Thank you, sir. Enjoy 
the show.” 
Kevin walked with the crowd 
along the spotless corridor and 
stepped aboard the automatic lift, 
getting out at the floor above. He 
seated himself in one of the comfortable lounging chairs and shuddered slightly as it fitted itself to the 
contours of his body. His fingers 
clutched tightly the undistinguished 
box he carried and something within him resisted the comfort offered 
by the large chair in which he sat. 
People continued to file in and 
take places and the amphitheater 
was quickly filled. Soundlessly. The 
walls absorbed the sound and invisible filters removed the dust 
from the air. Occasionally people 
took small pills from the containers built into the sides of their 
chairs and popped them into their 
mouths. Kevin knew the pills tasted like popcorn, candy floss, and 
some even like hot dc^s. But they 
were, of course, not the same as the 
real thing. Neither was the amphitheater. 
Once there had been great canvas tents put up in the open air, and 
wood shavings covering the ground 
within, and hard benches for seats. 
The area around the tents had 
been sprinkled with small stands 
that sold soda in bottles and candy 
floss colored pink that melted into 
sweet nothingness in one’s mouth. 
And everywhere there was an exciting smell made up of many separate things. Animals, the foodstuffs on sale, sawdust, and the 
sweat of many human beings 
pressed tightly together on the 
bleachers. There were the shouts 
of barkers, colored lights, and men 
who sold little lizards that changed 
color as you watched them. Kevin 
knew all this for he had read it in 
the book which he had bought from 
the ancient shopkeeper in the rundown section of New New York, 
how many years ago? Kevin smiled 
slightly to himself as he recalled 
the puzzled expression on the shopkeeper’s face when he purchased 
the book. 
The circus was beginning and 
Kevin interrupted his reverie to 
watch. 
On small elevated squares in the 
center of the great arena stood figures almost too horrible to look at. 
Some flailed many arms about aimlessly; some simply stood — vacantly — and their undersize extra limbs 
which should have been wings fluttered sadly. One or two figures 
crawled about on their small 
squares scratching their scaly skins 
and making whimpering noises. 
One seemed to be making efforts to 
rise from where it lay in an amorphous heap, but was prevented 
from doing so by a grotesque oversized head which the creature 
seemed incapable of raising from 
the slab on which it sprawled. 
Kevin’s stomach tightened. Every 
year, he knew, specimens such as 
these, the products of the effects of 
radiation on the genes of their parents or, perhaps, grandparents during the war that ended nearly a 
hundred years ago, were placed on 
display in the circus on their small 
squares where rising electrical currents instead of bars imprisoned 
them. Even the freak shows in the 
twentieth century circus were different from this. At least then the 
freaks were still, well, people, and 
freely chose to exhibit their oddities for profit. In many cases it was 
the only way they could earn a living. But this was different. These 
senseless mutants were captured 
like animals after having been 
abandoned by their parents; and 
LEO KELLEY 
were being displayed with the same 
lack of humanity. 
Kevin watched robots perform 
mindless feats of strength as the circus continued. He saw colored 
opaque rays support a slab of concrete and gasped with the rest of 
the audience as the heavy slab was 
suddenly disintegrated by a sudden 
rainbow fusion of all the rays. 
He listened as the recorded commercials whispered their wiles to 
the captive audience. 
Suddenly a panel slowly opened 
in the ceiling of the amphitheater 
and dramatically, silently, an immense golden sphere descended until it hung glistening at the end of 
its thin cable in the center of the 
great arena. The lights dimmed 
and a hush fell over the crowd. 
The sphere suddenly glowed 
brightly and, at this signal, all 
other lights in the amphitheater 
were turned off. Kevin stared as the 
sphere began to rotate on its axis. 
He heard the first reaction the audience had yet shown; the “ohs’* 
and “ahs” that used to accompany 
fireworks displays in the old days. 
He looked into the sphere and 
could not believe what he saw. He 
was in the sphere and he — ! Everyone would know, he thought in 
horror and fear! He tore his eyes 
from the sphere and looked, expecting anything, at the people near 
him whose faces were dimly visible 
in the light from the sphere. They 
all gazed spellbound at the hypnotically revolving globe. Kevin listened as a woman whispered to the 
man next to her without taking her 
eyes from the shining bubble. 
“Can you see it, Jim?” 
THE HUMAN ELEMENT 
“Yeah,” the man answered soft
“I always dreamed of playing a 
love scene with Dirk Anders. He’s 
the best actor in the Lifies. And 
there I am! Doing it — ^in the Golden Ball,” the woman sighed. 
“That’s not what I see,” the man 
said in a low voice, not taking his 
eyes from the turning globe. Kevin 
watched the man’s mouth working. 
Saw him wipe the spittle from the 
comers of his mouth. He turned 
away from the naked look in the 
man’s eager eyes. 
A child of nine or ten in front 
of Kevin clutched excitedly at the 
sleeve of the woman next to him. 
“I’m in there. Mom! See me! And 
I’ve got a dog! See, he’s all black 
with one white paw! Just like I told 
you I wanted hnn to be. Mom!” 
The woman answered her son 
absently as she stared intently into 
die ball and Kevin wondered what 
private and personal dream she saw 
herself living. The Great Golden 
Ball, as it turned hypnotically on its 
cable, was providing everyone with 
a vision of his or her own particular 
wish-fulfillment. The spellbound 
audience was happily wallowing in 
a dream world. 
Kevin left his seat abruptly and 
boarded the lift in the corridor. On 
the lower floor he searched until 
he found the entrance to the arena. 
It was temporarily empty, but soon 
the robots would be using it as they 
brought equipment into the arena 
for the next display. Kevin opened 
his box and took from it the gaudy 
costume he had secretly made. 
Quickly he slipped it over his 
clothes. He took out a small mirror 
and, working quickly, covered his 
face with white powder. As he applied grease paint to his face in 
bright, bold strokes, a saucy grin 
smiled back at him from the mirror’s surface. He slipped the white 
skull piece over his head and fastened the red wig to it. One last 
look in the mirror and he was 
ready. 
Kevin skipped lightly, in spite of 
his forty-eight years, out into the 
glaring light of the arena. 
Silence greeted him. 
He walked about. He skipped. 
And suddenly fell. He rose, rubbing 
the place of his contact with the 
floor, and scanned the floor beneath 
his feet. Suddenly, he threw up his 
hands in mock surprise and, bending from the waist, picked up something from the floor. Triumphantly 
he held it up. It took the audience 
a minute or two to “see” the imaginary straw, or pin, or whatever it 
was, that was clutched between 
Kevin’s thumb and index finger. 
His painted smile beamed on the 
people before him and seemed to 
grow larger as a faint titter arose 
from a little girl in the first tier of 
seats. 
Kevin waved to her. 
She hid her face in her hands. 
And then waved shyly back. 
Kevin skipped about the arena 
watching the people whispering 
among themselves. The softest ripple of laughter ran through the audience and Kevin’s heart soared. 
He repeated his fall and waved to 
a small boy who waved wildly back. 
Kevin’s wig bobbed gaily as he 
hopped and strutted about the 
arena waving to the children. 
no 
“Wave to me! Wave to me!” 
cried a shrill voice from the stands. 
Kevin did not see the robots approaching on the run and yet was 
not surprised when they seized him 
and carried him from the arena, his 
red wig still bobbing gaily. It could 
not have ended otherwise, Kevin 
knew. But no matter. The children 
had laughed. So had many of the 
adults. 
The robots deposited him in the 
corridor beside the entrance to the 
arena and Kevin found himself 
facing two well dressed and corpulent gentlemen. 
“What’s going on here?” shouted the first man. This was Mr, 
Caldwell himself, the owner of the 
circus. His picture had been on the 
Gommunico Screen in connection 
with the advertising for the circus 
Kevin remembered. 
“Are you crazy?” the second man 
sputtered. 
Kevin slowly removed the wig 
and the white skull piece and stood 
with lowered eyes, his arms at his 
sides, facing the two angry men. 
As they continued to shout at him 
for an explanation Kevin, using the 
skull piece, wiped the clown makeup from his face. 
Both men, out of breath, paused 
and Kevin opened his mouth to 
speak. “I want to apolo — ,” he began but Caldwell interrupted him. 
“Hey, Mike,” he said to the other 
man, “Isn’t this the guy whose picture they’re sending out on the 
Communico Screen? You know, 
the guy who ran away from his 
son’s house before they could send 
him to the Psych Center?” 
LEO KELLEY 
Kevin didn’t give the man a 
chance to answer the question. 
“That’s true, sir, and I’m going 
home now. I’m sorry for the trouble I’ve caused but I had to do it. 
I — ,” he faltered. How could he explain about what he had done and 
why he had done it? Kevin brushed 
the gray lock of hair back from his 
forehead and reached absently for 
the glasses he had removed earlier 
while applying his make-up. “It’s a 
very long story,” he said finally and 
there was a weariness in his tone 
that was not merely the result of 
his exertion in the arena moments 
before. 
He stood quietly before the two 
men. The shouting from the arena 
did not quite penetrate his consciousness. 
Kevin thought of Sally and Edward and how they had reluctantly 
decided to send him to the Psych 
Rehabilitation Center because he 
persisted in “living in the past” as 
they put it and refused to be suitably interested in or impressed with 
the “progress” their century had 
made. When Kevin had tried to explain that the progress they spoke 
of was not all, he sincerely believed, 
of a worthwhile nature they had 
merely shrugged and looked at him 
oddly. 
He was willing to go through 
with the Psychlab’s “Rehabilitation Program” now for he had 
proved his point. There were some 
good things from the past and a 
clown was one of them. 
A circus without noise and fanfare and excitement and laughter 
was nothing. He hated the sterility 
of its present scientific gadgetry. 
THE HUMAN ELEMENT 
The best that could be said for it 
was that it did no obvious harm. 
But with the advent of The Great 
Golden Ball people were taking one 
more step away from what could be 
a pleasant reality and one more step 
in the direction of Dreamland. And 
Kevin was certain that this Dreamland would one day prove to be 
crawling with nightmares. 
“ — something written about this 
a Icmg time ago,” Caldwell was saying to his assistant. “Looks like its 
got possibilities. Back in the 1900’s 
they used to have these guys who 
made fools of themselves in the circus. People loved them. Sorta made 
them see their own faults and frustrations and all.” 
“But, sir — ” the younger man 
began. 
“I know we’re supposed to be a 
streamlined outfit but you can hear 
that crowd yelling out there as well 
as I can. That’s proof enough for 
me! This thing’s good!” 
Kevin listened in amazement. 
This was not the way he had expected things to go. They should 
have sent him home in the custody 
of one of the robots by now. Or 
called the Psych Rehabilitation 
Center to have someone come and 
get him. 
“What’s your name, dad?” Caldwell asked 
“Molloy. Kevin Molloy,” Kevin 
answered, feeling shy all at once. 
“But I didn’t—” 
“Listen Molloy. Get out there 
and do whatever you did before. 
No, don’t ask any questions now. 
We can settle details later. But from 
now on you’re working for Caldwell’s Circus!” 
Ill 
Kevin pulled the skull piece on 
his head once again and with shaking fingers applied his grease paint. 
It was a poor job but Kevin hoped 
it would look good enough. Still 
fastening the r^ wig, he ran out 
into the arena and was stopped 
short by the thunderous roar that 
went up from the crowd. Kevin 
lifted a boy from the stands and 
sat down on the floor of the arena, 
the boy on his lap. The age old 
game began. Kevin’s hands covered his face. The boy pulled away 
one finger after another until Kevin’s painted smile beamed out at 
him. They laughed together. 
Kevin played the clown and listened simultaneously to the voice 
shouting in his mind. Sally had 
always said an older man should 
have a hobby or something to keep 
him occupied. That was why I got 
such crazy ideas, she said, because 
I didn’t have enough to do since 
I retired. Well, now I’ve got 
more than a hobby. I’ve got a job. 
I’m a clown! Maybe I can get 
Caldwell to put some sawdust on 
this floor; it’s awfully slippery. 
Kevin placed the boy back in the 
stands and skipped about the arena. 
Maybe he’ll put up a candy floss 
stand and sell popcorn instead of 
all those pills, Kevin thought as he 
smiled at the happy crowd. 
Kevin slipped, fell, and the 
crowd howled its delight when he 
found the imaginary straw. 
As he staggered exhausted from 
the arena, his heart singing, Mr. 
Caldwell was still excitedly talking to his assistant, who was vigorously nodding his head in agreement. 
“ remember some ancient 
history myself! We’ll get him to 
teach some other guys the same 
kind of stuff. Remind me to ask 
him about that. I figure maybe 
we’ve come full circle on this, and 
he’s got just what we need around 
here the human element.” 
END 
THE FIRST WORLD OF if 
TWENTY of the most outstanding short stories published during the first five years of IF Magazine! Selected by the editors to 
include as many variations as possible, you will find something 
different in every story — an exciting variety of mood, idea, theme 
and pace. Here you will find Isaac Asimov, Charles Beaumont, 
Jerome Bixby, James Blish, Philip K. Dick, Frank Riley, Robert 
Sheckley and others — in a book chock full of the best in science 
fiction entertainment. 
The edition is small and many places did not receive copies. 
However, if your local news dealer cannot get you a copy, send 
50 cents to IF Magazine, Kingston, New York, and a copy will 
be mailed to you at once. 
What Is Your Science I. Q. ? 
HOW SCIENCE-WISE are you? Score 5 points for each correct 
answer; 75 is good, 80 very good, over 85 makes you a whizz. 
Answers are on page 120. 
1. The average weight of the human skeleton is approximately 
ounces. 
2. The South Antilles Arc joins South America to the Antarctic 
continent beneath the Ocean. 
3. The inert gas argon is prepared from liquid . 
4. In the tables of atomic weight, oxygen at is used as 
the standard. 
5. Pinchbeck is a form of . 
6. Crystals are grouped according to their . 
7. One horsepower is equal to foot pounds of work. 
8. The plane of the ecliptic is inclined toward the celestial 
equator at an angle of about degrees. 
9. Hydrogen diffuses times faster than oxygen. 
10. How many points of the compass must be mentioned when 
“boxing” the compass? 
11. A chemical compound which in solution conducts a current 
of electricity and is decomposed by it is called an . 
12. Coral reefs form only in tropical waters in a belt about 
degrees North and South of the Equator. 
13. What measure of length is equal to 1,553,164.13 wave 
lengths of red light from cadmium? 
14. The valence of a chemical element is dependent on the 
number and arrangement of the revolving outside 
the nucleus. 
15. What is Babbit metal? 
16. Iron becomes “passive” when treated with . 
17. The measure of interstellar space which is equal to a distance of 3.27 light years is called a . 
18. To convert Centigrade to Fahrenheit, multiply by 
and add 32. 
19. The angle between the planes of orbit of the Earth and the 
moon is about degrees. 
20. What is the name given to a geometric conception of a 
fourth dimensional super-solid? 
SHUFFLE BOARD 
(Continued from page 105) 
other case/’ Logan continued. 
“Two more cropped up three years 
ago and five in 2074. This is the 
fourteenth this year ... Of course, 
the UN has classified all information on the cases as restricted until 
they can be thoroughly studied.” 
“But what is it?”j McGune demanded, exasperated. 
“Pick up your child, Mr. McCune,” one of the Medical Research men suggested. 
McCune slipped his hands under 
the infant’s back and thighs and 
lifted, gently at first. Surprise 
streaked his face and he hastily lowered the child. 
“Why,” he began, dumbfounded, 
“she — she must weigh . .” 
“Twenty-three and a quarter 
pounds, to be exact,” Logan said. 
Someone shoved one of the Xray plates in his hand. “This is the 
child’s spleen and here is part of 
the reproductive system — the ovaries.” 
All McCune could see, though, 
were intensely white patches on 
the negative where the doctor indicated. 
“Our highest X-ray voltage,” 
Logan explained, “couldn’t penetrate those areas. We haven’t yet 
analyzed the substance or determined what sort of biological miracle the hypertissue represents. But 
one thing’s certain — as far as blood 
composition and genetic tolerance 
are concerned, your daughter will 
be able to accommodate a radiation level several thousand times 
as high as you or I without any ill 
effect.” E N D 
STATEMENT OF THE OWNERSHIP. MANAGEMENT. AND CIRCULATION REQUIRED BY THE 
ACT OF CONGRESS OF AUGUST 24. 1912. AS AMENDED BY THE ACTS OF 
MARCH 3, 1933. AND JULY 2. 1946 (39 U. $. C. 233) 
Of IF — Worlds of Science Fiction, published bi-monthly at Buffalo. New York, for October 
1, 1956. 
1. The names and addresses of the publisher, editor, manasrins editor, and business 
managers are: Publisher, Quinn Publishing Company. Inc., 17 Pearl Street. Kingston. N. Y.; 
Editor, James L. Quinn. 17 Pearl Street. Kingston, N.Y.; Managing editor. None; Business 
manager. None. 
2. The owner is (if owned by a corporation, its name and address must be stated and 
also immediately thereunder the names and addresses of stockholders owning or holding 1 
percent or more of total amount of stock) ; Quinn Publishing Company. Inc., 17 Pearl Street. 
Kingston. N. Y.; James L. Quinn. 17 Pearl Street, Kingston. N. Y. 
3. The known bondholders, mortgagees, and other security holders owning or holding 1 
percent or more of total amount of bonds, mortgages, or other securities are: None. 
4. The two paragraphs next above, giving the names of owners, stockholders, and 
security holders, if any. contain not only the list of stockholders and security holders as they 
appear upon the books of the company but also, in cases where the stockholder or security 
holder appears upon the books of the company as trustee or in any other fiduciary relation, 
the name of the person or corporation for whom such trustee is acting, is given; also that 
the said two paragraphs contain statements embracing affiant’s full knowledge and belief as 
to the circumstances and conditions under which stockholders and security holders who do not 
appear upon the books of the company as trustees, hold stock and securities in a capacity 
other than that of a bona fide owner; and this affiant has no reason to believe that any 
other person, association, or corporation has any interest direct or indirect in the said stock, 
bonds, or other securities than as so stated by him. 
6. The average number of copies of each issue of this publication sold or distributed, 
through the mails or otherwise, to paid subscribers during the 12 months preceding the date 
shown al^ve was: (This information is required from daily, weekly, semiweekly, and triweekly newspapers only) . 
James L. Quinn. Editor. 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this 14th day of September. 1966. 
(SEAL) Charlotte K. Laplne (My commission expires March 30. 1968 
Atomic powered military aircraft 
should make their appearance in 
three years and commercial aircraft in ten years, according to 
engineering predictions. Tomorrow’s atomic airliners will be locomotives of the sky. The engine will 
be a giant atomic-powered fuel 
plane, the coaches smaller ships 
coupled in mid-air to the locomotive. With this set-up indefinite 
shuttle service could be maintained, 
limited only by the crew’s endurance. The airborne nuclear train 
would fly its course, with commercial airliners unhooking on arrival 
at their terminal airport where 
other passenger aircraft would 
latch on for new airports of call. 
Airliners or airfreighters thus relieved of carrying full fuel loads 
could haul larger passenger and pay 
loads. The tow plane concept also 
solves the problem of shielding 
passengers from radiation emitted 
by a nuclear engine. 
Some day in the not too distant future people may eat whale steaks 
for dinner, thanks to antibiotics. 
The so-called mold remedies can be 
injected at the time of catch and 
keeps the whale meat fresh right 
through processing. Recent tests 
show that the decaying process, 
usually well advanced in the whale’s 
intestines within 36 hours, had not 
started. Both meat and oil were in 
perfect condition. Injecting whales 
on-the-run is also being tested by 
a Norwegian company. On ex^ditions, the antibiotic can be introduced into the body of the whale 
either by injection into the animal’s 
stomach after it has been shot, 
or by harpoon shell during the 
chase. While whale steaks are for 
the future, poultry, beef and fish 
and sea fo<^ preserved by antibiotics are now ready for market 
Discovery of some germ-reversing 
chemicals is expected to lead to an 
entirely new means of controlling 
disease. The germ reversal accomplished by chemicals consists in 
making laboratory-grown germs 
change from non-disease-producing 
ones to virulent disease producers. 
The chemicals causing this change 
are breakdown products of the cell 
nucleus chemical DNA. Antagonists to such chemicals, if found, 
would be the expected new weapons 
against germs, changing virulent 
to harmless germs. 
Silicon rubber will soon be used as 
the center layer in safety glass for 
supersonic aircraft. The conventional interlayer in safety glass does 
not withstand the intense frictional 
heat generated by potential aircraft speeds. Above 180F the conventional layer softens, evolves gas 
bubbles and rapidly loses strength. 
At the other end of the scale, temperatures at the range of -65F render it almost as brittle as glass itself. 
Laminated windshields made with 
the new silicone rubber retain full 
strength and clarity at temperatures ranging from -65F to over 
350F. The soft silicone plastic calendered between layers of polyethylene-coated paper flows readily 
under pressure and requires no 
bonding adhesive. When laminated 
and cured under pressure in either 
flat or curved glazings, it forms a 
tough rubbery interlayer with excellent optical properties, with haze 
and distortion minimized. 
Skin grafts will be sprayed on in 
the future if a recently discovered 
method is adopted. Spraying is 
expected to be particularly useful 
for burn victims who have lost 
large areas of skin and haven’t 
enough left for suitable grafts by 
other methods. The skin for spray 
grafts is put into an electric kitchen 
blender which divides the material 
into tiny particles suspended in 
salt solution. The suspension of 
skin particles is then sprayed by 
syringe onto a piece of fine mesh 
gauze that has been cut to fit the 
area needing the graft. The skin 
particles are deposited as a thin 
layer over one surface of the gauze. 
This is then inverted and placed 
over the graft area. In three weeks, 
the numerous scattered islands of 
skin have grown to cover com
pletely the entire area. 
An atomic powered engine for an 
interplanetary missile is being built 
by the Russians. The researchers 
picture an atomic-powered unmanned rocket weighing 100 tons 
for the Mars flight. It would carry 
70 or 80 tons of an inert propulsion 
agent and 20 to 30 tons payload. 
Once the rocket reaches Mars, it 
will be able to transmit data back 
to earth via instruments they claim 
they already have available. This 
will enable scientists to analyze the 
soil chemically and the atmosphere 
photographically. 
Creation in the laboratory of functioning glands or other organs of 
the human body may be achieved 
in the future. Replacement of failing human hearts by laboratorygrown ones would also seem a 
possibility. The new kind of spare 
parts for the human body now foreseen will be built from pure strains 
of cells grown, or cultured in the 
laboratory. The gland or stomach 
or kidney will not necessarily have 
the characteristic shape and form 
of the natural organ, but it will be 
able to function the same way. 
These spare parts will be achieved 
through advances in the field of 
tissue culture which has already 
provided the means of growing 
polio virus for vaccine production. 
WHAT IS YOUR SCIENCE I.Q.? 
ANSWERS: 1 — 423.2 ounces. 2 — Pacific. 3 — Air. 4 — 16. 5 — Brass. 
6 — Symmetry. 7 — 33,000. 8 — 23,5. 9 — Four. 10 — 32. 11 — Electrolyte. 
12 — 30 degrees. 13 — Meter. 14 — Electrons. 15 — Antifriction metal alloy. 
16 — Nitric acid. 17 — Parsec. 18 — 9/5. 19 — 50 degrees, 20 — Tesseract. 
SCIENCE BRIEFS 
Electrical equipment that will last 
longer is the promise of a thin 
skinned copper wire developed recently by research engineers. Using 
a new metallurgical technique, 
scientists have been able to coat 
copper wire with a thin, protective 
aluminum skin that is only onefortieth as thick as the average skin 
on the human body. The resulting 
product will mean an increase in 
life, a reduction in size and an 
increase in the efficiency of presentday electrical equipment. Key to 
the new technique is encasing the 
wire in a protective aluminum coat 
and then recoating with a hightemperature insulation. The wire 
can operate over longer periods of 
time at higher temperatures than 
have been practical up to now. 
Desert water may soon be saved 
by whales. An Australian research 
organization has found a way of 
cutting down water evaporation 
using cetyl alcohol, a chemical derived from whale oil. The chemical is used to lay a film over the 
surface of the water. It restricts 
water escaping into the air, but does 
not stop oxygen entering the water 
and keeping it fresh. Cetyl alcohol 
is invisible and tasteless and can 
be used freely in dams and reservoirs. It is harmless to animal life. 
In ideal laboratory conditions ffie 
chemical cuts down evaporation 
by 80%. Trials over a few years 
in dams and reservoirs have shown 
a saving of between 20% and 70%. 
Shock-treatment apparatus may 
soon be a standard piece of American farm equipment. With it, 
SCIENCE BRIEFS 
farmers will be able to improve 
germination, dry grain, process 
food and kill weed seeds. The key 
to these possibilities is a small electrical device invented recently by 
a Department of Agriculture research man. The machine consists 
of a glass tube, horizontally mounted, and fitted with electrical terminals at each end. The tube has 
two mouths on top. One, corked in 
operation, is the entrance for seeds. 
The other is connected to a vacuum 
pump. Seeds put into the tube are 
subjected to radiation from the 
glow discharge of low-frequency 
current at less than atmospheric 
pressure. The device gives greater 
control than possible before. Experimentally, a working model of 
the device has successfully speeded 
up corn seed germination, helped 
prepare soybean seeds for dehydrated processing and inhibited the 
germination of other seeds. 
By the year 2005 many kinds of 
mental retardation may be treated 
by the use of artificial enzymes. One 
hereditary form of mental abnormality may be prevented by placing in the artery of a new-born 
child with such a defect a synthesized catalyst in a polythene tube. 
The synthetic would do the work 
that normal enzyme molecules do 
in the normal child and the infant 
would then develop in a normal 
way. These predictions are based 
on the theory that many kinds of 
mental retardation are molecular 
diseases. That is, disease caused by 
molecules of abnormal structure 
present in place of molecules of 
normal structure. 
Dear Mr. Quinn : 
After reading Hue and Cry, I’m 
inclined to agree on the point that 
S-F will not have an untoward 
effect on our treatment of an alien. 
However, the reception depends 
entirely on how far advanced the 
alien is, his mode of approach, 
who’s in office at the time of meeting and, most important, the current mode of thinking. 
Speaking of thinking, a good example of how divergent thought can 
be at a particular time is being illustrated right now in our own 
society. I refer to the difference 
between scientific non-Aristotelian 
thinking and that of the rest of the 
world which can be called Aristotelian or linear thinking. I refer you 
to Science and Sanity by Korzybski, 
if further elaboration on the subject is needed. Think of the hostility with which an alien would be 
greeted if his mode of thinking was 
more divergent from the common 
man’s than that of the present day 
scientist’s. 
I disagree that scientists go 
afield in pronouncing on metaphysical problems; the implication 
that there are areas of nature governed by science, and other areas 
which are governed by some supernatural non-physical laws, is ridiculous. As I see it, the philosophers 
have had some 200 years plus to 
straighten out their affairs, which 
are still in the same intolerable 
mess; although I don’t see how 
they could have progressed much 
further than this when they have 
to give order to Nonsense or Nothing. These wrong-thinkers do nothing but impede the progress of 
science; witness the agitation with 
which something like eugenics is 
greeted, despite the fact that we 
are breeding diabetes, near-sightedness, insanity and various other debilities of the congenital and hereditary kinds into our population. We 
can’t depend on some magical 
cure-all mutation springing up. The 
odds are against it. But we can 
change the odds and help the race 
... yet we won’t. 
— Owen Sear 
Chatham, N.J. 
Dear Mr. Quinn : 
I have just noted that Mr. King’s 
letter in the Hue and Cry section 
leaves several unanswered questions regarding “humanists”. I 
should like to clarify the issue. 
The term humanism has come 
to mean two different things in the 
twentieth century, both somewhat 
at variance with our picture of 
Renaissance humanism. On the 
one hand we have those who are 
merely advocates of a greater use 
of the so-called “humanities” in the 
college curriculum. On the other, 
we have a movement which has developed among scientists, writers, 
educators, philosophers, and liberal 
religious clergymen and laymen, 
such as biologists Julian Huxley, 
Herman J. Miller, Anton Carlson 
and C. Judson Herrick, psychiatrists Rudolf Dreikurs, Brock Chisholm and Erich Fromm, philosophers John Dewey, Arthur Bentley, 
Sidney Ratner, Oliver Reiser, Max 
Otto and Bertrand Russell, and 
writers Herbert Muller and H. G. 
Wells. 
These “humanists” tend toward 
agnosticism as regards immortality 
or the existence of purpose or plan 
behind the universe, and generally 
regard the universe as being purposeless and ethically neutral. Man 
is regarded as being the product of 
purely natural processes. He 
“stands alone” (Huxley) without 
the hope or possibility of outside 
help. Humanists, whether themselves scientists or laymen, regard 
the self-correcting scientific world 
view as the only sane basis for a 
personal philosophy or religion. 
Humanism is represented organizationally in the United States 
chiefly by the American Humanist 
Association, with headquarters at 
Yellow Springs, Ohio, of which 
Nobel Prize winner Herman J. 
Muller is currently president and 
in the world at large by the International Humanist and Ethical 
Union, with headquarters at Ut
recht in the Netherlands. It is my 
belief that there exists a great deal 
of overlapping of interests between 
readers and writers of science fiction and those persons actively interested in the humanist movement. 
— Edd Doerr 
Indianapolis, Ind. 
If the number of letters received 
by the editor is any indication of 
interest, we know the answer to it. 
Mail has poured in ever since Mr. 
King (Dec. IF) made his charges. 
Dear Mr. Quinn: 
My main reason for writing this 
is to add a word or two to the 
“Man — Where did he come from?” 
controversy. 
It is obviously true that languages do evolve toward simplicity, 
but this is a fairly recent thing. It 
was not necessarily true when reading and writing were possessions of 
relatively few persons. In any case, 
I think most of us will agree that 
they have to evolve from simplicity 
to complexity first. Surely no one 
believes that the savage or the stone 
age man went from communication by grunts and gestures to a 
language of great grammatical intricacy. I doubt very much that 
this progress could be caused by 
mutation — no matter how sudden. 
Intelligence was not meant to be 
judged by the mere use of language, but by the thoughts expressed. They are two separate 
things. We have no evidence of the 
upward evolution of languages, and 
we have no evidence of the upward 
evolution of intelligence. While I 
do not deny that a relatively simple 
gene change would make a physical difference, I doubt that one 
stroke-of-lightning change would 
make the difference between early 
man and the modem creature. Further, the wide physical differences 
between men don’t seem to have 
any effect on their brain power. In 
this connection, the question is 
“Where is something — anything at 
all — between the cave wall scratchings of the Neanderthalers and a 
philosophical treatise in Sanskrit 
or Chinese?” Do we who accept 
so cheerfully the story of human 
evolution really know on how 
little evidence the theory is based? 
To me, the Biblical story of the 
creation or the common SF idea 
that man is descended from 
stranded visitors from another 
planet make much more sense. 
— Floyd Zwickey 
Rockford, 111. 
NEVER, 
EVER BEFORE, 
ANYWHERE! 
7000 fantasy and sciencefiction books and back-issue 
magazines at 50% to 90% 
under what they've cost you 
before, here or anywhere, 
while they last! LIST FREE, 
WEREWOLF BOOKSHOP 
7055 K Shonnon Rood 
Verona, Pennsylvania 
Dear Mr. Quinn ; 
I greet the appearance of THE 
FIRST WORLD OF IF with nothing but applause, both long and 
loud! You are certainly to be congratulated. However, the real motive of this letter is to persuade you 
to collect another anthology of IF 
stories using novelettes. I’m sure 
that sales of a mixed anthology, 
containing about four or five novelettes and half as many short stories 
as The First World of would be 
another terrific seller . 
Please give the above suggestion 
serious thought. I’m sure that I’m 
not the only one of your readers 
who would like to see you do it. 
— ^R. J. Banks 
Corsicana, Texas 
Sirs: 
Why is it SF writers seem to feel 
that they must always be moralizing? There is almost always some 
“deep moral meaning” such as: 
we should be compassionate and 
forgiving or whatnot, on a level 
with “the bogey man will get you 
if you don’t watch out”. 
A few years ago we were supposed to feel individual guilt for 
every violent death from the trilobites on. Next, we were accused 
of harboring such horrendous and 
evil thoughts that telepaths would 
be driven insane if they were to 
open their minds. Now we are in 
a judge-not era, or rather the 
writers seem to be on a judgenot 
toot, which promises to be equally 
sickening. I’ll take refuge in Jean 
Paul Satre, the Judger, the Evaluator. 
— T. J. O’Hare 
New York, N.Y. 
The Best ScieiKe-Brtiwi 
Wies ew« "?»*• 
Edited by T. E. DIKT Y 
f Continued from back covert 
I DO NOT LOVE THEE, DOCTOR FELL, by Robert Bloch 
^ — Bromely starts a series 
\ visits to a strange psychiatrist. But his ‘*Dr. 
wKtHL. Fell” does not exist — and 
Bromely never leaves his 
own office! Here’s a taut and terrifying tale 
about a new mental disease that will jolt you ! 
DREAM STREET, by Frank M. Robinson — Young 
Mike Donohue hopes to stow away on a rocket 
ship. At last he gets a break and is on the 
Star Quest, bound for MARS! 
THE GAME OF RAT AND DRAGON, 
by Cordioainer Smith — A frighten
ing story about fearful monsters 
which attack the helpless ships 
of space — and how men combat 
them with the “borrowed” minds 
of CATS! 
THE SHORES OF NIGHT, by Thomas 
N. Scortia — Gen. Preck’s grim determination 
to make the filial plunge from Pluto to a really 
distant star leads him into a long series of 
astonishing adventures — in which he loses his 
body but not his mind! 
CLERICAL ERROR, by Mark Clifton— The head 
of a mental hospital believes that 
a brilliant young physicist can be 
restored to sanity without risky 
brain surgery. But Security rules 
forbid him any contact with the 
patient. So he commits himself as 
insane — and gets put in the same 
cell with the man! -*^**-^® 
JUDGMENT DAY, by L, Sprague 
Camp — A half-mad scientist who 
hates everyone stumbles upon a nuclear formula which can destroy the whole earth. Will 
he use it? It’s a toss up, with our lives at stake! 
THE SCIENCE-FICTION YEAR, by T. F. Dikty— 
A summary of actual developments and events 
in the world of science — and the news of the 
year in Science-Fiction publishing. 
PLUS — ^A comprehensive list of ALL new S-F 
books, plus non-fiction works of special interest to Science-Fiction fans. AND — all the 
stories described on other side of this page! 
MAIL COUPON WITH 
ONLY 10^ 
Simply mail the coupon with only a 
dime. Your copy of ‘‘The Best Science-Fiction Stories and Novels: 
1966,” will be sent to you at once, 
together with the current selection 
of the Science-Fiction Book Club, for 
which you will be billed only $1, plus 
a few cents shipping charges. Every 
month you will be offered the cream 
of the new $2.60 to $4.00 sciencefiction and non-fiction science books 
for only $1 each. You are not obligated 
to take a book each month. You may 
accept as few as four a year and 
still retain all the privileges of membership. But this offer may be withdrawn at any time. So mail the 
coupon NOW, with only 10<^ to: 
SCIENCE-FICTION BOOK CLUB 
Dept. IF-6, Garden City, N. Y. 
SCIENCE-FICTION BOOK CLUB 
Dept. IF-6, Garden City, N. Y. 
I enclose only 10^ for which please rush my copy of “THE BEST 
SCIENCE-FICTION STORIES AND NOVELS: 1956" (Value 
$3.95 in publisher’s edition), together with the current selection of 
the CTlub for which you may bill me only $1.00. plus a few cents 
shipping, and enroll me as a member. Every month send the Club’s 
free bulletin, describing coming selections. For each book I accept, 
I will pay only $1, plus shipping. I need take only 4 books during 
the year and may resign at any time thereafter. 
NO-RISK GUARANTEE: If not delighted with the books. I may 
return them in 7 days, pay nothing, and membership will be cancelled. 
(Please Print Clearly) 
Selection price in Canada $1.10 plus shipping. Address 
Science-Fiction Club. 105 Bond St., Toronto 2, Ont. 
(Offer good only in Continental U. S. and Canada.) 
o^Sv ro 
(WITH MEMBERSHIP IN 
THE SCIENCE-FICTION BOOK CLUB) 
This Big New 
Collection of 
Thrilling 
y/CTfOAf, 
YOURS 
"ES, it’s yours for only 10^ on this 
introductory offer to new members 
his thrill-packed volume containing 
►re than a dozen top-flight stories 
d novels — the very cream of the 
ir’s Science-Fiction. This jumbo-size book 
ings you a wonderful reading feast of excitr tales by the best writers in the fleld today, 
are the thrills of high adventure with the 
3t men to brave the hazards of space! Ex)re the weird thoughts of men whose minds 
i hovering between genius and insanity! 
avel through space 20 centuries hence! 
This generous offer is made to demonstrate 
i many advantages of membership in the 
ience-Fiction Hook Club. This Clui) is really 
iqiie — it brings its meml)er not only the 
tstanding new masterpieces of imaginative 
RETAIl $095 
PRICE W 
IN PUBLISHER'S ED. 
writing, but also the best factual scientific reports of special interest to science-fiction fans. 
For example, Club selections have recently 
included such exciting non-fiction books as 
The Report on Unidentified Flying Objects^ The 
Viking Rocket Story, and Exploring Mare, as 
well as outstanding new fiction novels such as 
The Power, The City and the Stare, and Earthman, Co^ne Home. As a member you are offered 
these fine books for only $1 each, though the 
pul)lishers’ prices range up to $4.00! Why not 
join now< whiie you can get this thrilling new 
volume for only ten cents! 
Jusf a Few of the Exciting Stories in This Big New Anthology 
E MAN WHO ALWAYS KNEW, by 
jis Budrys — McMahon^ is always comf up with marvelous ideas — yet never 
^ents anything himself. He just knows 
ten others are about to invent someng good — and is on the spot when 
W do! 
lU CREATED US, by Tom Godwin— He 
s tracked the hideous beasts to their 
r. And now he finds that their powerl minds can control his. They plan to 
Ice over the world, raising people for 
^dl 
BENSON. DISPATCHER, by R. DeWift 
Her — The affairs of Acme Interplan
etary Express are in sad shape when 
Swenson takes over. Then the dark voids 
of space crackle with his crisp orders as 
he bilks the powerful competition with 
his lightning-like maneuvers! 
THE CYBER AND JUSTICE HOLMES, by 
Frank Riley — Will electronic machines 
that uncannily weigh legal evidence take 
the place of living judges on the bench ? 
Here’s a provocative story about a^ human judge who is put on trial, pitted 
against an infallible mechanical wizard. 
— ond MORE/ See other 
side for further details