MOON SHUTTLE SHIPS — The Moon is an easy target once a space station, 
outside the Earth's gravitational pull, is completed. These "shuttle" ships, 
spherical in shape and with enormous freight capacities, are built on the 
space station and launched from there. The shuttle above is departing for 
the Moon, loaded to capacity with supplies. The ship operates in a vacuum 
therefore fins are functional only as mounts and fuel tanks for control 
rockets, and for landing gear. Now turn to inside back cover. 
WORLDS of SCIENCE FICTION 
MAY 1954 
Ail Stories New and Complete 
Editor: JAMES L. QUINN 
Assistant Editors: THOR L. KROGH 
EVE P. WULFF 
Cover by Ed Valigursky: Refueling in Space 
| NOVELETTES j 
| THE TIES THAT BIND by Walter Miller, Jr. 4 j 
| THE GENIUS by Con Pederson 70 | 
| SHORT STORIES 
j PROMINENT AUTHOR by Philip K. Dick 27 | 
| “PERCHANCE TO DREAM" by Richard Stockham 42 | 
| SKIN GAME by Charles E. Fritch 55 | 
| FLY BY NIGHT by Arthur Dekker Savage 85 | 
| FORSYTES RETREAT by Winston Marks 96 1 
| DESCENT by Richard Matheson 109 | 
I FEATURES I 
1 A CHAT WITH THE EDITOR 2 ( 
| METHUSELAH'S GRANDPARENTS by James Blish 63 | 
| OUT OF THIS WORLD 41 j 
| SCIENCE BRIEFS 119 | 
COVER PICTORIAL: Shuttle Ships for Moon Base 
| by Ed Valigursky | 
5miiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiirii| 
IF is published monthly by Quinn Publishing Company, Inc. Volume 3, No. 3. 
Copyright 1954 by Quinn Publishing Co., Inc. Office of publication, 8 Lord Street, 
Buffalo, New York. Entered as Second Class Matter at Post Office, Buffalo, New 
York. Subscription $3.50 for 12 issues in U.S. and Possessions; Canada $4 for 12 
issues; elsewhere $4.50. Allow four weeks for change of address. All stories appearing in this magazine are fiction; any similarity to actual persons is coincidental. 
Not responsible for unsolicited artwork or manuscripts. 35c a copy. Printed in U.S.A. 
EDITORIAL AND BUSINESS OFFICES. KINGSTON, NEW YORK 
Next issue on sale April 9th 
A CHAT WITH 
THE EDITOR 
ONE OF the interesting things to 
watch for in the reading of science 
fiction is politics. Not that the subject of political science is delved 
into too deeply, but we catch — 
quite frequently as part of a background or occasionally as a solid 
premise — glimpses into rather 
thoughtful projections of applied 
government. Sometimes it is the 
leadership of a surviving tribe dug 
deep into the mountains; often it 
is relative to the affairs of life in a 
city-state not too unlike those of 
the ancient Greeks ; or it might 
concern an endless galactic empire. 
And it is encouraging to see, in the 
majority of stories we’ve published, 
that the structure is rather logically 
worked out — that in the conception of civilized life hundreds or 
thousands of years from now, political science is given some emphasis. Whether we agree with the author’s version or not is beside the 
point. 
What is to the point is that the 
average civilian isn’t giving half as 
much thought to the government 
by which we live today. Quite recently, newspapers, at least around 
this neck of the woods, were full 
of front-page stories concerning 
politics, personalities and parties 
which tended to lead the average 
individual to suspect something 
slightly stinky in the ole wood pile. 
Somebody was calling somebody 
else an old so-and-so and skeletons 
were dug out of closets and dusted 
off. Mud pies were tossed and antecedents were questioned. It was like 
a string of Chinese firecrackers going off in a three-ring circus. The 
citizenry was reading the newspapers like mad. But when the nice 
juicy copy died out, Mr. and Mrs. 
John Q. Public seemed to forget 
about the political hoopla and 
turned to “something else more important”. 
Which is unfortunate. There 
ain't much of anything else that’s 
more important. Politics (to repeat) is the science of government, 
and we live under government. We 
live under a government that affects our earnings, our economics, 
our homes and personal lives, our 
education, our health, our everything — including that beautiful 
word “freedom”. So it seems to me 
that this is a pretty good argument 
that politics is mighty important to 
all of us. 
GOOD GOVERNMENT is earned 
by constant vigilance on the part 
of everyone. Our democratic form 
of government is run (supposedly 
so) by people elected to office. 
They are human, and therefore 
prone to all the frailties of human 
nature, and the only way to keep 
these duly elected servants walking 
the straight and narrow in the public behalf is by watching each and 
every one all the time. 
Today’s inconceivable speed of 
communications and transportation has brought the peoples of the 
world closer and closer together. 
The globe we live on, instead of 
once-upon-a-time isolated villages 
and cities and nations, is now a 
conglomerate mass of international 
intercourse — and intrigue. To 
maintain the health and identity of 
America — that is, if we like living 
as we do today — a study and observation of the men we elect to 
guide us through this maelstrom is 
an absolute must. 
Through this intermingling 
of the peoples of all nations, malcontents creep in. Either they want 
a handout or they want to wreck 
something beautiful and strong because they themselves haven’t got 
it. So we have another good reason 
for being vitally interested in politics — that of survival! Not only 
does this apply to the national 
scene but all the w r ay down to the 
hot stove in the country store, from 
the highest office in the land to the 
local dog-catcher. 
Suppose our present system of 
government is susceptible to too 
many foibles and incapabilities, 
how would the science fiction writer alert the populace and strengthen the sinews of government? 
Would it be an immediate issuance 
of white papers, blue papers, black 
papers and a flock of other papers 
the colors of the rainbow? Would 
it be a mud campaign or a series 
of court trials? Or would it be a 
carefully planned project taking 
generations to build and to perfect? 
My bet would be on the latter. 
The science fiction writer, aiming 
at a strong, healthy, democratic 
form of government, would start 
with the grooming of young men, 
of high school and college age, for 
local, state or national government. 
Government is a vast business, so 
these young men would be trained 
as thoroughly as are doctors, lawyers, bankers, engineers, scientists, 
etc. Each man would have to pass 
the “board” and serve his apprenticeship before being allowed to 
run for public office. Then, if 
elected, he would know what he 
was stepping into. Of course, he 
would have to get adjusted, but he 
would have the foundation and the 
proven loyalty to work at his task 
honestly a^id in behalf of his own 
nation. 
AFTER ALL, we have trained men 
in our diplomatic service — why not 
a trained man for your local aiderman, councilman and mayor, or 
for your state legislature, or for 
the administrative and legislative 
branches of our national government. You don’t find a good-time, 
jack-of-all-trades Charlie stepping 
into the trust department of a bank 
to handle the funds and estates of 
its customers — do you? 
No, and the science fiction writer, using the America of today as 
his background, would never allow 
a greasy notebook filled with the 
names of hangers-on and “contacts” to qualify a man for public 
office — not unless his story called 
for an unhappy ending. — jlq 
The Earth was green and quiet. Nature had survived Man, and Man had survived himself. 
Then , one day , the great silvery ships broke the 
tranquillity of the skies , bringing Mans twentythousand-year-lost inheritance back to Earth . 
The TIES That BIND 
By Walter Miller, Jr. 
Illustrated by Kelly Freas 
“ Why does your br'and sae drop wi’ 
blude, 
Edward, Edivard? 
Why does your brand sae drop wi’ 
blude, 
And why sae sad gang ye, O?” 
“O I hae kill’d my hawk sae gude, 
M it her, mither; 
O I hae kill’d my hawk sae gude, 
And 1 had nae mair but he, O.” 
— ANONYMOUS 
T HE HORDE of sleek ships 
arose in the west at twilight — 
gleaming slivers that reflected the 
dying sun as they lanced across the 
darkling heavens. A majestic fleet 
of squadrons in double-vees, groups 
in staggered echelon, they crossed 
the sky like gleaming geese, and 
the children of Earth came out of 
their whispering gardens to gape at 
the splendor that marched above 
them. 
There was fear, for no vessel out 
of space had crossed the skies of 
Earth for countless generations, 
and the children of the planet had 
forgotten. The only memories that 
lingered were in the memnoscripts, 
and in the unconscious kulturverlaengerung, of the people. Because 
of the latter half-memory, the people knew, without knowing why, 
that the slivers of light in the sky 
were ships, but there was not even 
a word in the language to name 
them. 
The myriad voices of the planet, 
they cried, or whispered, or chattered in awed voices under the 
elms. 
The piping whine of a senile 
WALTER MILLER, JR. 
hag: “The ancient gods! The day 
of the judging! Repent, repent. 
The panting gasp of a frightened 
fat man: “The alien! We’re lost, 
we’re lost! We’ve got to run for the 
hills!” 
The voice of the child: “See the 
pretty birdlights? See? See?” 
And a voice of wisdom in the 
councils of the clans: “The sons of 
men — they’ve come home from the 
Star Exodus. Our brothers.” 
The slivers of light, wave upon 
wave, crept into the eclipse shadow 
as the twilight deepened and the 
stars stung through the blackening 
shell of sky. When the moon rose, 
the people watched again as the 
silhouette of a black double-vee of 
darts slipped across the lunar disk. 
Beneath the ground, in response 
to the return of the ships, ancient 
mechanisms whirred to life, and 
the tech guilds hurried to tend 
them. On Earth, there was a suspenseful night, pregnant with the 
dissimilar twins of hope and fear, 
laden with awe, hushed with the 
expectancy of twenty thousand 
years. The stargoers — they had 
come home. 
“ Kulturverlaengerung /” grunted 
the tense young man in the toga of 
an Analyst. He stood at one end of 
the desk, slightly flushed, staring 
down at the haughty wing leader 
who watched him icily from a seat 
at the other end. He said it again, 
too distinctly, as if the word were 
a club to hurl at the wingsman. 
“ Kulturverlaengerung , that’s why!” 
“I heard you the first time, 
Meikl,” the officer snapped. 
“Watch your tongue and your 
tone!” 
A brief hush in the cabin as hostility flowed between them. There 
was only the hiss of air from the 
ventilators, and the low whine of 
the flagship’s drive units somewhere below. 
The erect and elderly gentleman 
who sat behind the desk cleared 
his throat politely. “Have you any 
further clarifications to make, 
Meikl?” he asked. 
“It should be clear enough to all 
of you,” the analyst retorted hotly. 
He jerked his head toward the 
misty crescent of Earth on the 
viewing screen that supplied most 
of the light in the small cabin. 
“You can see what they are, what 
they’ve become. And you know 
what we are.” 
The two wingsmen bristled 
slightly at the edge of contempt in 
the analyst’s voice. The elderly 
gentlemen behind the desk remained impassive, expressionless. 
The analyst leaned forward with 
a slow accusing glance that swept 
the faces of the three officers, then 
centered on his antagonist at the 
other end of the desk. “You want 
to infect them, Thaiile?” he demanded. 
The wingsman darkened. His fist 
exploded on the desktop. “Meikl, 
you’re in contempt! Restrict yourself to answering questions!” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“There will be no further 
breaches of military etiquette during the continuance of this conference,” the elderly gentleman announced icily, thus seizing the 
situation. 
After a moment’s silence, he 
turned to the analyst again. “We’ve 
got to refuel,” he said flatly. “In 
THE TIES THAT BIND 
order to refuel, we must land.” 
“Yes, sir. But why not on Mars? 
We can develop our own facilities 
for producing fuel. Why must it 
be Earth?” 
“Because there will be some existing facilities on Earth, even 
though they’re out of space. The 
job would take five years on Mars.” 
The analyst lowered his eyes, 
shook his head wearily. “I’m thinking of a billion earthlings. Aren’t 
they worth considering, sir?” 
“I’ve got to consider the men in 
my command, Meikl. They’ve been 
through hell. We all have.” 
“The hell was our own making, 
baron.” 
“Meikl!” 
“Sorry, sir.” 
Baron ven Klaeden paused ominously, then: “Besides, Meikl, your 
predictions of disaster rest on certain assumptions not known to be 
true. You assume that the recessive 
determinants still linger in the present inhabitants. Twenty thousand 
years is a long time. Nearly a thousand generations. I don’t know a 
great deal about culturetics, but 
I’ve read that kulturverlaengerung 
reaches a threshhold of extinction 
after about a dozen generations, if 
there’s no restimulation.” 
“Only in laboratory cultures, 
sir,” sighed the analyst. “Under 
rigid control to make certain 
there’s no restimulant. In practice, 
in a planet-wide society, there’s 
constant accidental restimulation, 
unconsciously occuring. A determinant gets restimulated, pops back 
to original intensity, and gets 
passed on. In practice, a kult’laenger linkage never really dies out — 
although, it can stay recessive and 
unconscious.” 
“That’s too bad,” a wingsman 
growled sourly. “We’ll wake it up, 
won’t we?” 
“Let’s not be callous,” the other 
wingsman grunted in sarcasm. 
“Analyst Meikl has sensitivities.” 
The analyst stared from one to 
the other of them in growing consternation, then looked pleadingly 
at the baron. “Sir, I was summoned 
here to offer my opinions about 
landing on Earth. You asked about 
possible cultural dangers. I’ve told 
you.” 
“You discussed the danger to 
earthlings.” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“I meant ‘danger’ to the personnel of this fleet — to their esprit, 
their indoctrination, their groupefficiency. I take it you see none.” 
“On the contrary, I see several,” 
said the analyst, coming slowly to 
his feet, eyes flashing and darting 
among them. “Where were you 
born, Wingman?” he asked the officer at the oppisite end of the desk. 
“Lichter Six, Satellite,” the officer grunted after a moment of irritable silence. 
“And you?” 
“Omega Thrush,” said the other 
wingsman. 
All knew without asking that the 
baron was born in space, his birthplace one of the planetoid citystates of the Michea Dwarf. Meikl 
looked around at them, then 
ripped up his own sleeve, unsheathed his rank-dagger, and 
pricked his forearm with the needle 
point. A red droplet appeared, and 
he wiped at it with a forefinger. 
“It’s common stuff, gentlemen. 
We’ve shed a lot of it. And each 
WALTER MILLER, JR. 
of us is a walking sackful of it.” He 
paused, then turned to touch the 
point of his dagger to the viewer, 
where it left a tiny red trace on the 
glass, on the bright crescent of 
Earth, mist-shrouded, chastely 
wheeling her nights into days. 
“It came from there,” he hissed. 
“She’s your womb, gentlemen. Are 
you going back?” 
“Are you an analyst or a dramatist, Meikl?” the baron asked 
sharply, hoping to relieve the sudden chill in the room. “This becomes silly.” 
“If you land on her,” Meikl 
promised ominously, “you’ll go 
away with a fleet full of hate.” 
Meikl’s arm dropped to his side. 
He sheathed his dagger. “Is my 
presence at this meeting still imperative, sir?” he asked the baron. 
“Have you anything else to say?” 
“Yes — don't land on Earth." 
“That’s a repetition. No further 
reasons? — in terms of danger to 
ourselves?” 
The analyst paused. “I can think 
of nothing worse that could happen 
to us,” he said slowly, “than just 
being what we already are.” 
He snapped his heels formally, 
bowed to the baron, and stalked 
out of the cabin. 
“I suggest,” said a wingsman, 
“that we speak to Frewek about 
tightening up the discipline in the 
Intelligence section. That man was 
in open contempt, Baron.” 
“But he was also probably 
right,” sighed the graying officer 
and nobleman. 
“Sir—!” 
“Don’t worry, Wingsman, there’s 
nothing else to do. We’ll have to 
land. Make preparations, both of 
you — and try to make contact with 
surface. I’ll dictate the message.” 
When the wingsmen left, it was 
settled. The baron arose with a 
sigh and went to peer morosely at 
the view of Earth below. Very delicately, he wiped the tiny trace of 
blood from the glass. She was a 
beautiful world, this Earth. She 
had spawned them all, as Meikl 
said — but for this, the baron could 
feel only bitterness toward her. 
But what of her inhabitants? I’m 
past feeling anything for them, he 
thought, past feeling for any of the 
life-scum that creeps across the surface of a world, any world. We’ll 
go down quickly, and take what we 
need quickly, and leave quickly. 
We’ll try not to infect them, but 
they’ve already got it in them, the 
dormant disease, and any infection 
will be only a recurrence. 
Nevertheless, he summoned a 
priest to his quarters. And, before 
going to the command deck, he 
bathed sacramentally as if in preparation for battle. 
“Your hawk's blude was never sae 
red, 
Edward, Edward; 
Your hawk's blude was never sae 
red, 
My dear son, 1 tell thee, O” 
“O 1 hae kill'd my red-roan steed, 
M it her, mither; 
O I hae kill'd my red roan steed, 
That erst was sae fair and free, 
O” 
ANONYMOUS 
False dawn was in the east when 
the slivers of light appeared once 
again out of the eclipse shadow to 
rake majestically across the heavens, and again the children of 
THE TIES THAT BIND 
Earth crowded in teeming numbers 
from the quiet gardens to chatter 
their excitement at the wonder in 
the sky. But this time, a message 
came. The men of the tech clans 
who tended the newly activated 
mechanisms heard it, and the 
mechanisms memorized it, and 
played it again and again for the 
people, while the linguists puzzled 
over the unidentified language used 
in the transmission. 
PROPAUTH EARTH FROM 
COMMSTRAFEFLEET THREE, 
SPACE, KLAEDEN COMM, PRESENTS GREETINGS! 
IF YOU HAVE RECORDS, OUR 
USE OF ANCIENT ANGLO-GERMANIC SHOULD MAKE OUR 
IDENTITY CLEAR. HAVE. YOU 
FUELING FACILITIES FOR 720 
SHIPS OF THOR-NINE CLASS? IF 
NOT, WE SHALL DEVELOP FACILITIES FROM LOCAL RESOURCES, WITH, WE TRUST, 
YOUR PEACEFUL COOPERATION. 
THIS CADRE NOT REIMMIGRATING, BUT EN ROUTE TO URSAN 
STARS. REQUEST LANDING SUGGESTIONS, IN VIEW OF OUR 
FUELING NEEDS. 
REQUEST INTELLIGENCE CONCERNING PRESENT LEVEL OF 
TERRESTRIAL CULTURE. OUR 
ORIBITAL OBSERVATIONS INDICATE A STATIC AGRARIANTECHNICAL COMPLEX, BUT DETAILS NOT AVAILABLE. WE 
COME IN ARMS, BUT WITHOUT 
ENMITY. PLEASE REPLY, IF 
POSSIBLE. 
ERNSTLI BARON VEN 
KLAEDEN, COMMANDING 
STRAFEFLEET THREE, 
SPACESTRIKE COMMAND, IMPERIAL 
FORCES OF THE SECESSION 
S O IT CAME, repeated continuously for an hour, followed by 
an hour of silence, and then by another hour of repetition. The linguists were unable to discern meanings. Thousands of memorizers 
were consulted, but none knew the 
words of the harsh voice from the 
ships. At last, the sages consulted 
the books and memnoscripts in the 
ancient vaults, pouring over tomes 
that had been buried for countless 
centuries. After hours of hurried 
study . 
“It is found, it is found, a tongue 
of the ancients!” a joyous cry in 
the glades and the garden pathways. 
Happily, the sages recorded the 
linguistic structure of the forgotten 
tongue on memnoscript, and gave 
it to a servo translator. Outmoded 
mechanisms were being brought out 
of wraps and prepared for use. The 
servos supplied a translation of the 
message, and the sages studied it. 
“It is badly understood,” was the 
curious mutter along the garden 
pathways. 
“Many words have no words to 
match them, nor any thoughts that 
are similar,” was the only explanation the sages could give. 
In translation the message 
seemed meaningless, or unfathomable. Only one thing was clear. The 
sons of Man meant to descend again 
upon the world of their ancestors. 
There was a restless unease in the 
gardens, and groups of elders 
gathered in the conference glades 
to mutter and glance at the sky. 
“Invite our brothers to land,” was 
the impetuous cry of the young, but 
there were dissenters. 
In the Glade of Sopho, a few 
WALTER MILLER, JR. 
thoughtful clansmen of Pedaga had 
gathered to muse and speak quietly 
among themselves, although it was 
not ordinarily the business of tutors 
to consider problems that confronted society as a whole, particularly problems arising outside society itself. The Pedaga were teachers of th.e very young, and deliberately kept themselves childlike in 
outlook in order to make fuller contact with the children in their 
charge. 
“I think we should tell them to 
go away,” said Letha, and looked 
around at the others for a response. 
She got nothing in reply but a 
flickering glance from Marrita, who 
sat morosely on a cool rock by the 
spring, her chin on her bare knees. 
Evon gave her a brief polite smile, 
to acknowledge the sound of her 
voice, but he returned almost at 
once to absently tearing twigs and 
glancing up at the bits of sky that 
showed through the foliage of the 
overhanging trees. lak and Karrn 
were whispering together at the far 
end of the glade, and had not heard 
her. 
Letha shrugged and leaned back 
against the tree trunk again, sitting 
spraddle-legged this time in the 
hope of catching Evon’s eye. She 
was a graceful girl, and while gracefulness is sometimes feline, Letha’s 
was more nearly kittenish. She was 
full-bodied and soft, but wellshaped in spite of a trace of plumpness. Thick masses of black hair fell 
over baby-skin shoulders in a pleasing contrast, and while her face was 
a bit too round, it radiated a gentle, 
winning grin, and the sympathetic 
gaze of gray-blue eyes. Now she 
seemed ready to pout. Evon re
mained self-absorbed. 
“I think we should tell them to 
go away,” she repeated a little 
sharply. “They’ll all be big and 
swashbuckling and handsome, and 
the children will become unmanageable as soon as they see them. 
All the little girls will swoon, and 
all the little boys will want to go 
with them.” 
Evon ganced at her briefly. “It’s 
up to the elders of the Geoark,” he 
muttered without interest, and prepared to return to his own meditations. 
“And all the big girls will run 
away with them,” she purred with 
a tight smile, and stretched a languorous leg out in front of her to 
waggle her foot. 
Evon shot her a quick glance, 
held it for a moment, then looked 
skyward again. She pursed her lips 
in irritation and glared at him. 
Gradually, she forgave him. Evon 
was distraught. He must be — because she hadn’t seen him sit still 
this long in years. He was always 
doing something, or looking for 
something to do. It wasn’t like Evon 
just to sit still and think. He was a 
restless, outgoing fellow, nearly always reacting boisterously, or laughing his staccato laugh. Now he just 
sat there and looked puzzledly in 
the direction of the sky-fleet. Looking puzzled didn’t fit his face, somehow. It was a bony brown face, 
slightly oily, with a long narrow jaw 
that jutted forward like a plowshare 
under an elastic smirk. It was a 
rubbery kind of a face, the kind 
that could twist into horrid masks 
for the amusement of the young. 
Now it just drooped. 
She stirred restlessly, driven to 
THE TIES THAT BIND 
seek sympathetic understanding. 
“You wonder what it’s like, 
Evon?” she asked. 
He grunted at her quizzically and 
shook his head. 
“To be one of the children of the 
Exodus, I mean,” she added. 
“Me? What are you thinking of, 
Letha?” 
“Of your face. It looks suddenly 
like a nomad’s face. You remind me 
of an old schnorrer who used to 
wander through our gardenboro 
every year to play his fiddle, and 
sing us songs, and steal our chickens.” 
“I don’t fiddle.” 
“But your eyes are on the skyfleet.” 
Evon paused, hovering between 
irritation and desire to express. 
“It’s strange,” he murmured at last. 
“It’s as if I know them — the starbirds, I mean. Last night, when I 
saw them first, it was like looking 
at something I expected to happen 
. or . or . .” 
“Something familiar?” 
“Yes.” 
“You think he has the genemnemon, Marrita?” she asked the 
blonde girl who sat on the cool rock 
by the spring. 
Marrita looked up from dabbling her toes in the icy trickle. “I 
don’t believe in the genemnemon. 
My great grandfather was a thief.” 
“How silly! What’s that to do 
with it?” 
“He buried a fortune, they say. 
If there was a genemnemon, I’d remember where he buried it, 
wouldn’t I?” She pouted, and went 
back to dabbling a club toe in the 
spring. 
Evon snorted irritably and arose 
to stretch. “We lie around here like 
sleepy pigs!” he grumbled. “Have 
the Pedaga nothing to do but wait 
on the Geoark to make up its 
mind?” 
“What do you think they’ll do?” 
“The Geoark? Invite the strangers to land. What else could they 
do?” 
“Tell them to go away.” 
“And suppose they chose not to 
go?” 
The girl looked bewildered. “I 
can’t imagine anyone refusing the 
Geoark.” 
“Maybe they’ve got their own 
Geoark. Why should they cooperate 
with ours?” 
“Two Geoarks? What a strange 
idea.” 
“Is it strange that you and I 
should have two brains? Or were 
you aware that I have one too?” 
“Evon! What a strange idea.” 
He seized her by the ankles and 
dragged her squealing to the spring, 
then set her down in the icy trickle. 
Marrita moved away, grumbling 
complaints, and Letha snatched up 
a switch and chased him around the 
glade, shrieking threats of mayhem, 
while Evon’s laughter broke the 
gloomy air of the small gathering, 
and caused a few other Pedaga to 
wander into the clearing from the 
pathways. 
“I think we should prepare a 
petition for the Geoark,” someone 
suggested. 
“About the skyfleet? And who 
knows what to say?” 
“I’m afraid,” said a girl. “Somehow I’m suddenly afraid of them.” 
“Our brothers from the Exodus? 
But they’re people — such as you 
and I.” 
WALTER MILLER, JR. 
12 
So went the voices. After an hour, 
a crier came running through the 
glade to read another message received from the skyfleet. 
PROPAUTH EARTH FROM 
COMMSTRAFEFLEET THREE, 
SPACE, KLAEDEN COMM, PRESENTS GREETINGS! 
HAVING RECEIVED NO ANSWER TO OUR PREVIOUS COMMUNICATION, WE HAVE NO 
CHOICE BUT TO LAND AT ONCE. 
I AM IMPOSING AN INFORMATIONAL QUARANTINE TO AVOID 
RESTIMULATING POSSIBLE RECESSIVE KULTURVERLAENGERUNG, BUT SUGGEST YOU 
GUARD YOURSELVES. OUR CULTURES HAD A COMMON ORIGIN. 
WE COME IN ARMS, WITHOUT 
ENMITY. 
ERNSTLI BARON VEN 
KLAEDEN, COMMANDING 
STRAFEFLEET THREE, 
SPACESTRIKE COMMAND IMPERIAL 
FORCES OF THE SECESSION 
This was even more mystifying 
than the previous one, even less 
meaningful in translation. One 
thing was clear, however: the fleet 
was going to land, without invitation. 
Embarrassed, the elders of the 
Geoark immediately called the 
tech clans. “Gan you revive the 
devices that speak across space?” 
they asked. 
“They are revived,” answered 
the tech clans. 
“Then let us speak to our 
brothers from space.” 
And so it was that the people of 
the gardens of Earth sang out: 
BRETHREN TO BRETHREN, 
PRESENT LOVE LOVE LOVE. 
WE WELCOME YOU TO OUR 
GLADES AND TO OUR PLACES OF 
FEEDING AND OUR PLACES OF 
SLEEPING. WE WELCOME YOU 
TO THE BOSOM OF THE WORLD 
OF BEGINNING. AFTER TWENTY 
THOUSAND YEARS, EARTH HAS 
NOT FORGOTTEN. COME AMID 
REJOICING. 
THE ELDERS OF THE GEOARK 
“I’m afraid Earth will remember 
more than it wants to,” growled 
Ernstli Baron ven Klaeden, as he 
issued the command to blast into 
an atmospheric-braking orbit. 
And there was thunder in a 
cloudless sky. 
“O your steed was auld and ye hae 
mair, 
Edward, Edward. 
O your steed was auld and ye hae 
mair , 
And some other dule ye dree, O.” 
“O I hae kill’d my ain father dear, 
Mither, mither ; 
O I hae kill’d my ain father dear, 
Alas and woe is me, O.” 
ANONYMOUS 
I N ACCORDANCE with the 
rules of invasion strategy for 
semi-civilized planets, the fleet 
separated itself into three groups. 
The first group fell into atmospheric braking; the second group 
split apart and established an “orbital shell” of criscrossing orbits, 
timed and interlocking, at eight 
hundred miles, to guard the descent 
of the first wave of ships, while the 
third wave remained in battle for
THE TIES THAT BIND 
mation at three thousand miles as a 
rear guard against possible space 
attack. When the first wave had 
finished braking, it fell into formation again and flew as aircraft in 
the high stratosphere, while the 
second wave braked itself, and the 
third wave dropped into the orbital 
shell. 
From the first wave, a single ship 
went down to land, and its telecameras broadcast a view of a forest 
garden, slightly charred for a hundred yards around the ship, with 
fires blazing along its edges. 
“No signs of the natives yet,” 
came the report. “No signs of technology. No evidence of hostility.” 
A second ship descended to land 
a mile from the first. Its telecamera 
caught a fleeting glimpse of a man 
waving from a hilltop, but nothing 
more. 
One at a time the ships came, 
with weapon locks open and bristling with steel snouts. The ships 
came down at one-mile intervals, 
the first wave forming a circle that 
enclosed an area of forty-six hundred square miles. The second wave 
came down to land in a central circle of fifteen miles diameter. The 
third wave remained in its orbital 
shell, where it would stand guard 
as long as the fleet was on the 
ground. 
In accordance with the rules of 
officer’s conduct, Baron ven Klaeden, who had ordered the landing, 
was the first to expose himself to 
the enveloping conditions outside 
the flagship. He stood in an open 
lock, sniffing the autumn air of 
Earth in late afternoon. It was full 
of jet-fire smoke, and smelled of 
burning brush. The automatic ex
13 
tinguishers had quenched the 
flames, but the blackened trees and 
brush still roasted and sparked and 
leaked smoke across the land. Somewhere a bird was singing through 
the sunlit haze. Baron ven Klaeden 
recognized the sound as made by a 
living thing, and wondered if the 
recognition was born into his bones. 
Three hundred and fifty yards to 
the north, a wingship towered in 
the sun, its guns trained outward 
from the inner circle, and to the 
south, another wingship. The baron 
glanced down at the earth beneath 
the flagship. The jets had reduced 
to ashes something that might have 
been a low wooden structure. He 
shrugged, and glanced across the 
blackened area toward the orderly 
forest. Trees and shrubs, and a carpet of green turf below, broken 
here and there by rain-worn rocks 
and clusters of smaller fragile leafy 
stuff that might be food-plants. 
Vivid splashes of color blossomed in 
the shady forest, scarlets and blues 
and flashes of brilliant lemon that 
lived in profusion in the foliage of 
the shrubbery. Some of the trees 
were living masses of tiny flowers, 
and when the wind stirred them, 
petals showered to the ground in 
fragrant gusts. The wind changed, 
and the air that breathed about the 
commander’s face was full of perfume. 
I feel nothing, he thought. Here 
is beauty and warmth, here is the 
home of Man, and almost an Eden, 
but I feel nothing. It is just another 
mote that circles a minor sun, and 
to me it is only an exploitable supply dump of Nature, a place to accomplish Procedure 76- A, “Refueling Method for Terrestroid Planets 
WALTER MILLER, JR. 
Without Facilities, Native Labor 
Exploitable.” 
It was only a way-station on the 
long long road from Scorpius to 
Ursa, and it meant nothing, nothing at all. It had changed too much. 
Millenia ago, when the Star Exodus had burst forth to carry Man 
halfway across the galaxy, things 
had been different. A few colonies 
had kept accurate histories of 
Earth intact, and when the 
Transpace Empire had gathered itself into social integration, nearly 
five thousand years ago, the histories had been made universally 
available. The baron had studied 
them, but from the viewpoint of 
the spacer, the history of Humanity 
had ceased in any way to be associated with Earth after the Star 
Exodus. Man was a space creature, 
a denizen of the interstellum — or 
had been, before the War of Secession — and when history moved into 
space, Earth was a half-remembered hamlet. Ven Klaeden had 
seen the Earth-vistas that the historians had reconstructed for the 
museums — vistas of roaring industrial cities, flaming battlegrounds, 
teeming harbors and spaceports. 
The cities were gone, and Earth 
had become a carefully tended 
Japanese garden. 
S HE STARED around, he felt 
a lessening of the anxiety that 
had gnawed at him since the analyst Meikl had predicted dire consequences after the landing. The 
cultural blood of Man had diverged into two streams so vastly 
different that no intermingling 
seemed possible to him. It would be 
easy, he decided, to keep the informational quarantine. The order 
had already been issued. “All personnel are forbidden to attempt the 
learning of the current Earthtongue, or to teach any Empireculture language to the natives, or 
to attempt any written communication with them. Staff-officers may 
communicate only under the provisions of Memorandum J-43-G. The 
possession of any written or recorded material in the native 
tongue, and the giving of written 
material to the natives, shall be 
taken as violations of this order. No 
sign language or other form of symbolic communication shall be used. 
This order shall be in force until 
Semantics section constructs a visual 
code for limited purposes in dealing with the natives. Staff officers 
are hereby authorized to impose 
any penalty ranging to death upon 
offenders, and to try any such cases 
by summary courts martial. Junior 
officers authorized to summarily arrest offenders. Effective immediately. Ven Klaeden, Comm.” 
It would keep any interchange 
to an absolute minimum, he 
thought. And Semantics had been 
ordered to attempt construction of 
a visual language in which only the 
most vital and simple things could 
be said. Meanwhile, the staff could 
attempt to utilize the ancient 
Anglo-Germanic tongue in which 
the messages had been exchanged. 
The baron had started to turn 
back into the lock when his eye 
caught a flash of motion near the 
edge of the forest. Reflexively, he 
whirled and crouched, gun flickering into his hand. His eyes probed 
the shrubs. Then he saw her, half 
THE TIES THAT BIND 
hidden behind a tree trunk — a 
young girl, obviously frightened, yet 
curious to watch the ships. While 
he stared at her, she darted from 
one trunk to the next closer one. 
She was already approaching the 
edge of the blackened area. The 
bqron shot a quick glance at the 
radiation indicators on the inner 
wall of the airlock. The instantaneous meter registered in the red. 
The induced radioactivity in the 
ground about the base of the ship’s 
jets was still too high. The rate-ofdecrease meter registered a decrement of point ten units per unit. 
That meant it wouldn’t be safe for 
the crew to leave ship for twentythree minutes, and that the girl had 
better stay back. 
“Keep clear ! 33 he bellowed from 
the airlock, hoping to frighten her. 
She saw him for the first time, 
then. Instead of being frightened, 
she seemed suddenly relieved. She 
came out into the open and began 
walking toward the ship, wearing a 
smile and gazing up at the lock. 
“Go back, you little idiot ! 33 
Her answer was a brief sing-song 
chant and another smile. She kept 
coming — into the charred area. 
The gun exploded inJiis fist, and 
the bullet ricocheted from the 
ground near her feet. She stopped, 
startled, but not sensing hostility. 
The gun barked again. The bullet 
shattered a pebble, and it peppered 
her legs. She yelped and fled back 
into the green garden. 
He stood there staring after her 
for a moment, his face working 
slowly. She had been unable to understand his anger. She saw the 
ships, and was frightened but curious. She saw a human, and was re
assured. Any human. But was what 
she saw really human any longer, 
the baron asked himself absently. 
He grunted scornfully, and went 
back through the lock. 
It was easier, even on the ground, 
to communicate with the elders of 
the Geoark by radio, since both parties had set up automatic translators to translate their own tongues 
into the old Anglo-German which 
was a mutually recorded dead language. 
“We ha.ve neutralized a circle of 
land of thirty-one mile radius,” ven 
Klaeden reported to the elders. “If 
our selection of this region is unfortunate, we are open to discussion 
of alternatives. However, our measurements indicated that the resources of this area make it best for 
our purposes.” 
“Your landing caused only minor 
damage, brethren,” replied the gentle voice of the Geoark. “You are 
welcome to remain as you are.” 
“Thank you. We consider the 
occupied area to be under our military jurisdiction, and subject to 
property seizures. It will be a restricted area, closed to civilian population.” 
“But brethren, thousands of people live in the gardens you have 
surrounded!” 
“Evacuate them.” 
“I don’t understand.” 
“Evacuate them. Make them get 
out.” 
“My translator is working badly.” 
The baron turned away from the 
mike for a moment and grunted to 
the colonel in command of ground 
operations. “Start clearing the occupied zone. Get the population out 
unless they’ll work for us.” 
WALTER MILLER, JR. 
“How much notice?’* 
The baron paused briefly. “Fifty 
hours to pack up, plus one additional hour for each mile the fellow 
has to stump it to the outer radius.” 
“My translator is working badly,” 
the voice of the elder was parroting. 
“Look,” the baron grunted at 
the mike. “All we want is to accomplish what we came here for, and 
then get out — as quickly as possible. 
We don’t have much time to be 
polite. I invite the elders of the 
Geoark to confer in my flagship. 
We’ll try to make everything clear 
to you. Is this agreed?” 
“My translator is working badly.” 
“Aren’t you getting anything?” 
A pause, then : “I understand 
that you wish us to come to the 
place where the skyfleet rests.” 
“Correct.” 
“But what of the welcome we 
have made for our brethren in the 
feast-glades?” 
“I shall dispatch flyers to pick 
you up immediately. Unless you 
have aircraft of your own.” 
“We have no machinery but the 
self-sustaining mechanisms in the 
Earth.” 
“Any of your population understand the mechanisms?” 
“Certainly, brother.” 
“Then bring technicians. They’ll 
be best able to understand what we 
want, and maybe they can make it 
clear to you.” 
“As you wish, brother.” 
The baron terminated the contact and turned to his staff with a 
satisfied smile. “I think we shall 
have what we need and be gone 
quickly,” he said. 
“The . elder took it well. They 
must be afraid of us.” 
“Respectful awe is more like it,” 
the baron grunted. 
“I suggest the answer is in the 
word ‘brethren,’ ” came a voice 
from the back of the room. 
“Meikl! What are you doing in 
here?” ven Klaeden barked irritably. 
“You called my department for 
a man. My department sent me. 
Shall I go back?” 
“It’s up to you, Analyst. If you 
can keep your ideals corked and be 
useful.” 
Meikl bowed stiffly. “Thank you, 
55 
sir. 
“Having it in mind that our only 
objective is to go through the tooling-mining-fueling cycle with a 
minimum of trouble and time — 
have you got any suggestions?” 
“About how to deal with the natives?” 
“Certainly . but with the accent on our problems.” 
Meikl paused to snap the tip 
from an olophial and sniffed appreciatively at the mildly alkaloid vapor before replying. “From what 
we’ve gathered through limited observation, I think we’d better gather 
some more, and do our suggesting 
later.” 
“That constitutes your entire 
opinion?” 
“Not quite. About the question 
of recessive kulturverlaengerung 
» 
“Our problems, I said!” the commander snapped. 
“It’s likely to be our problem, 
sir.” 
“How?” 
“In Earth culture at the time of 
the Exodus, there were some pat
THE TIES THAT BIND 
terns we’d regard as undesirable. 
We can’t know whether we’re still 
carrying the recessive patterns or 
not. And we don’t know whether 
the patterns are still dominant in 
the natives. Suppose we get restimulated.” 
“What patterns do you mean?” 
“The Exodus was a mass-desertion, in one sense, Baron.” 
A moment of hush in the room. 
“I see what you mean,” the commander grunted. “But ‘desertion’ 
is a pattern of action, not a transmittable determinant.” 
Meikl shook his head. “We don’t 
know what is a transmittable determinant until after it’s happened.” 
He paused. “Suppose there’s some 
very simple psychic mechanism behind the ‘pioneer’ impulse. We 
don’t feel it, but our ancestors did, 
and we might have recessive traces 
of it in our kulturverlaengerung 
lines.” 
A wingman coughed raucously. 
“To be blunt with you, Meikl ... I 
think this is a lot of nonsense. The 
whole concept is far-fetched.” 
“What, the kult’laenger lines?” 
“Exactly.” The wingsman 
snorted. “How could things like 
that get passed along from father 
to son. If you people’d stop the 
mystical gibberish, and deal in 
facts . .” 
“Do you regard parent-child rapport as a fact?” Meikl turned to 
stare absently out a viewing port at 
the trees. 
“You mean the telepathic experiments with infants? I don’t know 
much about it.” 
“Seventy years ago. On Michsa 
Three. A hundred parents were 
given intensive lessons and intensive 
practice in playing a very difficult 
skill game . before they became 
parents. They did nothing but play 
the game for three years. Then 
their babies were taken away from 
them at the age of one year. 
Brought up institutionally. There 
was a control group — another hundred whose parents never heard of 
the skill game.” 
“Go on.” 
“So, when the children were ten 
years old, they did learning-speed 
tests on all two hundred.” 
“Learning the game, you mean?” 
“Right. The children whose 
parents had learned it came out 
way ahead. So far ahead that it was 
conclusive. Sometime during pregnancy and the first year, the kids 
had picked up a predisposition to 
learn the patterns of the game easily.” 
“So?” 
“So — during infancy, a child is 
beginning to mirror the patterns of 
the parental mind — probably telepathically, or something related. He 
doesn’t ‘inherit it’ in the genes, but 
there’s an unconscious cultural 
mechanism of transmittal — and it’s 
an analog of heredity. The kulturverlaengerung — and it can linger in 
a family line without becoming conscious for many generations.” 
“How? If they hadn’t taught the 
children to play the game . .” 
“If they hadn’t, it’d still be passed 
on — as a predisposition-talent — to 
the third and fourth and Nth generation. Like a mirror-image of a 
mirror-image of a mirror-image . 
or a memory of a memory of a 
memory . .” 
“This grows pedantic, and irrelevant,” the baron growled. “What 
WALTER MILLER/ JR. 
are the chances of utilizing native 
labor?” 
“And whatten penance will we dree 
for that, 
Edward, Edward ? 
Whatten penance will ye dree for 
that? 
My dear son, now tell me, O . 33 
“Ell set my feet in yonder boat, 
Mither, mither; 
Yll set my feet in yonder boat, 
And YU fare over the sea, O.” 
ANONYMOUS 
P HASE-A had been accomplished, after six months of toil. 
Baltun Meikl, Analyst Gulturetic 
of Intelligence Section stood on the 
sunswept hill, once forested, but 
now barren except for the stumps 
of trees, and watched the slow file 
of humanity that coursed along the 
valley, bearing the hand-hewn ties 
that were being laid from the opening of the mine shaft to the ore 
dump. Glittering ribbons of steel 
snaked along the valley, and ended 
just below him, where a crew of 
workmen hammered spikes under 
the watchful eye of a uniformed 
foreman. In tlie distance, the central ring of grounded ships dominated the land. Spacers and natives 
labored together, to lend an impression of egalitarian cooperation 
under the autocracy of the officer 
class. 
“How good it is for brethren to 
be reunited,” Meikl’s native interpreter murmured, in the facile tongue devised by Semantics Section 
for use by staff officers and Intelligence men in communicating with 
the natives. 
He stared at her profile for a moment, as she watched the men in the 
valley. Was she really that blind? 
Were all of them? Had they no 
resistance at all to exploitation, or 
any concept for it? 
Meikl had learned as much as he 
could of the socio-economic matrix 
of the static civilization of the present Earthlings. He had gone into 
their glades and gardens and seen 
the patterns of their life, and he 
wondered. Life was easy, life was 
gay, life was full of idle play. Somehow, they seemed completely unaware of what they had done to the 
planet in twenty thousand years. 
One of the elders had summed up, 
without meaning to, the entire 
meaning of twenty millenia, with 
the casual statement: “In our gardens, there are no weeds , 33 and it 
applied to the garden of human 
culture almost as well as it applied 
to the fauna and flora of the planet. 
This “weedlessness” had not 
been the goal of any planned project, but rather, the inevitable result 
of age-old struggles between Man 
and Nature on a small plot of land. 
When Man despoiled Nature, and 
slaughtered her children. Nature 
could respond in two ways : she 
could raise up organisms to survive 
in spite of Man, and she could raise 
up organisms to survive in the service and custody of Man. She had 
done both, but the gardener with 
his weed-hoe and his insect spray 
and his vermin exterminators had 
proved that he could invent new 
weapons faster than Nature could 
evolve tenacious pests, and eventually the life forms of Earth had 
been emasculated of the tendency 
to mutate into disobedient species. 
THE TIES THAT BIND 
Nature had won many bloody battles; but Man had won the war. 
Now he lived in a green world that 
seemed to offer up its fruits to him 
with only a minimum of attention 
from Man. Nature had learned to 
survive in the presence of Man. Yet 
the natives seemed unaware of the 
wonder of their Eden. There was 
peace, there was plenty. 
This, he thought, could be the 
answer to their lack of resistance 
in the face of what seemed to Meikl 
to be sheer seizure and arrogant exploitation by Baron ven Klaeden 
and his high command. In a bounteous world, there were no concepts 
of “exploitation” or “property 
seizure” or “authoritarianism”. The 
behaviour of the starmen appeared 
as strange, or fascinating, or laughable, or shocking to such as the girl 
who stood beside him on the hill — 
but not as aggressive nor imperious. 
When a foreman issued an order, 
the workman accepted it as a polite 
request for a favor, and did it as if 
for a friend. Fortunately, ven Klaeden had possessed at least the good 
sense to see to it that the individual 
natives were well treated by the individual officers in charge of tasks. 
There had been few cases of interpersonal hostility between natives 
and starmen. The careful semantics 
of the invented sign-language accomplished much in the way of 
avoiding conflicts, and the natives 
enthusiastically strived to please. 
He glanced at the girl again, her 
dark hair whipping in the breeze. 
Lovely, he thought, and glanced 
around to see that no one was near. 
“You belong to another, Letha?” 
he asked. 
She tossed him a quick look with 
pale eyes, hesitated. “There is a boy 
named Evon . .” 
He nodded, lips tightening. Stop 
it, you fool, he told himself. You 
can’t make love to her. You’ve got 
to leave with the rest of them. 
“But I don’t really belong to 
him,” she said, and reddened. 
“Letha, I . ” 
“Yes, Meikl.” 
“Nothing. I’m lonely, I guess.” 
Her eyes wandered thoughtfully 
toward the ships. “Meikl, why will 
you tell us nothing of space — how 
you’ve lived since the Exodus?” 
“We are an evil people.” 
“Not so.” 
She touched his arm, and looked 
up at him searchingly. 
“What is it you wish to know?” 
“Why will you never return to 
your home?” 
“To space — but we shall.” 
“To the worlds of your birth, I 
mean.” 
He stiffened slightly, stared at 
her. “What makes you think we 
won’t?” he asked, a little sharply. 
“Will you?” 
So there were leaks after all, he 
thought. After six months, many 
things would be communicated to 
the natives, even under strictest security. 
“No,” he admitted, “we can’t go 
back to the worlds of our birth.” 
“But why? Where are your women and children?” 
He wanted to tell her, to see her 
turn and flee from him, to see the 
natives desert the project and keep 
to their forests until the ships departed. There had been a translator 
set up between the Anglo-Germanic 
and the present native tongue, and 
he had fed it the word “war”. The 
WALTER MILLER, JR. 
single word had brought five minutes of incomprehensible gibberish 
from the native tongue’s output. 
There was no concept to equate it 
to. 
“There is blood on our hands,” 
he grunted, and knew immediately 
he had said too much. 
She continued to stare at the 
ships. “What are the metal tubes 
that point from the front and the 
sides of the ships, Meikl?” 
There was no word for “guns” or 
“weapons”. 
“They hurl death, Letha.” 
“How can ‘death* be hurled ?” 
Meikl shook himself. He was saying too much. These are the children of the past, he reminded himself, the same past that had begotten the children of space. The same 
traces of the ancient kulturverlaengerung would live in their 
neural patterns, however recessive 
and subliminal. One thing he 
knew: sometime during the twenty 
millenia since the Exodus, they had 
carefully rooted out the vestigial 
traces of strife in their culture. The 
records had been systematically censored and rewritten. They were unaware of war and pogroms and persecution. History had forgotten. He 
decided to explain to her in terms 
of the substitute concepts of her 
understanding. 
“There were twelve worlds, 
Letha, with the same Geoark. Five 
of them wished to break away and 
establish their separate Geoark. 
There was a contention for property.” 
“Was it settled?” she asked innocently. 
He nodded slowly. 
It was settled, he thought. We 
razed them and diseased them and 
interpested them and wrecked their 
civilizations, and revolutions reduced the remains to barbarism. If 
a ship landed on a former planet of 
the empire, the crew would be 
lynched and murdered. Under ven 
Klaeden, the ships of the Third 
Fleet were going to seek out an alleged colony in Ursa, to sell ships, 
tools, and services to a minor technology that was approaching its 
own space-going day, in return for 
immigration and nationalization 
rights — a young civilization full of 
chaotic expansion. 
“There is much you could not 
understand, Letha,’* he told her. 
“Our cultures are different. All societies go through three phases, and 
yours has passed through them all 
— perhaps into a fourth and final.” 
“And yours, Meikl?” 
“I don’t know. First there is the 
struggle to integrate in a hostile environment. Then, after integration, 
comes an explosive expansion of the 
culture — conquest, a word unknown to you. Then a withering 
of the mother-culture, and the rebellious rise of young cultures.” 
“We were the mother-culture, 
Meikl?” 
He nodded. “And the Exodus 
was your birth-giving.” 
“Now we are old and withered, 
Meikl?” 
He looked around at the gardenforests in the distance. A second 
childhood? he wondered. Was there 
a fourth phase? — a final perpetual 
youth that would never reach another puberty? He wondered. The 
coming of the sky-fleet might be a 
cultural coitus, but could there be 
conception? 
THE TIES THAT BIND 
PAIR of junior officers came 
wandering along the ridge, 
speaking in low tones and gazing 
down toward the valley. There was 
a casual exchange of salutes as they 
approached the girl and the analyst. 
The officers wore police armbands, 
and they asked for Meikl’ s fraternization permit, using the spacer’s 
tongue. 
“Deserter troubles?” he asked, as 
they returned his papers. 
“Nineteen last week,” said one 
of the officers. “We’ve lost about 
three hundred men since we 
landed.” 
“Found any of them?” 
“Justice Section got sixty-three. 
The rest are probably hopeless.” 
Another exchange of salutes. The 
officers left. 
“What did they want, Meikl?” 
she asked. 
“Just idle conversation. It’s nearly time for the meeting with the 
elders. Let’s go.” 
They began walking along the 
ridge together in the late sunlight. 
The meeting was to attempt to explain to the elders of the Geoark 
that the men of the fleet were not 
free to depart from the occupied 
zone. The attempt would be fruitless, but ven Klaeden had ordered 
it. 
From the viewpoint of the high 
command, three hundred desertions out of nineteen thousand men 
over a period of six months was not 
an important loss of personnel. 
What was important: the slow decay of discipline under the “no 
force” interdict. A policy of “no 
arrest” had been established for the 
ausland. If a man escaped from the 
occupied zone, Justice Section 
could send a detail to demand his 
return, but if he refused, no force 
would be used, because of the horrified reaction of the natives. If he 
were located, a killer was dispatched, armed with a tiny phial, a 
hollow needle, and a C0 2 gun that 
could be concealed in the palm of 
the hand. The killer stalked the deserter until he caught him alone, 
fired from cover, and stole quietly 
away while the deserter plucked the 
needle out of his hide to stare at it 
in horror. He had a week in which 
to get back to the occupied zone to 
beg for immunization; if he did 
not, the spot would become alive 
with fungus, and the fungus would 
spread, and within months, he 
would die rather grimly. 
The real danger, Meikl knew, 
was not to the fleet but to the natives. The spacers were cultural poison, and each deserter was a source 
of infection moving into the native 
society, a focal point of restimulation for any recessive kult’laenger 
lines that still existed in a peaceful 
people after twenty thousand years. 
“I think Evon will be here,” the 
girl said too casually as they entered the forest and turned into a 
path that led to the glade where 
the elders had assembled. 
He took her arm suddenly, and 
stopped in the pathway. 
“Letha — you have worked for 
me many months.” 
“Yes—” 
“I love you, Letha.” 
She smiled very slowly, and 
lifted her hands to his face. He 
kissed her quietly, hating himself. 
“You’ll take me with you,” she 
said. 
WALTER MILLER, JR. 
“No.” It was impossible. 
“Then you’ll stay.” 
“It is . forbidden . verboten. There was no word in 
the tongue. 
“I can’t understand ... If you 
love. .” 
He swallowed hard. For the girl, 
“love” automatically settled everything, and consummation must follow. How could he explain. 
“Letha — in your culture, ‘life’ is 
the highest value.” 
“How could it be otherwise? 
Love me, Meikl.” 
He took a deep breath and 
straightened. “You understand 
‘drama’, Letha. I have watched 
your people. Their lives are continuous conscious play-acting. 
Your lives are a dance, but you 
know you are dancing, and you 
dance as you will. Have you 
watched our people?” 
She nodded slowly. “You dance 
a different dance — act a different 
play.” 
“It’s not a play, Letha. We act 
an unconscious drama, and thus 
the drama becomes more important 
than living. And death takes precedence over life.” 
She shuddered slightly and 
stared into his eyes, unbelieving. 
“I don’t know what you mean.” 
“Can you understand? — that I 
love you, and yet my . my. .” 
He groped for a word for “duty”. 
“My death-allegiance to the shippeople takes precedence? I can 
neither take you nor remain with 
you.” 
Something went dead in her 
eyes. “Let us go to the glade,” she 
said in a monotone. “It’s growing 
late.” 
“And what will ye leave to your ain 
mither dear, 
Edward, Edward? 
And what will ye leave to your ain 
mither dear, 
My dear son, now tell me, O?” 
“ The curse of hell frae me sail ye 
bear, 
Mither, mither ; 
The curse of hell frae me sail ye 
bear; 
Sic counsels ye gave to me, O!” 
— ANONYMOUS 
T HE TROUBLE had begun on 
the eighteenth day of the ninth 
month. A party of unidentified men 
had stolen into the occupied zone 
during the night. Without warning, 
they killed three guards, seized control of the dispensary, raided the 
pharmacy, taking the entire supply 
of fungus immunization serum, together with a supply of the deadly 
phials and needles. They stole a 
flyer and departed to the south, 
skimming low over the forest to 
avoid fire from the grounded fleet. 
The following day, a leaflet appeared, circulating among the fleet 
personnel. 
NOTICE OF SANCTUARY 
TO: ALL PERSONNEL 
FROM: AUSLAND COMMITTEE 
SUBJECT: FREEDOM 
1. ANY OFFICER OR MAN WHO 
WISHES TO RESIGN FROM THE 
SERVICES OF THE IMPERIAL 
FORCES OF THE SECESSION MAY 
DO SO OF THIS DATE. 
2. THE PROCEDURE FOR RESIGNATION INVOLVES NO FORMAL STATEMENT. A MAN MAY 
TERMINATE HIS PERIOD OF 
THE TIES THAT BIND 
SERVICE BY DEPARTING FROM 
THE OCCUPIED ZONE. 
3. ANY OFFICER OR MAN WHO 
ATTEMPTS TO INTERFERE WITH 
THE RESIGNATION OF ANOTHER 
SHALL BE TRIED IN ABSENTIA 
BY THIS COMMITTEE, AND IF 
FOUND GUILTY, SHALL INCUR 
THE DEATH PENALTY. 
AUSLAND COMMITTEE 
“An outrageous and preposterous bit of deviltry!” ven Klaeden 
had hissed. “Get them. Make an 
example of them.” 
In reversal of previous policy, a 
police party was sent to search for 
the self-styled ausland committee, 
with orders to capture or kill on 
sight. The police party hunted 
down and killed six deserters, 
dragged eleven more back to the 
occupied zone, under the very eyes 
of the native population. But the 
immunizing serum was not recovered. 
A few days later, three staff officers and a dozen officers in Justice 
Section awoke with yelps in the 
night to pluck stinging needles from 
their skins and scream for the 
guard to pursue the silent shadows 
that had invaded their quarters. 
Five men were captured. Three 
of them were natives. Interrogation 
failed to disclose the location of 
the immunizing serum. 
Muttering natives began to desert the project. The five culprits 
were brought before the baron. 
“Execute them in public, with 
full dress military ceremony. Then 
close the border of the occupied 
zone. No native may leave, if he 
has signed a work contract.” 
On the day of the execution, the 
natives attempted to leave en 
masse. The police activity along 
the border approached the proportions of a massacre. 
“We were nearly finished,” raged 
the baron, pacing like an angry 
predator in the glade. “Another 
two weeks, and the first ore would 
come out of the crushers. They 
can’t stop us now. They can’t quit.” 
Three elders of the Geoark sat 
like frozen statues on a mossy boulder, tight-lipped, not understanding the colonel’s tongue, disdaining 
to speak in the intermediate language. 
“Explain it to them, Meikl. 
Make it clear.” 
Pale, trembling with suppressed 
disapproval, the analyst bowed 
curtly and turned to the girl. “Tell 
them,” he said in the Intermedia, 
“that death will come to any native who deserts, and that ten auslanders will die for every man murdered by the renegade committee. 
Tell them that the- Geoark is. .” 
He paused. There was no word for 
“hostage.” 
He was explaining the hostageconcept lengthily, while the girl’s , 
face drained of color. Suddenly she 
turned away to retch. Meikl stood 
stricken for a moment, turned helplessly toward the baron. 
“ They understood you, damn 
them!” ven Klaeden snapped. 
“They know the Intermedia.” 
The elders continued to sit stonily on the boulder without acknowledging that they had heard. One 
of them sighed deeply and spoke 
a few words to the others. They 
nodded sadly, answered with polite 
monosyllables. 
“No!” Letha yelped, suddenly 
whirling, looking at the elders. 
WALTER MILLER, JR. 
One of them smiled and murmured a few words to her. Then 
the three of them slid down from 
the boulder. The guard who stood 
at port arms a few feet away stirred 
restlessly. 
The elders walked casually toward a path leading away from the 
glade. The guard looked questioningly at the officers. 
“Where are they going?” ven 
Klaeden demanded. 
“Well, Letha?” Meikl muttered. 
“I — I don’t know — ” 
“You’re lying, girl,” the baron 
grunted, then to the guards: “Tell 
them to halt.” 
“Party, halt!” snapped the 
guard. 
The three elderly gentlemen continued toward the path, loose robes 
gathered up from spindley shins. 
"Party, halt!” 
The elders murmured conversationally among themselves as they 
continued. 
“HALT, I SAID.” 
“Take the one in the middle,” 
ordered ven Klaeden. 
The guard lifted the snub-nosed 
shoulder weapon. There was a brief 
rattling hiss. The back of the elder’s 
robe went crimson, and he crumpled at the entrance of the pathway. 
The other two continued on 
their way, their stride unbroken. 
“Shoot for the legs, you fool!” 
barked the baron. 
The rattling hiss came again. 
They fell in the shrubs, whimpering softly. 
Miekl turned away with a choking spasm in his throat, looked 
around for Letha. She had vanished from the glade. 
“Haul them to the dispensary, 
keep them prisoner,” the baron was 
growling. 
Meikl turned on him. “Now it’s 
come to this, has it?” he snapped. 
“From the beginning, they were 
willing — even eager, to give what 
we wanted. Why did they stop being willing?” 
“That’s enough, Meikl!” 
“I’ve hardly started. You came 
here like a tyrant, and they served 
you like a friend. You couldn’t bear 
it. ‘Brethren’, they said. But there’s 
nothing about ‘brethren’ in the tactical handbooks, is there, Baron?” 
“Shut up.” 
Ven Klaeden said it quietly, as 
if bored. He crossed slowly to stand 
before the analyst and stare at him 
icily. 
“You speak of the unconscious 
inheritance of culture, analyst — the 
kulturverlaengerung. And you have 
accused me for being a carrier of 
the war plague, eh?” 
Meikl paused. The baron’s eyes 
were narrowed, stabbing as if in 
judgment or triumph. 
“Well, Meikl? Is that what we’ve 
done? Inflicted them with conflict? 
Brought back the old seeds of 
hate?” 
The analyst drew himself up 
slightly. “You just killed a man, a 
man of dignity,” he snarled, “and 
you cut two others down like 
weeds.” 
“Innocent old men.” The baron’s mouth twisted into a snarl. 
“They wanted nothing but to 
help us.” 
“Yes, Meikl? And we are the 
barbarians, eh?” 
The analyst spoke disdain with 
his eyes. 
THE TIES THAT BIND 
The baron straightened in sudden hauteur. “Look down at the 
ground, Analyst ” he hissed. 
Ven Klaeden’s sudden change of 
tone impelled him to obey. His eyes 
fell to the turf at his feet — moss 
covered sod, rich and dark beneath 
the green. 
The baron kicked a hole in the 
moss with the toe of his boot. “Tell 
me where the infection came from, 
Analyst,” he growled. He scraped 
at the hole with his heel. “And why 
is the dirt so red right here?” 
Meikl glanced up slowly. Two 
men were coming through the 
shrubs, walking warily along the 
path toward the clearing. Ven 
Klaeden seemed unaware. He 
leaned forward to speak through 
his teeth. 
“I give them nothing but what 
they gave our fathers — their own 
inner hell, Meikl — the curse they so 
carefully forgot. In their Eden.” 
The man was mad . perhaps. 
Meikl’s eyes followed the men who 
approached through the shrubs. 
One of them carried a burden — 
the limp body of a girl, occasionally visible through the low foliage 
as they drew nearer. One of the 
men was a junior officer, the other 
a native. After a moment, he recognized the native. 
1 “Evon!” 
As he called out, the baron 
whirled, hand slipping to the hilt 
of the ceremonial sword he wore 
in the presence of the Geoark. The 
men stopped. Meikl stared at the 
limp figure in the arms of the 
native. 
“Lethal” 
“Dead,” Evon hissed. “They 
killed her for running. .” 
They emerged from the shrubs 
into full view. The officer was holding a gun. 
“Put that away!” ven Klaeden 
snapped. 
The young officer laughed sourly. “Sorry, baron, I’m from the 
committee.” 
“Guard!” 
“There’s no one in earshot, 
Baron.” 
“Fool!” Ven Klaeden arrogantly 
whipped out the sword. “Drop that 
gun, or I’ll blade-whip you!” 
“Easy, baron, easy. I’m your 
executioner. .” 
The baron straightened haughtily and began a slow advance, a 
towering figure of icy dignity in the 
sun that filtered through the 
foliage. 
“. but I want to take care of 
this one first.” The renegade waved 
the gun toward Meikl. “You, Baron, you can have it slower — a 
needle in your official rump.” 
Ven Klaeden, a figure of utter 
contempt, continued the slow advance with the sword. The officer’s 
lips tightened. He squeezed the 
trigger. Ven Klaeden hesitated, 
jerking slightly, then continued, his 
hand pressing against his abdomen, 
doubling forward slightly. The officer fired again — a sharp snap of 
sound in the glade. The baron 
stopped, wrestling with pain ten 
feet from the pale renegade. 
Suddenly he flung the sword. It 
looped in mid-air and slashed the 
man’s face from chin to cheekbone. 
He tripped and tumbled backward 
as ven Klaeden slipped to his knees 
on the moss. 
Meikl dived for the gun. By the 
time he wrestled it away from the 
WALTER MILLER, JR. 
officer with the bloody face, ven 
Klaeden was sitting like a gaunt 
Buddha on the moss, and the body 
of Letha lay nearby, while a confused Evon clutched his hands to 
his face and rocked slowly. Meikl 
came slowly to his feet. The renegade officer wiped his face of blood 
and shrank back into shrubs. 
“Get him,” croaked ven Klaeden. 
Scarcely knowing why, the analyst jerked the trigger, felt the 
gun explode in his fist, saw the 
renegade topple. 
There was a moment of stillness 
in the glade, broken only by ven 
Klaeden’ s wheezing breath. The 
baron looked up with an effort, his 
eyes traveling over the girl, then up 
to the figure of the child of Earth. 
“Your woman, Earthling?” 
Evon lowered his hands, stood 
dazed and blinking for a moment. 
He glanced at Meikl, then at the 
girl. He knelt beside her, staring, 
not touching, and his knee encountered the blade of the sword. 
“You have brought us death, you 
have brought us hate,” he said 
slowly, his eyes clinging to the 
sword. 
“Pick it up,” hissed the baron. 
“You will never leave. A party 
of men is wrecking what you have 
done. Then we shall wreck your 
ships. Then we. .” 
“Pick it up.” 
The native hesitated. Slowly, his 
brown hand reached for the hilt, 
and fascination was in his eyes. 
“You know what it is for?” the 
analyst asked. 
The native shook his head slowly. 
Then it was in his hand, fingers 
shaping themselves around the hilt 
—as the fingers of his fathers had 
done in the ages before the Star 
Exodus. His jaw fell slightly, and 
he looked up, clutching it. 
“Now do you know?” the baron 
gasped. 
“My — my hand — it knows,” the 
native whispered. 
Ven Klaeden glanced sourly at 
Meikl, losing his balance slightly, 
eyes glazed with pain. “He’ll need 
it now, won’t he, Analyst?” he 
breathed, then fell to the moss. 
Evon stood up slowly, moistening his lips, feeling the grip of the 
sword and touching the red-stained 
steel. He peered quickly up at 
Meikl. Meikl brandished the gun 
slightly. 
The low rumble of a dynamite 
blast sounded from the direction of 
the mines. 
“You loved her too,” Evon said. 
He nodded. 
The native held the sword out 
questioningly, as if offering it. 
“Keep it,” the analyst grunted. 
“You remembered its feel after 
twenty thousand years. That’s why 
you’ll need it.” 
Some deeds, he thought, would 
haunt the soul of Man until his 
end, and there was no erasing them 
. for they were the soul, selfmade, lasting in the ghost-grey fabric of mind as long as the lips of a 
child greedily sought the breast of 
its mother, as long as the child mirrored the mind of the man and the 
woman. Kulturverlaengerung. 
The analyst left the native with 
the sword and went to seek the 
next in line of command. The purpose of the fleet must be kept intact, he thought, laughing bitterly. 
Yet still he went. 
• • • THE END 
It was the dawn of a golden age of transportation. T err an Development was ready to market 
a fourth dimension {C vehicle 33 which afforded almost instantaneous travel . For instance, Henry 
Ellis commuted 160 miles to work in five steps 
and a few seconds. Then, one morning, he met 
some people on the way . 
Prominent Author 
By Philip K. Dick 
Illustrated by Paul Orban 
prompt man, and hasn’t been late 
to work in twenty-five years, is actually still someplace around the 
house.” She sipped at her faintlyscented hormone and carbohydrate 
drink. “As a matter of fact, he 
won’t be leaving for another ten 
minutes.” 
“Incredible,” said Dorothy Lawrence, who had finished her drink, 
and now basked in the dermalmist spray that descended over her 
virtually unclad body from an automatic jet above the couch. “What 
they won’t think of next!” 
Mrs. Ellis beamed proudly, as if 
she personally were an employee of 
Terran Development. “Yes, it is incredible. According to somebody 
down at the office, the whole history of civilization can be explained 
in terms of transportation techniques. Of course, I don’t know 
anything about history. That’s for 
Government research people. But 
from what this man told Henry — ” 
“Where’s my briefcase?” came a 
fussy voice from the bedroom. 
“Good Lord, Mary. I know I left 
it on the clothes-cleaner last night.” 
“You left it upstairs,” Mary replied, raising her voice slightly. 
“Look in the closet.” 
“Why would it be in the closet?” 
Sounds of angry stirring-arounds. 
“You’d think a man’s own briefcase 
PHILIP K. DICK 
would be safe.” Henry Ellis stuck 
his head into the living room briefly. “I found it. Hello, Mrs. Lawrence.” 
“Good morning,” Dorothy Lawrence replied. “Mary was explaining that you’re still here.” 
“Yes, I’m still here.” Ellis 
straightened his tie, as the mirror 
revolved slowly around him. “Anything you want me to pick up 
downtown, honey?” 
“No,” Mary replied. “Nothing I 
can think of. I’ll vid you at the 
office, if I remember something.” 
“Is it true,” Mrs. Lawrence 
asked, “that as soon as you step 
into it you’re all the way downtown?” 
“Well, almost all the way.” 
“A hundred and sixty miles! It’s 
beyond belief. Why, it takes my 
husband two and a half hours to 
get his monojet through the commercial lanes and down at the 
parking lot and then walk all the 
way up to his office.” 
“I know,” Elli smuttered, grabbing his hat and coat. “Used to 
take me about that long. But no 
more.” He kissed his wife goodbye. 
“So long. See you tonight. Nice to 
have seen you again, Mrs. Lawrence.” 
“Can I — watch?” Mrs. Lawrence asked hopefully. 
“Watch? Of course, of course.” 
Ellis hurried through the house, 
out the back door and down the 
steps into the yard. “Come along!” 
he shouted impatiently. “I don’t 
want to be late. It’s nine fifty-nine 
and I have to be at my desk by 
ten.” 
Mrs. Lawrence hurried eagerly 
after Ellis. In the back yard stood 
a big circular hoop that gleamed 
brightly in the mid-morning sun. 
Ellis turned some controls at the 
base. The hoop changed color, 
from silver to a shimmering red. 
“Here I go!” Ellis shouted. He 
stepped briskly into the hoop. The 
hoop fluttered about him. There 
was a faint pop. The glow died. 
“Good Heavens!” Mrs. Lawrence gasped. “He’s gone!” 
“He’s in downtown N’York,” 
Mary Ellis corrected. 
“I wish my husband had a Jiffiscuttler. When they show up on 
the market commercially maybe I 
can afford to get him one.” 
“Oh, they’re very handy,” Mary 
Ellis agreed. “He’s probably saying hello to the boys right this 
minute.” 
H ENRY ELLIS was in a sort of 
tunnel. All around him a gray, 
formless tube stretched out in both 
directions, a sort of hazy sewerpipe. 
Framed in the opening behind 
him, he could see the faint outline 
of his own house. His backporch 
and yard, Mary standing on the 
steps in her red bra and slacks. 
Mrs. Lawrence beside her in greencheckered shorts. The cedar tree 
and rows of petunias. A hill. The 
neat little houses of Cedar Groves, 
Pennsylvania. And in front of 
him — 
New York City. A wavering 
glimpse of the busy streetcorner in 
front of his office. The great building itself, a section of concrete and 
glass and steel. People moving. 
Skyscrapers. Monojets landing in 
swarms. Aerial signs. Endless whitecollar workers hurrying every
PHILIP K. DICK 
where, rushing to their offices. 
Ellis moved leisurely toward the 
New York end. He had taken the 
Jiffi-scuttler often enough to know 
just exactly how many steps it was. 
Five steps. Five steps along the 
wavery gray tunnel and he had 
gone a hundred and sixty miles. He 
halted, glancing back. So far he 
had gone three steps. Ninety six 
miles. More than half way. 
The fourth dimension was a 
wonderful thing. 
Ellis lit his pipe, leaning his 
briefcase against his trouserleg and 
groping in his coat pocket for his 
tobacco. He still had thirty seconds 
to get to work. Plenty of time. The 
pipelighter flared and he sucked in 
expertly. He snapped the lighter 
shut and restored it to his pocket. 
A wonderful thing, all right. The 
Jiffi-scuttler had already revolutionized society. It was now possible to go anywhere in the world 
instantly , with no time lapse. And 
without wading through endless 
lanes of other monojets, also going 
places. The transportation problem 
had been a major headache since 
the middle of the twentieth century. Every year it took longer to 
get to work. Every year more families moved from the cities out into 
the country, adding numbers .to the 
already swollen swarms that 
choked the roads and jetlanes. 
But it was all solved, now. An 
infinite number of Jiffi-scuttlers 
could be set up; there was no interference between them. The 
Jiffi-scuttler bridged distances nonspacially, through another dimension of some kind (they hadn’t explained that part too clearly to 
him). For a flat thousand credits 
any Terran family could have Jiffiscuttler hoops set up, one in the 
backyard — the other in Berlin, or 
Bermuda, or San Francisco, or 
Port Said. Anywhere in the world. 
Of course, there was one drawback. 
The hoop had to be anchored in 
one specific spot. You picked your 
destination and that was that. 
But for an office worker, it was 
perfect. Step in one end, step out 
the other. Five steps — a hundred 
and sixty miles. A hundred and 
sixty miles that had been a two 
hour nightmare of grinding gears 
and sudden jolts, monojets cutting 
in and out, speeders, reckless flyers, 
alert cops waiting to pounce, ulcers 
and bad tempers. It was all over 
now. All over for him, at least, as 
an employee of Terran Development, the manufacturer of the Jiffiscuttler. And soon for everybody, 
when they were commercially on 
the market. 
Ellis sighed. Time for work. He 
could see Ed Hall racing up the 
steps of the TD building two at a 
time. Tony Franklin hurrying after 
him. Time to get moving. He bent 
down and reached for his briefcase — 
It was then he saw them. 
T HE WAVERY gray haze was 
thin, there. A sort of thin spot 
where the shimmer wasn’t so 
strong. Just a bit beyond his foot 
and past the corner of Tiis briefcase. 
Beyond the thin spot were three 
tiny figures. Just beyond the gray 
waver. Incredibly small men, no 
larger than insects. Watching him 
with incredulous astonishment. 
PROMINENT AUTHOR 
Ellis gazed down intently, his 
briefcase forgotten. The three tiny 
men were equally dumbfounded. 
None of them stirred, the three tiny 
figures, rigid with awe, Henry Ellis 
bent over, his mouth open, eyes 
wide. 
A fourth little figure joined the 
others. They all stood rooted to the 
spot, eyes bulging. They had on 
some kind of robes. Brown robes 
and sandals. Strange, unTerran 
costumes. Everything about them 
was unTerran. Their size, their 
oddly-colored dark faces, their 
clothing — and their voices. 
Suddenly the tiny figures were 
shouting shrilly at each other, 
squeaking a strange gibberish. They 
had broken out of their freeze and 
now ran about in queer, frantic 
circles. They raced with incredible 
speed, scampering like ants on a 
hot griddle. They raced jerkily, 
their arms and legs pumping wildly. And all the time they squeaked 
in their shrill high-pitched voices. 
Ellis found his briefcase. He 
picked it up slowly. The figures 
watched in mixed wonder and terror as the huge bag rose, only a 
short distance from them. An idea 
drifted through Ellis’ brain. Good 
Lord — could they come into the 
Jiffi-scuttler, through the gray 
haze? 
But he had no time to find out. 
He was already late, as it was. He 
pulled away and hurried toward 
the New York end of the tunnel 
A second later he stepped out in 
the blinding sunlight, abruptly 
finding himself on the busy streetcorner in front of his office. 
“Hey, there, Hank!” Donald 
Potter shouted, as he raced through 
the doors into the TD building. 
“Get with it!” 
“Sure, sure.” Ellis followed after 
him automatically. Behind, the entrance to the Jiffi-scuttler was a 
vague circle above the pavement, 
like the ghost of a soapbubble. 
He hurried up the steps and inside the offices of Terran Development, his mind already on the hard 
day ahead. 
As they were locking up the office and getting ready to go home, 
Ellis stopped Coordinator Patrick 
Miller in his office. “Say, Mr. Miller. You’re also in charge of the 
research end, aren’t you?” 
“Yeah. So?” 
“Let me ask you something. Just 
where does the Jiffi-scuttler go? It 
must go somewhere.” 
“It goes out of this continum 
completely.” Miller was impatient 
to get home. “Into another dimension.” 
“I know that. But — where?” 
Miller unfolded his breastpocket handkerchief rapidly and 
spread it out on his desk. “Maybe 
I can explain it to you this way. 
Suppose you’re a two-dimensional 
creature and this handkerchief 
represents your — ” 
“I’ve seen that a million times,” 
Ellis said, dissapointed. “That’s 
merely an analogy, and I’m not interested in an analogy. I want a 
factual answer. Where does my 
Jiffi-scuttler go, between here and 
Cedar Groves?” 
Miller laughed. “What the hell 
do you care?” 
Ellis became abruptly guarded. 
He shrugged indifferently. “Just 
PHILIP K. DICK 
curious. It certainly must go someplace” 
Miller put his hand on Ellis’ 
shoulder in a friendly big-brother 
fashion. “Henry, old man, you just 
leave that up to us. Okay? We’re 
the designers, you’re the consumer. 
Your job is to use the ’scuttler, try 
it out for us, report any defects or 
failures so when we put it on the 
market next year we’ll be sure 
there’s nothing wrong with it.” 
“As a matter of fact — ” Ellis 
began. 
“What is it?” 
Ellis clamped his sentence off. 
“Nothing.” He picked up his briefcase. “Nothing at all. I’ll see you 
tomorrow. Thanks, Mr. Miller. 
Goodnight.” 
He hurried downstairs and out 
of the TD building. The faint outline of his Jiffi-scuttler was visible 
in the fading late-afternoon sunlight. The sky was already full of 
mono jets taking off. Weary workers beginning their long trip back 
to their homes in the country. The 
endless commute. Ellis made his 
way to the hoop and stepped into 
it. Abruptly the bright sunlight 
dimmed and faded. 
A GAIN he was in the wavery 
- gray tunnel. At the far end 
flashed a circle of green and white. 
Rolling green hills and his own 
house. His backyard. The cedar 
tree and flower beds. The town of 
Cedar Groves. 
Two steps down the tunnel. Ellis 
halted, bending over. He studied 
the floor of the tunnel intently. He 
studied the misty gray wall, where 
it rose and flickered — and the thin 
place. The place he had noticed. 
They were still there. Still? It 
was a different bunch. This time 
ten or eleven of them. Men and 
women and children. Standing together, gazing up at him with awe 
and wonder. No more than a half 
inch high, each. Tiny distorted figures, shifting and changing shape 
oddly. Altering colors and hues. 
Ellis hurried on. The tiny figures watched him go. A brief 
glimpse of their microscopic astonishment — and then he was stepping 
out into his back yard. 
He clicked off the Jiffi-scuttler 
and mounted the back steps. He 
entered his house, deep in thought. 
“Hi,” Mary cried, from the 
kitchen. She rustled toward him in 
her hip-length mesh shirt, her arms 
out. “How was work today?” 
“Fine.” 
“Is anything wrong? You look — 
strange.” 
“No. No, nothing’s wrong.” Ellis 
kissed his wife absently on the forehead. “What’s for dinner?” 
“Something choice. Siriusian 
mole steak. One of your favorites. 
Is that all right?” 
“Sure.” Ellis tossed his hat and 
coat down on the chair. The chair 
folded them up and put them 
away. His thoughtful, preoccupied 
look still remained. “Fine, honey.” 
“Are you sure there’s nothing 
wrong? You didn’t get into another 
argument with Pete Taylor, did 
you?” 
“No. Of course not.” Ellis shook 
his head in annoyance. “Everything’s all right, honey. Stop 
needling me.” 
“Well, I hope so,” Mary said, 
with a sigh. 
PROMINENT AUTHOR 
T HE NEXT morning they were 
waiting for him. 
He saw them the first step into 
the Jiffi-scuttler. A small group 
waiting within the wavering gray, 
like bugs caught in a block of jello. 
They moved jerkily, rapidly, arms 
and legs pumping in a blur of motion. Trying to attract his attention. 
Piping wildly in their pathetically 
faint voices. 
Ellis stopped and squatted down. 
They were putting something 
through the wall of the tunnel, 
through the thin place in the gray. 
It was small, so incredibly small he 
could scarcely see it. A square of 
white at the end of a microscopic 
pole. They were watching him 
eagerly, faces alive with fear and 
hope. Desperate, pleading hope. 
Ellis took the tiny square. It 
came loose like some fragile rose 
petal from its stalk. Clumsily, he let 
it drop and had to hunt all around 
for it. The little figures watched 
in an agony of dismay as his huge 
hands moved blindly around the 
floor of the tunnel. At last he found 
it and gingerly lifted it up. 
It was too small to make out. 
Writing? Some tiny lines — but he 
couldn’t read them. Much too 
small to read. He got out his wallet and carefully placed the square 
between two cards. He restored his 
wallet to his pocket. 
“I’ll look at it later,” he said. 
His voice boomed and echoed up 
and down the tunnel. At the sound 
the tiny creatures scattered. They 
all fled, shrieking in their shill, piping voices, away from the gray 
shimmer, into the dimness beyond. 
In a flash they were gone. Like 
startled mice. He was alone. 
Ellis knelt down and put his eye 
against the gray shimmer, where it 
was thin. Where they had stood 
waiting. He could see something 
dim and distorted, lost in a vague 
haze. A landscape of some sort. Indistinct. Hard to make out. 
Hills. Trees and crops. But so 
tiny. And dim. 
He glanced at his watch. God, it 
was ten! Hastily he scrambled to 
his feet and hurried out of the tunnel, onto the blazing N’York sidewalk. 
Late. He raced up the stairs of 
the Terran Development building 
and down the long corridor to his 
office. 
At lunchtime he stopped in at 
the Research Labs. “Hey,” he 
called, as Jim Andrews brushed 
past, loaded down with reports and 
equipment. “Got a second?” 
“What do you want, Henry?” 
“I’d like to borrow something. A 
magnifying glass.” He considered. 
“Maybe a small photon -microscope 
would be better. One or two hundred power.” 
“Kids’ stuff.” Jim found him a 
small microscope. “Slides?” 
“Yeah, a couple of blank slides.” 
He carried the microscope back 
to his office. He set it up on his 
desk, clearing away his papers. As 
a precaution he sent Miss Nelson, 
his secretary, out of the room and 
off to lunch. Then carefully, cautiously, he got the tiny wisp from 
his wallet and slipped it between 
two slides. 
It was writing, all right. But 
nothing he could read. Utterly unfamiliar. Complex, interlaced little 
characters. 
For a time he sat thinking. Then 
he dialed his inter-department vidphone. “Give me the Linguistics 
Department.” 
After a moment Earl Peterson’s 
good-natured face appeared. “Hi, 
there, Ellis. What can I do for 
you?” 
Ellis hesitated. He had to do this 
right. “Say, Earl, old man. Got a 
little favor to ask you.” 
“Like what? Anything to oblige 
an old pal.” 
“You, uh — you have that Machine down there, don’t you? That 
translating business you use for 
working over documents from nonTerran cultures?” 
“Sure. So?” 
“Think I could use it?” He 
talked fast. “It’s a screwy sort of a 
deal, Earl. I got this pal living on — 
uh — Centaurus VI, and he writes 
me in — uh — you know, the Centauran native semantic system, and 
I—” 
“You want the Machine to translate a letter? Sure, I think we could 
manage it. This once, at least. 
Bring it down.” 
He brought it down. He got 
Earl to show him how the intake 
feed worked, and as soon as Earl 
had turned his back he fed in the 
the tiny square of material. The 
Linguistics Machine clicked and 
whirred. Ellis prayed silently that 
the paper wasn’t too small. 
Wouldn’t fall out between the relay-probes of the Machine. 
But sure enough, after a couple 
of seconds, a tape unreeled from 
the output slot. The tape cut itself off and dropped into a basket. 
The Linguistics Machine turned 
promptly to other stuff, more vital 
PHILIP K. DICK 
material from TD’s various export 
branches. 
With trembling figures Ellis 
spread out the tape. The words 
danced before his eyes. 
Questions. They were asking him 
questions. God, it was getting complicated. He read the questions intently, his lips moving. What was 
he getting himself into? They were 
expecting answers. He had taken 
their paper, gone off with it. Probably they would be waiting for him, 
on his way home. 
He returned to his office and 
dialed his vidphone. “Give me outside,” he ordered. 
The regular vid monitor appeared. “Yes sir?” 
“I want the Federal Library of 
Information,” Ellis said. “Cultural 
Research Division.” 
r I Ml AT NIGHT they were waiting, all right. But not the same 
ones. It was odd — each time a different group. Their clothing was 
slightly different, too. A new hue. 
And in the background the landscape had also altered slightly. The 
trees he had seen were gone. The 
hills were still there, but a different 
shade. A hazy gray- white. Snow? 
He squatted down. He had 
worked it out with care. The answers from the Federal Library of 
Information had gone back to the 
Linguistics Machine for re-translation. The answers were now in 
the original tongue of the questions 
— but on a trifle larger piece of 
paper. 
Ellis made like a marble game 
and flicked the wad of paper 
through the gray shimmer. It 
PROMINENT AUTHOR 
bowled over six or seven of the 
watching figures and rolled down 
the side of the hill on which they 
were standing. After a moment of 
terrified immobility the figures 
scampered frantically after it. They 
disappeared into the vague and invisible depths of their world and 
Ellis got stiffly to his feet again. 
“Well,” he muttered to himself, 
“that’s that.” 
But it wasn’t. The next morning 
there was a new group — and a new 
list of questions. The tiny figures 
pushed their microscopic square of 
paper through the thin spot in the 
wall of the tunnel and stood waiting and trembling as Ellis bent over 
and felt around for it. 
He found it — finally. He put it 
in his wallet and continued on his 
way, stepping out at New York, 
frowning. This was getting serious. 
Was this going to be a full time 
job? 
But then he grinned. It was the 
damn oddest thing he had ever 
heard of. The little rascals were 
cute, in their own way. Tiny intent 
faces, screwed up with serious concern. And terror. They were scared 
of him, really scared. And why not? 
Compared to them he was a giant. 
He conjectured about their 
world. What kind of a planet was 
theirs? Odd to be so small. But size 
was a relative matter. Small, 
though, compared to him. Small 
and reverent. He could read fear 
and a yearning, gnawing hope, as 
they pushed up their papers. They 
were depending on him. Praying 
he’d give them answers. 
Ellis grinned. “Damn unusual 
job,” he said to himself. 
“What’s this?” Peterson said, 
when he showed up in the Linguistics Lab at noontime. 
“Well, you see, I got another letter from my friend on Centauraus 
VI.” 
“Yeah?” A certain suspicion 
flickered across Peterson’s face. 
“You’re not ribbing me, are you, 
Henry? This Machine has a lot to 
do, you know. Stuff’s coming in all 
the time. We can’t afford to waste 
any time with — ” 
“This is really serious stuff, Earl.” 
Ellis patted his wallet. “Very important business. Not just gossip.” 
“Okay. If you say so.” Peterson 
gave the nod to the team operating 
the Machine. “Let this guy use the 
Translator, Tommie.” 
“Thanks,” Ellis murmured. 
He went through the routine, 
getting a translation and then carrying the questions up to his vidphone and passing them over to the 
Library research staff. By nightfall 
the answers were back in the 
original tongue and with them carefully in his wallet, Ellis headed out 
of the Terran Development building and into his Jiffi-scuttler. 
As usual, a new group was waiting. 
“Here you are, boys,” Ellis 
boomed, flicking the wad through 
the thin place in the shimmer. The 
wad rolled down the microscopic 
countryside, bouncing from hill to 
hill, the little people tumbling jerkily after it in their funny stiff-legged 
fashion. Ellis watched them go, 
grinning with interest — and pride. 
They really hurried; no doubt 
about that. He could make them 
out only vaguely, now. They had 
raced wildly off away from the 
shimmer. Only a small portion of 
PHILIP K. DICK 
their world was tangent to the Jiffiscuttler, apparently. Only the one 
spot, where the shimmer was thin. 
He peered intently through. 
They wei'e getting the wad open, 
now. Three or four of them, unprying the paper and examining the 
answers. 
Ellis swelled with pride as he 
continued along the tunnel and out 
into his own back yard. He couldn’t 
read their questions — and when 
translated, he couldn’t answer them. 
The Linguistics Department did the 
first part, the Library research staff 
the rest. Nevertheless, Ellis felt 
pride. A deep, glowing spot of 
warmth far down inside him. The 
expression on their faces. The look 
they gave him when they saw the 
answer- wad in his hand. When 
they realized he was going to answer 
their questions. And the way they 
scampered after it. It was sort of 
— satisfying. It made him feel damn 
good. 
“Not bad,” he murmured, opening the back door and entering his 
house. “Not bad at all.” 
“What’s not bad, dear?” Mary 
asked, looking quickly up from the 
table. She laid down her magazine 
and got to her feet. “Why, you look 
so happy! What is it?” 
“Nothing. Nothing at all!” He 
kissed her warmly on the mouth. 
“You’re looking pretty good tonight yourself, kid.” 
“Oh, Henry!” Much of Mary 
blushed prettily. “How sweet.” 
He surveyed his wife in her twopiece wraparound of clear plastic 
with appreciation. “Nice looking 
fragments you have on.” 
“Why Henry! What’s come over 
you? You seem so — so spirited 7" 
Ellis grinned. “Oh, I guess I enjoy my job. You know, there’s nothing like taking pride in your work. 
A job well done, as they say. Work 
you can be proud of.” 
“I thought you always said you 
were nothing but a cog in a great 
impersonal machine. Just a sort of 
cypher.” 
“Things are different,” Ellis said 
firmly. “I’m doing a — uh — a new 
project. A new assignment.” 
“A new assignment?” 
“Gathering information. A sort 
of — creative business. So to speak.” 
B Y THE END of the week he 
had turned over quite a body 
of information to them. 
He began starting for work about 
nine-thirty. That gave him a whole 
thirty minutes to spend squatting 
down on his hands and knees, peering through the thin place in the 
shimmer. He got so he was pretty 
good at seeing them and what they 
were doing in their microscopic 
world. 
Their civilization was somewhat 
primitive. No doubt of that. By 
Terran standards it was scarcely a 
civilization at all. As near as he 
could tell, they were virtually without scientific techniques; a kind of 
agrarian culture, rural communism, 
a monolithic tribal-based organization apparently without too 
many members. 
At least, not at one time. That 
was the part he didn’t understand. 
Every time he came past there was 
a different group of them. No 
familiar faces. And their world 
changed, too. The trees, the crops, 
fauna. The weather, apparently. 
PROMINENT AUTHOR 
Was their time rate different? 
They moved rapidly, jerkily. Like 
a vidtape speeded up. And their 
shrill voices. Maybe that was it. A 
totally different universe in which 
the whole time structure was radically different. 
As to their attitude toward him, 
there was no mistaking it. After 
the first couple of times they began 
assembling offerings, unbelievably 
small bits of smoking food, prepared 
in ovens and on open brick hearths. 
If he got down with his nose against 
the gray shimmer he could get a 
faint whiff of the food. It smelled 
good. Strong and pungent. Highly 
spiced. Meat, probably. 
On Friday he brought a magnifying glass along and watched them 
through it. It was meat, all right. 
They were bringing ant- sized animals to be killed and cooked, leading them up to the ovens. With the 
magnifying glass he could see more 
of their faces. They had strange 
faces. Strong and dark, with a 
peculiar firm look. 
Of course, there was only one 
look he got from them. A combination of fear, reverence, and hope. 
The look made him feel good. It 
was a look for him, only. Between 
themselves they shouted and argued — and sometimes stabbed and 
fought each other furiously, rolling 
in their brown robes in a wild tangle. They were a passionate and 
strong species. He got so he admired them. 
Which was good — because it 
made him feel better. To have the 
reverent awe of such a proud, sturdy 
race was really something. There 
was nothing craven about them. 
About the fifth time he came 
there was a rather attractive structure built. Some kind of temple. A 
place of religious worship. 
To him! They were developing a 
real religion about him. No doubt 
of it. He began going to work at 
nine o’clock, to give himself a full 
hour with them. They had, by the 
middle of the second week, a fullsized ritual evolved. Processions, 
lighted tapers, what seemed to be 
songs or chants. Priests in long 
robes. And the spiced offerings. 
No idols, though. Apparently he 
was so big they couldn’t make out 
his appearance. He tried to imagine 
what it looked like to be on their 
side of the shimmer. An immense 
shape looming up above them, beyond a wall of gray haze. An indistinct being, something like themselves, yet not like them at all. A 
different kind of being, obviously. 
Larger — but different in other 
ways. And when he spoke — booming echoes up and down the Jiffiscuttler. Which still sent them fleeing in panic. 
An evolving religion. He was 
changing them. Through his actual 
presence and through his answers, 
the precise, correct responses he 
obtained from the Federal Library 
of Information and had the Linguistics Machine translate into their 
language. Of course, by their timerate they had to wait generations 
for the answers. But they had become accustomed to it, by now. 
They waited. They expected. They 
passed up questions and after a 
couple centuries he passed down 
answers, answers which they no 
doubt put to good use. 
“What in the world?” Mary demanded, as he got home from work 
PHILIP K. DICK 
an hour late, one night. “Where 
have you been?” 
“Working,” Ellis said carelessly, 
removing his hat and coat. He 
threw himself down on the couch. 
“I’m tired. Really tired.” He sighed 
with relief and motioned for the 
couch-arm to bring him a whisky 
sour. 
Mary came over by the couch. 
“Henry, I’m a little worried.” 
“Worried?” 
“You shouldn’t work so hard. 
You ought to take it easy, more. 
How long since you’ve had a real 
vacation? A trip off Terra. Out of 
the System. You know, I’d just like 
to call that fellow Miller and ask 
him why it’s necessary a man your 
age put in so much — ” 
“A man my age!” Ellis bristled 
indignantly. “I’m not so old.” 
“Of course not.” Mary sat down 
beside him and put her arms around 
him affectionately. “But you 
shouldn’t have to do so much. You 
deserve a rest. Don’t you think?” 
“This is different. You don’t understand. This isn’t the same old 
stuff. Reports and statistics and the 
damn filing. This is — ” 
“What is it?” 
“This is different. I’m not a cog. 
This gives me something. I can’t 
explain it to you, I guess. But it’s 
something I have to do.” 
“If you could tell me more about 
it—” 
“I can’t tell you any more about 
it,” Ellis said. “But there’s nothing 
in the world like it. I’ve worked 
twenty-five years for Terran Development. Twenty-five years at the 
same desk. Classifying the same reports, again and again. Twenty-five 
years— and I never felt this way.” 
H, YEAH?” Miller roared. 
“Don’t give me that! Come 
clean, Ellis!” 
Ellis opened and closed his 
mouth. “What are you talking 
about?” Horror rolled through him. 
“What’s happened?” 
“Don’t try to give me the runaround.” On the vidscreen Miller’s 
face was purple. “Come into my 
office.” 
The screen went dead. 
Ellis sat stunned at his desk. 
Gradually, he collected himself and 
got shakily to his feet. “Good 
Lord.” Weakly, he wiped cold 
sweat from his forehead. All at 
once. Everything in ruins. He was 
dazed with the shock. 
“Anything wrong?” Miss Nelson 
asked sympathetically. 
“No.” Ellis moved numbly toward the door. He was shattered. 
What had Miller found out? Good 
God! Was it possible he had — 
“Mr. Miller looked angry.” 
“Yeah.” Ellis moved blindly 
down the hall, his mind reeling. 
Miller looked angry, all right. 
Somehow, he had found out. But 
why was he mad? Why did he 
care? A cold chill settled over Ellis. 
It looked bad. Miller was his superior — with hiring and firing 
powers. Maybe he’d done something wrong. Maybe he had somehow broken a law. Committed a 
crime. But what? 
What did Miller care about 
them ? What concern was it of Terran Development? 
He opened the door to Miller’s 
office. “Here I am, Mr. Miller,” he 
muttered. “What’s the trouble?” 
Miller glowered at him in rage. 
“All this goofy stuff about your 
PROMINENT AUTHOR 
cousin on Proxima.” 
“It’s — uh — you mean a business 
friend on Gentaurus VI.” 
“You — you swindler!” Miller 
leaped up. “And after all the Company’s done for you.” 
“I don’t understand,” Ellis muttered. “What have — ” 
“Why do you think we gave you 
the Jiffi-scuttler in the first place?” 
“Why?” 
“To test! To try out, you walleyed Venusian stink-cricket! The 
Company magnanimously consented to allow you to operate a 
Jiffi-scuttler in advance of market 
presentation, and what do you do? 
Why, you — ■” 
Ellis started to get indignant. 
After all, he had been with TD 
twenty-five years. “You don’t have 
to be so offensive. I plunked down 
my thousand gold credits for it.” 
“Well, you can just mosey down 
to the accountant’s office and get 
your money back. I’ve already sent 
out a directive for a construction 
team to crate up your Jiffi-scuttler 
and bring it back to receiving.” 
Ellis was dumbfounded. “But 
why?” 
“Why indeed! Because it’s defective. Because it doesn’t work. 
That’s why.” Miller’s eyes blazed 
with technological outrage. “The 
inspection crew found a leak a mile 
wide in it.” His lip curled. “As if 
you didn’t know.” 
Ellis’ heart sank. “Leak?” he 
croaked apprehensively. 
“Leak. It’s a damn good thing I 
authorized a periodic inspection. If 
we depended on people like you 
to—” 
“Are you sure? It seemed all 
right to me. That is, it got me here 
without any trouble.” Ellis floundered. “Certainly no complaints 
from my end.” 
“No. No complaints from your 
end. That’s exactly why you’re not 
getting another one. That’s why 
you’re taking the monojet transport, 
back home tonight. Because you 
didn’t report the leak! And if you 
ever try to put something over on 
this office again — ” 
“How do you know I was aware 
of the — defect?” 
Miller sank down in his chair, 
overcome with fury. “Because,” he 
said carefully, “of your daily pilgrimmage to the Linguistics Machine. With your alleged letter from 
your grandmother on Betelgeuse II. 
Which wasn’t any such thing. 
Which was an utter fraud. Which 
you got through the leak in the 
Jiffi-scuttler!” 
“How do you know?” Ellis 
squeaked boldly, driven to the walk 
“So maybe there was a defect. But 
you can’t prove there’s any connection between your badly constructed Jiffi-scuttler and my — ” 
“Your missive,” Miller stated, 
“which you foisted on our Linguistics Machine, was not a nonTerran script. It was not from Centaurus VI. It was not from any 
nonTerran system. It was ancient 
Hebrew. And there’s only one place 
you could have got it, Ellis. So 
don’t try to kid me.” 
“Hebrew!” Ellis exclaimed, 
startled. He turned white as a sheet. 
“Good Lord. The other continum 
• — The fourth dimension. Time, of 
course.” He trembled. “And the 
expanding universe. That would explain their size. And it explains why 
a new group, a new generation — ” 
PHILIP K. DICK 
“We’re taking enough of a 
chance as it is, with these Jiffi-scuttlers. Warping a tunnel through 
other space-time continua.” Miller 
shook his head wearily. “You meddler! You knew you were supposed 
to report any defect.” 
“I don’t think I did any harm, 
did I?” Ellis was suddenly terribly 
nervous. “They seemed pleased, 
even grateful. Gosh, I’m sure I 
didn’t cause any trouble.” 
Miller shrieked in insane rage. 
For a time he danced around the 
room. Finally he threw something 
down on his desk, directly in front 
of Ellis. “No trouble. No, none. 
Look at this. I got' this from the 
Ancient Artifacts Archives.” 
“What is it?” 
“Look at it! I compared one of 
your question sheets to this. The 
same. Exactly the same. All your 
sheets, questions and answers, every 
one of them’s in here. You multilegged Ganymedian mange beetle!” 
Ellis picked up the book and 
opened it. As he read the -pages a 
strange look came slowly over his 
face. “Good Heavens. So they kept 
a record of what I gave them. They 
put it all together in a book. Every 
word of it. And some commentaries, 
too. It’s all here — Every single 
word. It did have an effect, then. 
They passed it on. Wrote all of it 
down.” 
“Go back to your office. I’m 
through looking at you for today. 
I’m through looking at you forever. 
Your severance check will come 
though regular channels.” 
In a trance, his face flushed with 
a strange excitement, Ellis gripped 
the book and moved dazedly toward the door. “Say, Mr. Miller. 
Can I have this? Can I take it 
along?” 
“Sure,” Miller said wearily. 
“Sure, you can take it. You can 
read it on your way home tonight. 
On the public monojet transport.” 
H ENRY has something to show 
you,” Mary Ellis whispered excitedly, gripping Mrs. Lawrence’s 
arm. “Make sure you say the right 
thing.” 
“The right thing?” Mrs. Lawrence faltered nervously, a trifle uneasy. “What is it? Nothing alive, I 
hope.” 
“No, no.” Mary pushed her toward the study door. “Just smile.” 
She raised her voice. “Henry, 
Dorothy Lawrence is here.” 
Henry Ellis appeared at the door 
of his study. He bowed slightly, a 
dignified figure in silk dressing 
gown, pipe in his mouth, fountain 
pen in one hand. “Good evening, 
Dorothy,” he said in a low, wellmodulated voice. “Ca-re to step into 
my study a moment?” 
“Study?” Mrs. Lawrence came 
hesitantly in. “What do you study? 
I mean, Mary says you’ve been doing something very interesting recently, now that you’re not with — 
I mean, now that you’re home 
more. She didn’t give me any idea 
what it was, though.” 
Mrs. Lawrence’s eyes roved curiously around the study. The study 
was full of reference volumes, 
charts, a huge mahogany desk, an 
atlas globe, leather chairs, an unbelievably ancient electric typewriter. 
“Good heavens!” she exclaimed. 
“How odd. All these old things.”