WORLDS OF SCIENCE FICTION APRIL 1974 • 750 ^Q) 
A new Berserker story! 
FRED SABERHAGEN 
WINGS OUT OF SHADOW 
ONE STEP AHEAD, James H. Schmitz 
THE TOUCH OF YOUR HAND, Raymond F. Jones 
TAR BABY, Edward Wellen 
Randall Garrett Leigh Brackett’ 
James A. Roszell Lynda Isaacs Lester del Rey 
■ \ 
From Harper ePEow 
SCIENCE FICTION 
The first collection of Jewish Fantasy and 
Science Fiction Stories 
WANDERING STARS 
An anthology edited by Jock Donn; introduction by Isaac Asimov. $6.95 
Clarke, Anderson, Russ, Pohl, Ellison, Silverberg, Rotsler, Wolfe 
NEBULA AWARD STORIES EIGHT 
The prize-winning collection, edited by Isaac Asimov. $6.95 
"Immensely entertaining . long overdue ."—Pou I Anderson 
CASEY AGONISTES 
and Other Science Fiction and Fantasy Stories 
By Richard McKenna, author of The Sand Pebbles. $5.95 
"A collection of complex, humane stories."— Kirkus Reviews 
SHOWCASE 
An original anthology edited by Roger Elwood. $5.95 
A runaway quasar threatens the earth's survival 
THE INFERNO 
A new thriller by Fred and Geoffrey Hoyle. $5.95 
m SCIENCE SPECULATION E] [U 
Startling experiments in plant-man communication 
THE SECRET LIFE OF PLANTS 
By Peter Tompkins and Christopher Bird. Illustrated, $8.95 
The provocative best seller about the 
greatest mystery of the ancient world 
SECRETS OF THE GREAT PYRAMID 
By Peter Tompkins. Illustrated, 7th printing, $13.50 
"Astronomical imagination and fact in an 
alluring marriage." —Ernest K. Gann 
MARS AND THE MIND OF MAN 
Facts and speculations by Ray Bradbury, Arthur C. Clarke, Bruce Murray, 
Carl Sagan, and Walter Sullivan. Illustrated with Mariner 9 photos, $7.95 
^Harper e? Row 
LI I 10 E 53rd SI.. New York 10022 
At bookstores 
Th« p«p*r tiiM machiiM 
STRATEGY & TACTICS is a magazine. It's 
also a tool: a time machine that enables you 
to replay Ihe crucial events — past, present, 
and tuture — that shape our lives. 
Now. instead of merely reading about what's 
happening, you can explore and experience 
the alternatives and decision points through 
the technique of Conflict Simulation. 
What is CofiAiet Siimilallon? 
Conflict Simulation is a way of analyzing a 
political or military conflict situation. A way 
that is as intellectually stimulating as a game 
of chess, and as thorough as a written analysis. 
Through the use of the Conflict Simulation 
(or "game") format, the conflict situation is 
re-created — so that you are in a position to 
make the vital decisions and, in the game at 
least, change the way things were. are. or 
will be. 
Whet yeu got 
STRATEGY & TACTICS magazine is published bi-monthly. Each issue contains; 
WA ready-lo-play conllict-simulalion game 
with a 22 X 28 ‘ playing surface, die-cut play
ing pieces, and complete rules. 
A An analytical article on the same subject as 
the game in that issue. 
A Other feature articles on historical and 
military subjects. 
A Game and book reviews, commentary on 
existing games, and discussions of subscribers' 
questions. 
The magazine is 48 + pages long, and all 
material is handled in a highly organized (and 
easily understandable) graphic format. 
Games recently published in STRATEGY & 
TACTICS were: GRUNT (ground combat in 
Vietnam). LOST BATTLES (tactical combat in 
Russia, 1941-44). USN (the war in the Pacific. 
1941-43). COMBAT COMMAND (tactical combat in Western Europe. 1944). 
We also publish a separate line of conflictsimulation games, which you will find listed in 
the coupon. 
Free to new SMhecrttoora 
NAPOLEON AT WATERLOO, history's greatest 
battle presented in a game-design specially 
created to introduce new readers to Conflict 
Simulation. 
Send check or money order to: 
Simulations Publications, Inc. 
Oept. 12S 44 East 23rd St., New York, N.Y. 10010 
Phase enter my subscription to SBT for 
□ 1 year (6 issuesl-$12 
□ 2 yrs. (12 issues)-$22 
□ 3 yrs. (18 issuesl-$30 
□ Current issue-94 
□ 6-month trial (3 issuesl-S8 
Sand me the following Simulations Gamas: 
n Red Star/Whita Star (armor in the Wsl-ST 
n NATO (Soviet invasion of Europe)-l7 
□ Work! War // (Europe. 1939-4S)-$7 
□ Sniper! (street fighting, WWII)-S7 
□ Salomons Campaign (Pacific. WWIII-S7 
□ SoUiars (WWI tactics)-$7 
□ Lae Moves North (Civil Warl-$7 
(□ American Revolution (1775-83)-$7 
□ Phalanx (ancient tacticsl-S7 
□ Phase send me your free brochure. 
Name 
Address Apt# 
City State Zip 
March-Aphl 1974 
Vol.22, No. 4 
Issue No. 171 
WORLDS OF 
[Q 
SCIENCE 
FICTION 
ALL NEW 
STORIES 
Arnold E. Abramson, Publisher 
James Baen, Editor Theodore Sturgeon, Contributing Editor 
Ejler Jakobsson, Editor Emeritus Lester del Rey, Feature Editor 
L. C. Murphy, Subscription Director Jay Tunick, Circulation Director 
NOVELETTES 
ONE STEP AHEAD, James H. Schmitz 
Even the mighty, protean warriors of Skand knew 
they could not stand before the programmed onslaught of the Terrestrial League. They didn*t give 
up, though . 
THE TOUCH OF YOUR HAND, Raymond F. Jones 
Neither men, nor yet the inexorable mechanisms 
of space-time itself could keep them apart^and 
when they met . 
TAR BABY, Edward Wellen 62 
Boyd Moomaw knew he must use all the powers 
of his human imagination to outwit this planetary 
intelligence— or face inevitable extinction! 
WINGS OUT OF SHADOW, Fred Saberhagen 78 
Human gallantry versus the cold, inhuman precision of killer-machines is the theme of this 
story of aeons-old intersteiiar war. 
...17 
SHORT STORIES 
TRAINING TWOFOOTS, Chelsea Quinn Yarbro 44 
THE ICEMAN, James A. Roszell 51 
PRIDE AND PRIMACY, Randall Garrett 95 
TRANSIT, Lynda Isaacs 101 
SERIAL (Part II of II) 
THE GINGER STAR, Leigh Brackett Ill 
Continuing the adventures of Eric John Stark, 
whose savage heritage of animal strength and 
cunning is pitted against the merciless world of 
Skaith and its degenerate peoples! 
FEATURES 
READING ROOM, Lester del Rey 34 
While giving us his opinion of severai recent 
noveis, the Master discourses on the theme of 
iiterary opportunism— a malady, he avers, to 
which sf is not immune. 
SF CALENDAR 59 
Cover by Rick Sternbach: "STARBOW,” 
from THE TOUCH OF YOUR HAND 
Woilds of IF Is published In the United Kingdom by Universal-Tandem Publishing Company, Ltd., 14 Gloucester Road, London SW7 
4RD. Arnold E. Abramson, Chairman of the 
Board, Ralph Stokes, Managing Director. 
Single copy: 25p. 12-iS8ue subscription in the 
United Kingdom: 3.60 d. 
Worlds of IF is published bimonthly by UPD 
Publishing Corporation, a subsidiary of Universal Publishing & Distributing Corporation. 
Arnold E. Abramson, President. Main Offices: 
235 East 45 Street, New York, N.Y. 10017. 
Single copy: 75c. 12-issue subscription: $9.00 
in U.S., $10.00 elsewhere. 
Copyright © 1974 by UPD Publishing Corporation under International, Universal and PanAmerican Copyright Conventions. All rights reserved. Second class postage paid at New York, 
N.Y. and additional mailing offices. The publishers assume no responsibility for unsolicited 
material. All stories printed in this magazine are fiction and any similarity between characters and 
actual persons is coincidental. Printed in U.S.A. 
Discover the science facts 
behind the science fiction. 
The sci-fi reader: thoughtful, inquisitive. And who 
wants to know the science background in which 
science fiction finds its truth ... to make reading 
science fiction more enjoyable. For that reader, 
there's 
The Library of Science 
Take any 3 best selling books 
(values as high as $39.50) 
all for only $3.95 
If you join now and accept 3 more selections 
(at handsome discounts) in the next 12 months. 
(retail prices shown) 
35751. BEGINNER’S GUIDE TO ARCHAEOLOGY. Louis A. Brennan. The techniques and 
background information that will enable anyone 
to find, survey, test, excavate, preserve, analyze 
and record artifacts and other evidences of prehistoric life. $9.95 
52180. HAMLET’S MILL: An Essay on Myth and 
tha Frame of Tims. Giorgio de Santillana and 
Hertha von Dechend. A brilliant speculative 
inquiry into the origins of scientific thought in 
the pre-literate world, deciphering "code language" common to many archaic cultures. $10.00 
85960. IN THE WAKE OF THE SEA-SERPENTS. 
Bernard Heuvelmans. The scientific case for the 
legends of the Great Sea-Serpent. A spell-binding scientific detective story. $10.00 
45490. ENVIRONMENTAL GEOLOGY. Peter T. 
Flawn. Lucidly explains the relationship between 
man and natural earth processes keyed to the 
improved use and control of the environment. 
A most important book. $14.50 
58840. LOOKING FOR DILMUN. Geoffrey Bibby. 
Digging away at the site of half-fabulous Dilmun, 
on Bahrain, an archaeologist discusses oil 
sheiks, business practices of prehistory, and a 
wealth of fresh historical insights. $10.00 
96141. BEYOND STONEHENQE. Gerald S. 
Hawkins. Assesses the significance of the temples of the Nile, Mayan ruins, the linear drawings 
in the Peruvian desert, and the huge geometrical 
earthworks of the U.S. $10.00 
S0281. GIANT REPTILES. Sherman A Minton. Jr., 
and Madge Rutherford Minton. A storehouse of 
informat^n of the giant reptiles of the world— 
the crocodiles and alligators, the giant tortoises 
of the Galapagos and Aldabra islands, the 
dragon lizards of Komodo, and much more. 
Illustrated. $9.05 
85060. ULYSSES AIRBORNE. Mauricio Obregdn. 
Homer's Odyssey relived using a light plane at 
surface-skimming altitudes, and photographing 
the ancient Mediterranean landmarks described 
by Homer. $8.50 
57060. THE KEY. John Philip Cohane. What Is 
the relationship between Stonehenge and Mycenae. Mayan culture and buried ruins of the 
Far East? Mythology, archaeology, anthropology, 
etymology and a wealth of exciting speculation. 
Reads like a detective story! $7.50 
69711. THE POLAR WORLDS. Richard Perry. A 
book of marvels about the two extremes of the 
globe, a work that is at once scientific and 
poetic, and that leaves the reader with the distinct feeling that he has seen it at first hand. 
$7.95 
34630. ASIMOV’S GUIDE TO SCIENCE. Isaac 
Asimov. The incomparable Isaac Asimov has 
done it again with this exciting general account 
of modern science— a highly readable, encyclopedic work of 945 pages. $15.00 
41940. THE DEEP WELL Carl Ny lander. Philosophical and archaeological explorations of "the 
well of the past" in Egypt, Iran, Canaan, Greece 
and elsewhere. A highly personal, different and 
memorable book. $7.95 
68070. OPUS 100. Isaac Asimov. A fascinating 
guided tour by Asimov himself through his literary output of, lo, these many years. "Wonderfully entertaining."— PubZ/shers Weekly. $5.95 
HOW THE CLUB OPERATES • The Book Club 
News, describing the coming Main Selection and 
Alternate Selections, will be sent to you 15 times 
a year at three or four week intervals • If you 
wish to purchase the Main Selection, do nothing 
and it will be shipped to you automatically. • If 
you prefer one of the Alternates, or no book at 
all, simply indicate your decision on the reply 
form always enclosed with the News and mail it 
so we receive it by the date specified. • The News 
is mailed in time to allow you at least 10 days 
to decide if you want the coming Main Selection. 
If. because of late mail delivery of the News, you 
should ever receive a Main Selection without having had the 10-day consideration period, that Selection may be returned at Club expense. • After 
completing your trial membership, you will be 
entitled to take advantage of our fabulous bonus 
plan which offers savings up to 70% and more, 
(retail prices shown) 
The Library of Science 2-37A 
Riverside, New Jersey 08075 
Please accept my application for membership 
and send me the three volumes I have 
indicated, billing me only $3.95 for all three. 
I agree to purchase at least three additional 
books during the first year at special members’ prices. Savings range up to 30% and 
more. Membership is cancelable any time 
after I buy three books. Shipping and handling is added to all shipments. Send no 
money. Members are billed when books 
arrive. 
3 books for $3.95. indicate by number the 
3 books you want. 
I Aoaress 
I City State Zip 
■ (Offer good in Continental U.S. and Canada 
only. Prices slightly higher in Canada.) 
STEP 
AHEAD 
JAMES H. SCHMITZ 
PROGRAMMED CORPS 
LEAVING RIDZIN! 
the newscast machines roared that 
morning. Many added grimly: 
SKANDER WAR IMMINENT! 
To well-informed citizens of Ridzin it came as no surprise. For fifteen years, the Programmed Corps, 
the mightiest war-machine ever 
known, had been developing on 
their world, lending Ridzin a significance unique in the Terrestrial 
League. Second-rate in most respects, Ridzin had been a logical 
base for the formation of the Corps. 
No one doubted that the League 
Central Government on Great Xal 
would have preferred the Corps to 
be assembled under its. immediate 
supervision. But the jealousy of 
other powerful League worlds made 
it impossible — the Corps simply 
would not have come into being as 
a joint effort of the League if Great 
Xal had insisted on the point. On 
the other hand, the central government wouldn’t have permitted its 
establishment on worlds like Hannaret or Lorcia, for example, 
worlds not too inferior to Great Xal 
in military strength and perennially 
on the verge of open rebellion. The 
Programmed Corps — its awesome 
manpower and appalling technical 
equipment drawn from all fourteen 
League worlds — must bring about, 
it was agreed by those in the know, 
in one direction or another a decisive shift in the balance of power 
in the League. 
As it would also bring about a 
decisive shift in the balance of 
power between the Terrestrial 
League and that despised, remote, 
alien race called the Skanders. 
That, as all League citizens understood — having been told it regularly during the past fifteen years — was 
the basic and vital reason for the 
Programmed Corps’ existence. And 
because its personnel were conditioned to absolute unquestioning 
obedience to whomever knew the 
commands by which to direct them, 
the Corps could be brought into 
being only on a world like Ridzin, a 
world which by no stretch of the 
imagination could be regarded as a 
menace to anyone else. 
And now the Programmed 
Corps — completed only after fifteen 
years of sustained effort, armed, 
trained, single-minded, irresistable — ^was shipping out! 
44rYlH£ FELLOW,” visiting Inspec
X tor General Mark Treffry of 
Great Xal remarked in a tone of 
absorbed interest as he peered 
through a window into the compound several stories below “is 
magnificent!” 
Dexter Monte, Treffry’s Technical Advisor, standing a prudent 
dozen steps farther back in the 
room, cleared his throat. 
“You really, “ the Inspector 
General went on, “should come 
over here and watch him! What 
incredible reaction speed!” 
“I prefer,” Dexter Monte said 
firmly, “not to expose myself at a 
window while a Programmed assassin is in the area. If I might suggest—” 
Treffry chuckled. 
“Don’t you trust your own precautions?” he inquired. “The 
shields, the fields, the what-not? 
They’ve functioned perfectly so 
far.” 
“So far!” Monte repeated meaningfully. 
Treffry grunted. 
“Thinking of poor Ulbrand, I 
suppose?” 
“Yes.” 
“Ah, well,” said Treffry. “Ul
brand was no doubt a rather better 
than average Technical Advisor. 
But let’s face it, Monte ... he 
simply was not in your class! I’m 
not surprised they got him — whoever it is doesn’t want us on 
Ridzin.” He paused, added smugly, 
“And we have pretty fair idea of 
who that is, don’t we?” 
“Yes,” Monte said. 
“Now as for you,” Treffry went 
on, “I have complete confidence in 
your devices. That fellow down 
there is in a trap. But he’s certainly 
handling himself well while we 
close it! On the average how many 
do we lose in these attacks?” 
“Seventeen-point-two men.” 
“Well, our present would-be assassin seems to have accounted for 
at least two dozen by now! And — 
good heavens!” Treffry went silent 
a moment, staring down through 
the window. 
“What’s going on?” Dexter 
Monte inquired in an uneasy tone. 
“I’m sure I don’t know!” Treffry 
told him. “There were some odd 
glitters of extremely bright light. 
Almost like the scintillation of a 
diamond as you turn it.” 
“Ah!” Monte said. “The assassin 
was near it?” 
“He was near it! He’s nowhere 
now! What was it?” 
Joining Treffry at the window, 
Monte said in great relief, “An 
adaptation of the Welban Vortex. I 
wasn’t sure it would work on a 
Programmed mind.” 
“It worked!” Treffry assured 
him. He gave the Advisor a sidelong glance full of admiration. 
“This is the sixteenth or seventeenth such attack we’ve undergone, isn’t it?’’ 
“The twenty-first,’’ Monte said. 
“And always by Programmed 
Soldiery! They’re unbelievable! I’ll 
trust your traps while only one of 
them is involved. But when the entire Programmed Corps goes into 
action — !’’ The Inspector General 
shook his head. 
“Yes,’’ Dexter Monte said slowly. 
“A fearful thought.’’ 
“Clearly, somebody else — somebody not at all authorized — knows 
at least a few of the key commands 
to their minds,’’ Treffry said. 
“Well, we’ll be rid of these problems soon enough. When is the first 
carrier scheduled to lift?’’ 
Dexter Monte glanced at his 
watch. “In sixteen hours, thirtytwo minutes and ten seconds.’’ 
He looked at Treffry, added, “If 
you want to hear Governor Vinocur’s official announcement of the 
Programmed Corps’ departure 
from the Planet of Ridzin — he’s 
about to go on the air.’’ 
“By all means,’’ said Treffry. “I 
think I’ll really enjoy hearing our 
good and loyal friend Vinocur explain the situation to the public!*’ 
Planetary Governor Frank Vinocur was an old-time politician; 
while his speech, to which most of 
the adult population of Ridzin was 
tuned that morning, was a review of 
facts with which his listeners had 
been familiar for over a dozen 
years, he made them sound like 
news. There were friction points 
between the Terrestrial League and 
the alien Skanders. Though widely 
separated in space, they had overlapping spheres of influence — overlapping only slightly so far; but the 
situation was bound to become 
more serious as time went on. 
Unlike other spacefaring aliens 
men had encountered, the Skanders 
did not prudently withdraw when 
confronted by the mighty race of 
Terra — had, in fact, been known 
on occasion to attack first. They 
were savage and treacherous 
enemies, and showed, in addition, 
repulsively amebic physical characteristics. 
Space, Governor Vinocur declared, was not large enough for the 
Terrestrial League and such as the 
Skanders! An eventual showdown 
with the creatures was inevitable . 
and, as all knew, it was for this 
showdown that the Programmed 
Corps had been created. Ridzin 
could proudly say in this hour of 
parting that it had earned its place 
in history as the home of the Corps. 
By the wise planning of the Central 
Government on Great Xal, the time 
to strike at the Skander vermin — 
strike first, strike hard! — had arrived. The Programmed Corps was 
prepared . and victory was certain! 
The speech went over well — since 
Ridzin clearly would be remote 
from the battle zones. Throughout 
ONE STEP AHEAD 
the day patriotic anti-Skander fervors grew in the population, reaching a high pitch when Governor 
Vinocur’s press attaches let it become known that at the official 
leave-taking banquet that evening 
the Governor would be publicly appointed a Programmed Corps 
General by the Inspector General 
from Great Xal, Mark Treffry, who 
had been on Ridzin for the past 
year to arrange for the Corps’ 
transfer. And when the last of the 
automatic transspace carriers lifted 
from the planet during the night 
hours, General Frank Vinocur 
would leave with it in the company 
of the Inspector General, to represent Ridzin and its people at the 
front in this stirring period of 
history. 
That afternoon cheering crowds 
lined the routes along which the 
Programmed Corps convoys rolled 
toward the planet’s three Transspace Stations. They surrounded 
the stations themselves where giant 
carriers, all bearing the insignia of 
Great Xal, lay in dense rows like 
vast steel sausages. Into them 
marched the Programmed Corps. 
Eighteen thousand men with full 
equipment were assigned to each 
carrier; the men would lie in rigid, 
frozen sleep during the long spaceflight to Great Xal. One by one, the 
carriers were loaded and closed 
their locks . 
Some of Ridzin’s citizens, noting 
that only the central government 
appeared to be involved in the oper
ation, speculated that they might 
be witnessing a dramatic ne^ turn 
in the Terrestrial League’s internal 
politics. But no public mention was 
made of such possibilities and by 
the time the official banquet began 
the planet was in a festive mood — 
almost as if the war against the 
Skanders were already won. Governor Vinocur was duly appointed a 
General of the Programmed Corps 
while Ridzin followed the event on 
their tri-di screens; laudatory 
speeches were exchanged between 
him and the Inspector General; 
toasts and countertoasts were offered .. Dexter Monte, the Inspector General’s Technical Advisor, 
created a minor diplomatic flurry 
when, in full view of the entire 
planet, he refused to empty his 
glass in Ridzin’s honor, explaining 
that he was not a drinking man, 
that alcohol had deleterious effects 
on his metabolism. However, he 
was quickly coaxed into it by Mark 
Treffry and Governor Vinocur, and 
thereafter drank dutifully, if sourly, 
to every toast proposed. 
T hen the official rituals were 
over, except for the final scene 
on the steel loading dock within the 
maw of the last giant carrier left on 
the planet, where Governor Vinocur bade Ridzin farewell. Inspector 
General Treffry stood smiling at his 
side, Dexter Monte standing a few 
feet behind the two, belching every 
few seconds and generally showing 
the effects of having been forced 
Science 
Hcttcxi 
"FREaK 
No! 
You love good storytelling and the SF magazines ; 
just about the only place to find that art practiced today — 
until now. Now there is FICTION, a new magazine 
exclusively for prose, poetry, and drama. FICTION 
is today’s magazine of the future — the future of storytelling. In FICTION you will discover the pleasures of 
the Mystery, the Western, Fantasy, and Romance, 
as well as Science Fiction and modes of literature 
still unnamed because they chart a virginal universe. 
With each issue FICTION ^ill plunge 
further into the most exciting depths of the human mind — the unbound imagination. 
Take a step into the future of an art! 
FICTION 
I would like to take advantage of the 
SPECIAL OFFER below and enter a 
subscription to FICTION. I understand 
that if I am not completely satisfied I may 
cancel my subscription at any time and 
receive a refund on the price of the issues 
remaining. My payment is enclosed. 
[ ] 6 issues $5.00 ($1.00 savings) 
1 ] 12 issues $9.00 ($3.00 savings) 
[ i 24 issues $17.00 ($8.00 savings) 
Name: 
Street: 
Town: , 
State: 
Zip: . 
Send to: FICTION, 193 Beacon Street 
Boston, Mass. 02 1 16 
into participating in the toasts. 
Vinocur spoke briefly into the tri-di 
cameras, concluded with a formal 
salute; then camera crews withdrew, glancing with silent awe at 
the huge bulkheads to either side of 
the dock behind which eighteen 
thousand men lay frozen in sleep. 
As the last of them left the carrier 
the loading locks slid shut with a 
heavy steel boom. The three men 
standing on the dock were alone. 
There was a dim humming in the 
air as the ship computers readied 
the engines for lift-off and the long 
flight during which there would be 
no waking human being to guide 
them. Treffry looked at his watch. 
“Still half an hour,” he said. 
“But we might as well get to our 
tanks at once. Feeling any better, 
Monte?” 
“No,” Dexter Monte muttered. 
“Worse! I’ll be more than happy to 
settle into that tank. I’m beginning 
to have some difficulty holding myself together, I can tell you!” 
Treffry and Vinocur glanced at 
each other and laughed, more loudly than the remark called for, almost as if each were enjoying a private joke; Monte blinked in brief, 
bleary surprise at them as he 
turned to follow them off to the 
sleep tanks. 
Five minutes later. Inspector 
General Mark Treffry heard the 
sharp click with which his sleeping 
tank sealed itself above him. He 
switched on the intercom connecting the three tanks. With no 
attendants left awake in the carrier, 
it was essential that he and his 
companions monitor one another 
through the steps required to 
ensure that they would awaken 
safely after the trip. Governor 
Vinocur acknowledged at once, 
and some seconds later, Dexter 
Monte also replied. The preparations were carried out, checked, 
and then Treffry settled back comfortably. He already felt a faint, not 
unpleasant numbness in legs and 
arms, which was the anesthetic’s 
firsf effect. By the time the sleepcold touched him, he would not feel 
anything at all. But his mind was 
still awake and active; and the private joke which had made him 
laugh aloud a short while ago 
seemed too good now to keep to 
himself. 
“Vinpcur?” he said to the intercom. 
“Yes, Treffry?” Vinocur’s voice 
responded. 
“Before we drop off,” Treffry 
said, “I thought I’d thank you for a 
highly enjoyable experience.” He 
could hardly refrain from laughing 
again. 
“You’re referring to your stay on 
Ridzin?” Vinocur asked politely. 
“We tried to make it as pleasant as 
possible, of course.” 
“I’m sure you did!” And now 
Treffry did laugh, huffing and 
snorting helplessly for almost a 
minute before he was able to stop. 
He dabbed at his eyes, and sensed 
that the sleep-heaviness hadl>eg:un 
to edge into his hands. 
“Why do you laugh, Treffry?” 
Vinocur’s voice asked. 
That almost set Treffrey off 
again. But he choked the laughter 
down. If he kept giving way to it, he 
would be asleep before he made 
sure that wl^atever dreams came to 
Frank Vinocur during the long trip 
would not be pleasant ones. He 
said, “Let me tell you — “ 
While the Programmed Corps 
was being forged into a magnificent, automatically functioning 
weapon on Ridzin, it became 
obvious that its completion was 
awaited with as much anxiety as 
eagerness by a number of the 
worlds of the Terrestrial League. 
The question, of course, was who in 
the end would control it. 
“We didn’t try to stop the plotting and bargaining that went on,” 
Treffiry said. “And we didn’t become involved in it. We merely took 
measures to epsure that the central 
government and Great Xal would 
remain always one step ahead of 
the conspirators.’’ 
“Conspirators?” Vinocur’s voice 
repeated carefully over the intercom. 
“Hanfiaret and Lorcia from the 
beginning, naturally!” Treffry told 
him. *‘Then, during tlie past two 
years, the governing body of Ridzin. We did our intelligence work 
thoroughly. Great Xal held the 
margin of power, so nothing else 
was needed. We could let the thing 
ripen. 
“My dear fellow, that was what 
has made the final stages of 
this game so amusing! The ingenuity! The intricate patterns of deception! War fleets from Lorcia 
and Hannaret combining suddenly 
for ‘joint maneuvers’ in an open 
threat to Great Xal — and on Ridzin, in apparent desperation, ineffectual gestures at sabotage, including a series of attempted assassinations by mysteriously malfunctioning Programmed soldiers! They 
were not intended to succeed, of 
course; murdering me could not 
have held up the transfer of the 
Corps by a day. I imagine poor Ulbrand got killed by accident^-or, 
more correctly, by the ineptness of 
his defenses. 
“And to what end? Why, to divert our attention. Nothing more. 
To draw us away from the one plan 
which did, in fact, have a chance to 
succeed. But that plan has failed, 
too, Vinocur!” 
Treffry paused a moment. When 
the intercom remained silent, he 
went on complacently. “The Hannaret warships which were to intercept and halt our carriers on their 
way to Great Xal have been allowed 
to take up position midway on our 
course. But they will be joined a few 
days from now by twice their 
number of central government 
ships. There will be no interception, Vinocur! 
“And now, with the Programmed 
Corps to enforce its orders. Great 
Xal deals once and for all with the 
ONE STEP AHEAD 
malcontent worlds! The Terrestrial 
League will be hammered into a 
unit. That is the corps’ only urgent 
and immediate task. Time enough 
later to turn to settling our score 
with the Skanders. Why we owe 
those obscene aliens some gratitude, as a matter of fact — if they 
hadn’t been such a visible threat to 
the League it would have been impossible to bring ihe Corps into 
existence. So now, as I bid you 
good-night, ‘General’ Vinocur, I 
shall leave it to you to picture foij 
yourself the warm reception awaiting you on Great Xal!” 
There was silence again for a moment. Then Vinocur said, 
“Treffry?” 
“Yes?” Treffry said, pleased. He 
had not really expected Vinocur to 
reply. 
“You omitted mentioning one of 
our diversion attempts,” the intercom told him. 
“I did?” Treffry said. “What 
was that?” 
“The interception of the carriers, 
of course! Too many people knew 
of that plan. It was almost inevitable that your intelligence 
would get wind of it.” 
Treffry started to speak, checked 
himself, suddenly chilled. 
“To stay one step ahead in this 
game,” Vinocur’s voice told him 
blandly, “that, as you’ve indicated, 
was the great necessity here. To bedazzle, mislead, confuse with a 
variety of elaborate schemes and 
dodges — when, all the time, only 
some very simple plan, one known 
to the fewest possible planners, 
could be successful. And that plan 
has succeeded, Treffry! To this moment only four men have known 
about it. You will now be the fifth. 
“The Programmed Corps is not 
on its way to Great Xal, you see. 
Instead, the course of the carriers 
will take them to transspace stations on Hannaret.” 
Impossible, Treffry thought in 
instant, scornful relief. What was 
the fellow attempting to accomplish 
with such a lie? Only Ulbrand and 
Monte — 
“Ulbrand’s death,” Vinocur’s 
voice was continuing, “was no accident. He and Dexter Monte controlled the master programs of the 
carrier fleet’s computers. We had 
to get Ulbrand out of the way.” 
“Ridiculous!” Treffry realized he 
had shouted, his voice thick and 
distorted, wondered briefly whether 
it was the anesthetic which made 
his mouth feel numb and stiffened 
now — or fear. “Monte!” he shouted 
again at the intercom. 
Some seconds passed silently, as 
Vinocur, too, waited for Dexter 
Monte to respond. 
yroNTE!” Treffry bellowed 
IVl. once more. Slurred, mumbling noises issued from the speaker then, followed by a heavy belch. 
‘‘I couldn’t answer at once,” 
Dexter Monte explained in a weak, 
complaining voice. “I had to pull 
myself together. I don’t feel at all 
well! If you two hadn’t made me 
swallow those atrocious alcoholic 
concoctions — ” He muttered indistinctly, added, “What is it?’’ 
“You heard what that fool was 
saying?’’ Treffry demanded. 
“You needn’t speak so loudly!’’ 
Monte protested. “Yes, I heard 
him.’’ 
“Well?’’ 
“Oh, I agreed almost a year ago 
to program the carriers to go to 
Hannaret when the time came. Is 
that what you want to know? It’s 
true enough. They guaranteed me 
wealth, power, influence. The usual 
approach. Including direct blackmail, I must say! Ulbrand, incidentally, wasn’t so stupid. I had to 
loosen his defenses to let the assassin get to him.” Dexter Monte 
belched explosively, groaned in polite dismay. “Excuse me, gentlemen! Your infernal alcohol ...” 
Vinocur was laughing now. Treffry’s thoughts seemed to whirl in 
confusion. Then he remembered 
something. He snorted. 
“Monte, yoir’re a miserable 
coward and a monstrous liar!” he 
stated. “I can believe they blackmailed you into agreeing to do what 
they wanted. But you’re safe from 
them now, so you can give up the 
pretense! Because of course you 
didn’t go through with it.” 
Vinocur abruptly stopped laughing. “He went through with it!” he 
growled. 
Treffry chuckled. “He couldn’t. 
CD CD K! 
FIRST TIME IN PAPERBACK 
DAW BOOKS brings you in 
February James Blish’s MIDSUMMER’S CENTURY, an unusual short novel of a very 
strange future, and there Is a 
bonus added In two Bllsh novelettes. Ted Sturgeon called MIDSUMMER’S CENTURY “engrossing.” UQ1094-95C 
Gerard Conway produces his 
full-length original novel MINDSHIP— an entirely new concept 
of interstellar travel— told with 
psychological depth and sensitivity. UQ1095-95C 
The Lovecraft cult has Its day 
with Brian Lumley’s THE 
BURROWERS BENEATH. It’s a 
horror sf novel that you can read 
at midnight! UQ1096-95c 
Grainger, the man of the double 
mind, who pilots the Hooded 
Swan, finds In the PROMISED 
LAND that all is harmony and 
only man Is the jarring note. 
UQ1097-95C 
And in the problem of the 
JEWEL OF JARHEN, Cap Kennedy once again finds evidence 
of the first galactics and is 
thrown back a million years to 
find himself playing Prometheus on a far planet! 
UQ1098’95c 
If you can’t find a DAW book in 
stores, please send name and 
address, book price plus 25c 
postage and handling to: P.O. 
Box 999, Bergenfield, N.J. 
07621 . 
ONE STEP AHEAD 
Vinocur! He simply couldn’t! 
Monte, like every other key man 
brought to Ridzin, was put through 
secret security tests once a month — 
and I supervised that operation — 
always. So Monte couldn’t have 
harbored any real intentions to 
betray us. No human mind can deceive the testing machines . .eh, 
Monte?” 
Monte wearily mumbled a sentence or two. 
“What did you say, Monte? 
Speak up!” 
“I said I agree with you.” Dexter 
Monte’s voice was distinct again 
but quite faint. He sighed. “No 
human mind can deceive the testing machines.” 
Treffry swallowed with difficulty. 
The anesthetic definitely was affecting his tongue and throat now. 
“Are you listening, Vinocur?” he 
demanded. “So the Programmed 
Corps isn’t going to Hannaret, is it, 
Monte?” 
“No,” Monte said. He added 
peevishly, “But you gentlemen 
must excuse me now! I really can’t 
keep myself together any longer.” 
“Treffry — ” Vinocur’s voice had 
thickened, sounded heavily slurred. 
“Yes?” 
“Ask him — ask him whether the 
Programmed Corps is . going to 
Great Xal.” 
“What?” 
“We . had him on . testing 
machines, too, Treffry!” 
A monstrous thought swam up 
slowly in Treffry’s mind. 
“Monte!” he cried. “Monre/” 
Odd watery whistling noises responded for some seconds from the 
intercom. Nothing else. 
Could it be? Could the most awesome weapon ever devised, the irresistable Programmed Corps, be 
hurtling now, not toward Great 
Xal but, out of control, toward 
some immensely distant point in 
space? From which it presently 
would return, under new instructions, to wipe out the race which 
had created it? 
“Monte!” This time, only 
Treffry’s mind formed the word. 
The sound that came from his 
mouth was a heavy groan — the 
cold -sleep process was moving 
along its irreversible course. Moaning noises in the intercom indicated 
Vinocur was experiencing similar 
difficulties. Treffry’s thoughts began to swirl in slow and awfuf confusion, revolving about one fact repeatedly mentioned in the speeches 
that day: the Skanders’ repulsive 
amebic quality, their ability to 
force themselves out of their basic 
shape into another of their choosing and to maintain it for an indefinite period . 
Perhaps for as long as fifteen or 
twenty years? Long enough to — 
That thought, all thought, faded. 
The moaning in the intercom went 
on for almost another minute. 
Then it, too, stopped. In a silence 
which would remain unbroken for 
many months the great c|irrier fleet 
rushed toward its destination. • 
AT THE edge of the Galaxy the 
Starbom idled at half c, like 
an impatient beast on tether. At the 
pilot’s station Jaro Mandan once 
again punched the com controls 
that should have put him on closed 
beam to Flight Control at Whittier 
Dock .on Earth, 2142 A.D. 
With an oath he reached t6 
switch off the unresponsive controls, wonderirig how he could 
report an aborted Jump to Captain 
Heath and survive the Captain’s 
wrath. But before his hand touched 
the instruments the screen finally 
came alive. It showed a face he had 
never seen before. A woman — a 
girl. 
“Who the hell are you?” he demanded. 
She was pale and spoke with 
compressed lips. “Mara Summers. 
Controller Third Class, Whittier 
Dock. Who are you?” 
He ignored her question. “I’ve 
been trying to raise Whittier for a 
full eighteen minutes. You realize, 
of course, this deserve a black-tab 
report.” 
“Send the orange copy to my 
mail station. SC31, Whittier.” 
She wasn’t even going to attempt 
an excuse for her delay. He really 
ought to black-tab her. “Delays 
cost money.” 
“You’re costing more. Name and 
mission, please.” 
"Starbom. We filed intentions 
before leaving Earth two days ago.” 
The girl punched the tabs on her 
clearance console and scanned the 
screen. “Your request is for clearance to Sigler IV. Cargo: 30,000 
tons miscellaneous instruments and 
tools.” 
“Correct. We are now twentythree minutes late for Jump.” 
Mara touched another row of 
keys with long, swift fingers. “Correction inserted. Record flight instructions.” 
A red light glowed on the panel 
in front of him, informed Jaro that 
the clearance data was being fed 
into his computer. After a moment, 
the light flicked out. Jaro glanced 
up at the girl’s tense face on the 
screen. “Thanks,” he said curtly. 
“Have a good flight, sir,” she 
replied, icy- voiced. “Don’t forget 
my copy of the report.” Mara 
switched off. 
The pilot turned away, cursing 
himself for allowing her insolence 
to irritate him. He really would 
black-tab her. 
Behind him, his three-man pilot 
crew were intent on their work as 
the computer control readied the 
ship for Jump. Jaro watched his 
own instruments and signaled to 
Captain Heath on the Bridge. 
“Clearance inserted, sir. Forty seconds to Jump.” 
On the screen the Captain 
nodded. “Proceed.” 
It took a hundred-man crew to 
operate a giant cargo ship like the 
Starbom, Not one of them could 
completely hide the strain that 
appeared on his face. Awareness of 
the penalties of flight via QuadraSpace, ever present, became intense as Jump approached. It still 
happened that now and then a ship 
entered Quadra-Space and never 
returned. Speculations about the 
conditions of such entrapment were 
not pleasant. 
Even more crushing was the 
recognition that the gulf separating 
the crews of the Starships from the 
rest of humanity was to widen a 
step further. This was the inevitable 
penalty the crews paid for the lives 
they led. 
The Jump warning signal 
jangled. Jaro and his men watched 
the singleT)lazing light in the center 
of the wall that would shift from 
red to green. Then it came, the familiar, wrenching, shearing agony 
that was over almost before it began. Over, but somehow enduring — for the rest of their lives. 
The Starbom' s rate of accelera-, 
tion slowed and slowed as she 
edged ever closer to c. Her mighty 
engines whined in a higher and 
higher key. Then she crossed. That 
was Jump. The moment the speed 
of light was exceeded. The moment 
they entered the unreality of 
Quadra-Space. And then the ship* 
continued to accelerate to hundreds 
of times the velocity of light — insofar as concepts such as ‘acceleration’ and ‘velocity’ have meaning 
outside of time and space as men 
had always known them. QuadraSpace. A mathematical fiction until 
men learned to exceed the speed of 
light. 
Crew duties were minor now. 
The ship was run by its grim computer brains that operated wholly 
outside time. 
Jaro turned his eyes to the control panel after the shock of Jump 
had passed. There was no requirement for him to recheck with Flight 
Control, but he regretted having 
been so severe. The girl was obviously new to her job and his own 
impatience and anxiety about falling behind schedule had made him 
behave stupidly. She was probably 
worried sick about the threatened 
black -tab report. 
He pressed the communication 
controls, and set the time pattern to 
Earth normal. In a moment her 
face appeared. She looked even 
more pale and drawn than before. 
“Whittier,” she said automatically. 
Then she recognized him. “Oh — 
it’s you.” 
Jaro grinned. “Yeah — it’s me.” 
Mara Summers resumed her impassive mask. *Starborn acknowledged. What is your request?” 
“My request is that we forget our 
TH€ TOUCH OF YOUR HAND 
previous conversation — at least the 
part about black-tabbing.” 
“It was justified. The delay was 
inexcusable.” 
“How many ships did you have 
on your board?” 
“Seventeen.” 
“Your delay was justified. Am I 
holding you up again?” 
“No. The board is clear, except 
for you.” Mara’s voice was tired. 
“Please state your request.” 
“I already have. Look — I want to 
apologize for being so stuffy. Tm 
not ordinarily like that. I was just 
jittery about getting a takeoff without an abort. My Captain would 
have exiled me to Quadra-Space for 
that.” 
M ara smiled for the first time; a 
. little of the tiredness left her 
eyes. “All right. I forgive you — and 
I thank you. One more black-tab in 
the division would have put us all 
back on Apprentice-status.” 
Jaro was glad he had called. The 
girl’s job was tough enough without 
prima donna pilots adding to her 
problems. 
“Are you in Quadra-Space 
now?” asked Mara. 
Jaro nodded. “Our velocity has 
passed 200 c and is climbing fast.” 
“You know — I’ve studied it, I 
talk to people like you every day; I 
still don’t understand it.” 
Jaro smiled wryly at her phrase, 
“people like you.” 
“I’m still human,” he said. 
Mara flushed. “Oh — I didn’t 
mean it that way — !” 
“It’s all right. Sometimes even 
we forget we belong.” 
“I just can’t imagine what it 
would be like not to be able to — 
touch anything — anyone. It is that 
way, isn’t it?” 
“It’s that way.” Jaro’s voice was 
flat. “If I should touch your hand 
we would both simply detonate — 
like a small atomic explosion.” 
He didn’t know why he had put it 
that way. He glanced at her hand, 
her long, slender fingers lying on 
the desk in front of her. For the 
first time in the years since he’d 
first entered Quadra-Space he felt 
as if it were some unaccountable 
tragedy that he could not reach out 
and touch such a hand. 
Mara was staring too, as if confronted with some sudden burden. 
She shook herself and smiled 
faintly. “We surely wouldn’t want 
that to happen, would we?” 
Jaro smiled in agreement. “No, 
we certainly wouldn’t.” 
“Tell me why it is,” said Mara. 
“I could never understand the 
mathematics in the classes. It went 
right over my head.” 
“I’m not sure anyone understands it. When an object moves, 
its subjective time becomes shorter 
with respect to the reference world. 
When a ship nears the speed of 
light a short space of ship-time 
equals centuries on Earth.” 
“I don’t see, then, how the ship 
can ever get back to Earth at the 
normal time. How can we even be 
talking to each other now?” 
“The first super-c ships never did 
get back. They weren’t expected to, 
really. Then, after Quadra- Space 
was actually penetrated, it was 
found that the sign of the equations 
could be reversed; a return trip in 
both space and time was possible. 
The scientists aboard the second or 
third research ship modified their 
drive and returned. They died as 
soon as they landed. They flashed 
out of existence — like atomic explosions.” 
“Why?” 
“It was found that when objects 
travel backward, so to speak, in 
Quadra-Space to return to original 
space and time they experience a 
deadly compensation. When the 
sign of the equations is reversed the 
objects accumulate a ‘time-charge’. 
It might be likened to a charge of 
static electricity. Discharge takes 
place when a time-charged object 
contacts a normal one. The discharge is violent, because the buildup of time charge involves enormous energy.” 
“They taught us something about 
time discharge, but how can cargo 
be sent through Quadra-Space and 
utilized on different worlds?” 
“Time charge is cumulative and 
builds up only with negative passage through Quadra-Space, as 
when a ship returns to normal 
Earth and time. A single passage 
through Quadra-Space can be discharged by proper treatment. All 
cargo is treated to make it usable. 
But for ships and men who have 
made hundreds of Jumps — no. 
They can only be insulated. The 
accumulated energy of their timecharge is so great that it could not 
be safely released in a lifetime. So 
when we return to Earth the ship 
stays in orbit — not even entering 
the atmosphere while we take . a 
shuttle down and spend our leave in 
luxurious — and completely insulated — quarters. We are prisoners of 
the life we’ve chosen.” 
Mara shuddered. “Why did you 
choose it?” 
Jaro’s eyes focused on some infinite distance and he smiled with 
hidden pleasure. “To walk where 
no other man has walked. To see 
worlds no other man has seen. 
There are reasons, Mara. Good 
reasons.” 
“If you say so — it sounds kind of 
horrible from here.” 
“Not really. I’ll tell you more 
about it another time. I’ve got to 
clear the channel now, or I’ll get a 
black -tab myself for holding it. It’s 
THE TOUCH OF YOUR HAND 
been nice talking with you, Mara.” 
The girl nodded. “I hope there 
will be another time.” 
And then, just before he cut off, 
while she was still smiling wistfully, 
he snapped a picture of her with the 
recorder built into the screen. He 
pulled the print out of the back of 
the machine. The holographic 
image returned his regard. Mara’s 
wistful smile was fixed; unchanging 
forever. 
He slipped the picture into his 
shirt pocket, glancing self-consciously about. But all the other 
crewmen had long since left, thenposts. 
H e walked down the long corridor, past the crew’s quarters 
toward the recreation area in the 
center of the ship. Here already had 
begun the gaity that marked the 
days of transition through QuadraSpace — a gaity that had always 
seemed forced to Jaro. Now more 
than ever. The men and women 
crew-members were already dancing and drinking as if compelled to 
forget the unreal reality of QuadraSpace. 
A woman named Rosilla spied 
Jaro from across the room. She 
held out her arms and ran toward 
him. “Jaro! We’ve been waiting for 
you! How can we have a party without Jaro?” 
Her husky arms embraced him 
fiercely, but he slowly pushed her 
warm, strong body from him. He 
inhaled the dense perfume of her 
black hair and found it stifling. 
“You can get along without me 
this time,” he said. 
“What you need is a drink! 
Here’s some of that stuff we found 
on Porteuse on our last Jump. It’ll 
take the ice out of your backbone.” 
“And the backbone with it. 
You’d better/ ease off that stuff.” 
“Only the Captain can tell Rosilla what to do or not to do!” 
“Have it your way, honey. I’m 
sitting this one out in my quarters.” 
“I’ll come with you.” 
“No — I’d rather be alone for 
now.” 
Rosilla’s eyes glared angrily. 
“You sick, Jaro?” 
“Could be,” he said. “It just 
could be.” 
He shut the door behind him and 
fell onto the bed, lay staring at the 
ceiling. His quarters, like everyone 
else’s, were luxurious. The entertainment center could furnish any 
audio or visual experience he desired. 
Except one. He pulled the picture from his shirt pocket and held 
it up. Mara Summers. No one had 
ever moved him this way before. He 
must be losing his damper-bars, he 
thought. How could he let his 
interest be caught by such a casual 
contact? 
Casual— and futile. It was no lie 
that if he ever touched her hand 
they would both disappear in an 
actinic glare. He could never even 
see her directly with his eyes. 
He smiled at the image and 
propped the picture above his bed. 
Mara, Mara, whom I can never see, 
never touch. Never really know. 
Who are you, Mara? What are you 
like, Mara? 
He rolled over and turned his 
face to the ceiling again. He had 
chosen this life deliberately and 
didn’t regret it. No other life offered so much. More worlds than a 
man could explore in a lifetime. 
More experience than other men 
could dream of. All creation was 
his. 
For all this he’d had to exchange 
only one small planet out of an infinity of worlds. It was just that it 
happened to be called Earth, and 
he’d once called it home. And it 
held Mara Summers. 
He had seen other men go 
through periods like this, times 
when they grew lonely for what they 
had given up. One guy had been 
obsessed with wanting to see his old 
pet dog. Another wanted to see the 
house he’d lived in as a kid. Others 
pined for old loves. 
It hit the men the worst, and the 
wom^ comforted them out of their 
doldrums. 
Jaro knew he could ride it out. 
Ballanttne 
Boofc» 
1974 may well be remembered as the year 
of Alan Dean Foster, or so It Is beginning to 
seem here at Ballanttne where we have three 
of his books scheduled within five months. 
Not bad for a young writer whose very first 
book was published as recently as 1972. Just 
off the press is LUANA, Alan's adaptation 
of the Jungle extravaganza now playing in 
movie theaters around and about the 
country. Luana, something of a female 
Tarzan, and her family — a lion, a tiger, and 
a chimp — are vividly brought to life on the 
cover by the inimitable Frazetta. Watch for 
LUANA; she's a gal you're not likely to 
forget! 
Alan's other books already scheduled include: ICERIGGER, a March sf adventure 
in which he returns to the marvelously 
imaginative galaxy of his first novel THE 
TAR-AIYM k RANG; and in June STAR 
TREK LOG ONE, first book in a series 
based on the successful new animated Star 
Trek series. But much more about those two 
as they are published. 
For his next project Alan has suggested 
scripting ‘^Deep Thoat" — an X-rated Barsoom adventure. Hmmm . 
• • • 
So much for a look into our future. Now 
back to the real world and more February 
books. a stunning debut by a new 
science fiction talent." That's what PubUshers Weekly says about WALK TO THE 
THE TOUCH OF YOUR HAND 
END OF THE WORLD, by Smy McKee 
Chenuui. Tbit onaiiially poweifiil fint noTel 
wfll eurely be a contender — we think — when 
awards are voted. **Not only are the prose, 
atmosphere, and credibility of the post-hoiocanst story superior,*^ PW contfames, ^bot 
[the book] boldly advances into the convointed area of sex, a place where most sf 
writers are either timid or puerile.’* Who 
could ask for a better review? And, good 
news, Chamas has a sequel In the typewriter! 
• • • 
Back to the top of our sf list Is NERVES, 
Lester del Key’s now-classic tale of disaster 
in an atomic plant. First written In 1942, 
this story of a nuclear reaction bursting out 
of control Is even more devastating today. 
What starts out as an ordfaiaty experiment 
on an ordinary day turns into a race to 
prevent atomic holocanst. As fuel supplies 
evaporate everywhere and we begin to look 
more to atomic power for our energy, we 
come closer and closer to the world del Rey 
wrote about. Now in Its fourth big printing, 
NERVES is still a must for every sf reader. 
^ A wholly admirahle blend of prophetic 
thinking, warm human valuta and powerful 
narrative suspense,” said the New York 
Herald Tribune reviewer. Need we say 
more? 
• • • 
LU ANA, WALK TO THE END OF THE 
WORLD and NERVES-^h $1.25->are 
at your bookstore or newsstand now. If yon 
can’t find them complain to the dealer 
and/or send $1.25 per book, plus 25c per 
order for handling, to Ballantine Cash Sales, 
PO Box 505, Westminster, Maryland 21157. 
But he was glad his nostalgia had 
not settled on a pet dog, or an aged 
grandmother. Far better a girl like 
Mara Summers. 
He smiled at her picture again. 
She was undoubtedly married or 
otherwise committed. But that 
wouldn’t bother his dreams — and 
dreams were all he would ever have 
of her. 
Use of the communication channels for unofficial purposes was forbidden by regulation. All transmissions were recorded. But crewmen 
of the starships had figured ways of 
bypassing the spy-circuits. 
A ship could have its clearance 
pulled for such infractions. But it 
was essential to morale, as Captain 
Heath recognized; he was a strict 
disciplinarian but even he closed 
his eyes^to this. 
A week later Jaro called again. 
“Hello,” Mara said. She seemed 
shy as she recognized him now. 
“Hello — is your board loaded?” 
“You timed it just right. I just 
finished my last contact.” 
And now he couldn’t think of 
anything to say. He stared at her 
image, knowing that it was only a 
pattern of lines and dots on a silvered glass. Suddenly he longed to 
know the texture of her hair, the 
true color of her eyes. “How much 
longer is your shift?” he said. 
“Another hour. I won’t have any 
more traffic.” 
“Do you handle only starships?” 
“Yes. There are more all the 
time. It seems that other people 
think the rest of the universe is 
better than Earth.” Then she 
flushed. “I didn’t mean that the 
way it sounded.” 
“I know. We’re still human as I 
said the other day. We get lonesome for what we left behind. One 
of the guys was climbing the walls 
from wanting to see the dog he had 
had as a boy.” 
“Do you ever wish you could see 
the old familiar places?” 
“Sure. I’d like to see the old 
house on Edgemont Avenue where 
my folks lived. I’d like to see old 
North High where I went to 
school.” 
“Where was that? I knew a 
North High once.” 
“Every town has one. Mine was 
in Jefferson, New Cal.” 
“I went to school in San Marcos! 
That’s only fifty miles away — why 
we might even have run into each 
other back then.” 
Jaro smiled at that pleasant impossibility. “Yeah, we might. 
When were you there?” 
“I graduated in ’37.” 
“I guess we wouldn’t have made 
it. I was there in — well, you were a 
bit after my time, that’s all.” 
“But just think — ” Mara’s eyes 
were shining now. “If we had been 
there at the same time you might 
have bumped into me at a game 
and we might have gone somewhere 
to eat and talk. It couldn’t have 
happened, but it’s nice to think 
about.” She leaned her cheek 
against her fist. “Did you always 
want to be a starjumper?” 
Jaro nodded. “Always.” 
“Don’t you ever miss having . 
someone?” 
“Ours is a mixed crew.” 
Mara looked down at her hands. 
“I should have remembered. They 
told us about that, too.” 
“Mara — ” Jaro spoke softly. 
“One of the things that almost 
makes me wish I’d chosen a different life is that if I had I’d be able to 
reach out and — and touch your 
hand.” 
Mara laughed sadly. “And have 
us both — what was the word you 
used — ‘detonate’?” 
“No. Have us walk along some 
quiet path at night, holding hands, 
watching the moon through the 
trees, talking.” 
“Stop it!” Mara’s voice was almost violent. “This isn’t going to 
get us anywhere! We’re making 
fools of ourselves — ” 
“You’re right. I’m sorry. Let’s 
stick to the real world. I’m a star 
jumper and you’re a pretty girl 
who’ll get married and settle down 
and raise a family to inherit a piece 
of the Earth. Tell me, are you 
married now, or is there any one?” 
THE TOUCH OF YOUR HAND 
“Does it make any difference? 
Anyway, I’m not, and there’s no 
one. So what?’’ 
“Don’t be angry with me, Mara. 
We dream lonely dreams out here 
on the starships.’’ 
She passed a hand over her forehead. “I’m tired. I’ve got to clean 
up my books before I go. I’m glad 
you called.’’ 
“Yeah, sure. Maybe again sometime. Goodnight, Mara.’’ 
He cut off sharply. Never again. 
He was behaving no differently 
from the man who yearned for his 
pet dog of long ago. He headed for 
the recreation area. Maybe Rosilla 
would be there. 
S IGLER IV was an Earth-type 
world having a climate of perpetual rain, inhabited by a humanoid species that had a curious technological development. They were 
high in mechanics but almost 
devoid of knowledge in chemistry 
and related fields. They had no 
metallury or metal machinery, but 
could do miracles with wood and 
stone. In the holds of the Starbom 
were mechanical devices of all 
kinds and a complete steam-electric plant for trade. 
The ship had been here once before and Jaro had made friends 
with a half dozen of the humorless 
creatures and looked forward to 
renewing old acquaintances. But 
almost from the moment he stepped 
off the ramp of the Starbom something seemed wrong. It was raining 
as usual, a steamy, misty rain that 
choked his lungs and blurred his 
vision. He wondered how he could 
ever have liked the place. 
Stepping onto an alien world like 
Sigler involved no hazard to the 
Earthmen because there was no 
compensation for the time differential resulting from their trip from 
Earth, hence, no time-charge. They 
didn’t care what time it was on 
Sigler IV. 
Captain Heath had delegated 
Jaro to contact the locals. The two 
of them stood at the foot of the 
ramp, peering through the rain at 
the slowly approaching group of 
natives. 
“There they are,’’ said the 
tain. “Do you recognize any of 
them?’’ 
“The dead-heads all look alike.’’ 
The Captain looked at him curiously. “I thought you were buddies 
with this bunch.’’ 
Jaro ignored the comment and 
walked toward the group. He spoke 
a few words of the local dialect. 
After a long palaver he found someone who recalled the first visit. 
When Jaro mentioned the names of 
others of his former acquaintances 
there was a long wait in the mushy 
rain while they were called. It was a 
long and miserable day. Jaro 
wished he had never seen this dank 
and muddy planet. 
During the night he came down 
with fever; by morning he was 
delerious. The ship’s surgeon, Dr. 
Pavan, said it was a virus indigenous to Sigler IV. His entire arsenal of antibiotics had little effect. 
He made Jaro as comfortable as 
possible in the pilot’s quarters and 
assigned Rosilla to watch over 
him — since he knew she would do 
that anyway. 
While Rosilla wasn’t committed 
to him, she was closer to Jaro than 
to anyone else. But Jaro had never 
asked for her commitment. Others 
had, and Rosilla had declined 
them, hoping still that Jaro would 
someday claim her. 
She didn’t like the progress of 
Jaro’s illness. Each hour he was 
more flushed and incoherent. She 
had seen too many alien diseases to 
believe the doctor was as sanguine 
as he pretended to be. She suspected he was baffled, was simply 
giving up on Jaro. 
Then she found the picture of 
Mara in a cabinet drawer and 
understood. It was Jaro who had 
given up. 
She saw that Mara was in a Dock 
Control Center and guessed her to 
be a new Controller. She checked 
Starbom's clearance-records and 
deduced Mara’s name. 
Rosilla hacf seen men die of long
ings they could not satisfy away 
from the planet which gav^ them 
birth. Jaro might easily become one 
of them. 
The Captain must know, Rosilla 
decided. He understood these 
things. 
In his cabin Captain Heath listened to Rosilla as he turned the 
picture of Mara Summers in his 
hand. He understood — both Rosilla 
and Jaro. 
“Put the picture back where you 
got it,” he said quietly when Rosilla 
had finished. 
“But you must do something! 
Jaro is dying. Maybe not from the 
disease, maybe not from the sickness over this girl. But together 
they will kill him.” 
“I’ll have a talk with Jaro,” the 
Captain promised. 
When Rosilla was gone, the Captain checked with Dr. Pavan, who 
shook his head. “I’ve run every 
kind of test I know; injected him 
with a broad-spectrum antibiotic.” 
The Doctor gestured to his extensive laboratory equipment. “The 
virus isn’t particularly virulent but 
Jaro isn’t responding.” 
“Could it be psychosomatic?” 
Pavan shrugged. “Who knows? 
We’re all mostly crazy, or we 
wouldn’t be here in the first place. 
You know that.” 
Heath smiled. No other comment 
was necessary. 
THE TOUCH OF YOUR HAND 
T wo days later Rosilla reported 
Jaro was feeling better, and 
Captain Heath visited the patient. 
“I hear you’re about ready to 
palaver some more with our friends 
outside,” the Captain said easily, 
taking a chair beside the bed. 
“No, I’m not. I don’t care if I 
never see this miserable planet 
again.” 
“Ah, well, no matter. We’re 
making satisfactory cargo exchange. But we miss you.” 
“Like hell you do!” 
“You’re getting better, I see. But 
really we do. Everybody counts in 
this little world of ours.” The Captain leaned back and stared philosophically at the ceiling. “You 
know, I often wonder how the starships are going to end up. We’re 
like little planets all by ourselves, 
except nobody can get on and nobody can get off. We can have children here to take our places as we 
die. But what will happen to them? 
Will the Starbom go on, generation 
after generation? How will they 
keep it from wearing out? Its parts 
can’t be replaced by uncharged 
material. I’ll bet you didn’t think of 
that when you signed on.” 
“No, I didn’t.” 
“But you have to think of it now. 
There can never be any human 
contacts outside the world of this 
ship.” 
“We all know that.” The Cap
tain’s sermonizing irritated Jaro. 
“Nobody’s going to try to get off.” 
“Sometimes just the wanting can 
make a man sick. You get attached 
to something or someone outside.” 
“Like what?” Jaro demanded. 
“Well — like the pretty Controller 
back at Whittier. That kind of 
wanting could make alnan awfully 
sick.” 
Jaro felt a coldness in his belly. 
“She’s nothing to me.” 
“I hope not. Understand that all 
the human beings you’ll ever know 
are right here abroad this ship. 
Now, take Rosilla. She’s a nice person. She’d like a permanent commitment. It wouldn’t be a bad arrangement. You have no permanent 
attachments, and that’s what makes 
a man think too much about the 
outside.” 
“That’s not my trouble.” 
“Good. To make sure, we’ll 
apply surveillance. We need you, 
Jaro. You’re a fine pilot. We don’t 
want you to get into trouble. We 
need you to train the next generation of pilots.” 
Jaro nodded wearily. 
Heath nodded and rose to go. 
“Good. Get some rest now. You’ll 
be back on your feet in no time.” 
Jaro closed his eyes. He felt a 
loneliness, as immense as all the 
Universe. He heard the door then, 
opened his eyes to Rosilla. 
He waited until she was by the 
bed. “Where’s the picture?” 
She stood frozen a moment. “In 
the drawer,” she said finally. 
“Get it.” 
She laid the picture of Mara 
Summers in Jaro’s hand. The pilot 
put it down and looked up at the 
woman. 
“Help me, Rosilla,” he said. 
“How, Jaro? How can I help 
you?” 
“Have you ever wanted anything 
so much that nothing else in the 
entire rest of the Universe mattered 
at all?” 
Rosilla nodded, hoping he could 
read her heart. “Yes, I have, Jaro,” 
she said softly. 
“That’s the way it is with me. 
Will you help me?” 
He was suddenly drifting away 
from her at the speed of light. She 
felt cold inside but managed to 
nod. “I’ll help you. What can I 
do?” 
“I want to see Mara. I have to see 
her — not an image on a screen, but 
her — ^just once.” 
“That’s impossible! You can 
nev,er see her.” 
“There’s a way. I can do it if you 
will help me.” 
“Whatever you’re thinking will 
probably kill you. What can I do?” 
S URVEILLANCE meant a constant 
watch by another crew member, who would report any suspect 
activity on the part of the one under 
surveillance. It meant severe restrictions when the ship was in 
port, particularly on Earth. Jaro 
guessed Rosilla had been assigned 
surveillance over him. It didn’t 
matter. He had to trust that his 
appeal would touch her. 
Starborn's next stopover was 
Boro, a minor world about fifty 
light years from Sigler IV. The 
remainder of the Starborn\ cargo 
was to be cached there for later 
transfer to more distant points, and 
the ship was to pick up waiting 
cargo for Earth. The planet had a 
communication relay station. 
“I’ve got to make a call,” Jaro 
said to Rosilla. “I can’t get off the 
ship alone, but if Dr. Pavan agrees 
that I need a walk in the fresh air 
and you go with me I can do it. Will 
you talk to Pavan?” 
“If the Captain ever finds out — ” 
“I know. Will you do it?” 
“All right. So I’m crazy, too. I’ll 
see.” 
“Thanks.” 
Jaro had been on his feet in his 
quarters and on the main decks for 
several days. He was weak, but he 
began to feel as if he would lick the 
Sigleran bug, after all. On the 
other hand, he was not likely to survive the obsession to see Mara, but 
it was something he had to do. 
Rosilla obtained approval for 
Jaro to leave the ship. Together, 
THE TOUCH OF YOUR HAND 
they strolled into the murky fog of 
Boro on the afternoon of the landing. They walked to the compound 
of buildings that housed the contingent of technicians and cargo 
handlers that manned the outpost. 
Jaro nodded toward a windowless 
stone cube that huddled below a 
massive time-shifter antenna. “That 
must be the communications building.” 
The operator looked up cordially 
as Jaro and Rosilla entered. He 
didn’t get many visitors. 
“I’d like to send a personal 
message home,” said Jaro. 
“Earth?” 
“Right.” 
“That’ll cost you a bundle! Use 
your ship’s channel. Nobody can afford a personal message from 
here.” 
“We’re sticky about things like 
that on our ship. Can you get me a 
channel now? I can afford it.” 
“Whatever you say.” 
A crewman’s pay was enormous 
and almost impossible to spend. 
Jaro had allowed his to accumulate 
in a bank on Earth. He wrote a 
check which wiped out his assets 
and made a sizable dent in those of 
the bank. 
Mara should be off duty at this 
time. He hoped she would be home. 
Then, as the operator indicated the 
channel connection, Jaro took his 
place in the single, seldom-used 
booth for private communication. 
The screen brightened as a surprised and sleepy Mara appeared. 
She frowned and shook her head, 
disbelieving. 
“Jaro! Where are you?” 
“Boro. A minor planet in — it 
doesn’t matter. Listen. I have to 
talk to you.” 
“This is a private channel. It will 
cost a fortune! Why didn’t you call 
me from the ^hip?” 
“I can’t. The tapes are being 
monitored. Listen, I have only a 
few seconds. I want to see you, 
Mara. Not a pattern of phosphor 
dots, but you.'' 
“Jaro, oh, 7aro ...” Tears started in her eyes; declared the impossibility of what he was saying. 
“No! Listen to me. There is a 
way. Stand at the far end of the 
cargo ramp at noon the day after 
we strike orbit. You’ll be able to 
learn when the cargo is due. *Be 
there when it is. I’ll be on the top of 
the ramp, and I’ll see you from 
there.’ 
“No, Jaro! You can’t! You know 
that—” 
“Mara, I can. I know a way. And 
I’ve got to do it. Mara, I’ve got to 
look at you just once. Please be 
there. It’s the only time we’ll ever 
really see each other. Just once — ” 
“Jaro—” 
He was cut off as she sobbed his 
name. 
E KNEW how he could do it. 
The cargo was brought down 
from the orbiting Starborn by 
shuttle and transferred to the discharge-chambers. There, the timecharge accumulated during the trip 
from Sigler IV would be discharged. Jaro intended to pass through 
the discharging chambers with the 
cargo. 
It would have only a partial 
effect, a very small percentage, 
since it would kill him to try to 
relieve any sizable amount of his 
time-charge. But it would reduce 
his charge enough to enable him to 
breathe normal air without burning 
up — or at least to burn only 
slowly — for a few minutes. It would 
enable him to walk on the substance of Earth for a minute or two. 
That’s all he asked. 
In those minutes he would be 
looking upon Mara. Not an image 
of light and shadow. Mara herself. 
But without Rosilla’s help he 
could not manage it. On the journey home she moved into his quarters and they published their commitment. There was quite a celebration among the crew but Jaro 
wasn’t sure of Captain Heath’s reaction. The Captain stood aside 
and watched^ Jaro with quizzical 
eyes. 
As the Starborn approached 
Earth Jaro feigned a relapse. He 
retreated to his quarters and Pavan 
made a cursory examination. The 
doctor had never understood Jaro’s 
condition, so this new turn engendered no suspicion. 
Because of his “illness,” Jaro — 
and Rosilla — remained behind on 
the Starborn as it orbited Earth, 
with only a skeleton maintenance 
crew and cargo handlers. All the 
rest of the crew went down on the 
personnel shuttle to the insulated 
palace that would be their home 
while on Earth. 
It was too easy, Jaro thought. 
Something had to go wrong. He 
had doubts about Rosilla. Was she 
planning even now some way to betray him, keep him from seeing 
Mara? There was no way of knowing. He had to trust her. 
But Rosilla cleared the way and 
stood guard for him and helped 
him into the insulating suit and 
into the cargo holds. There, he 
opened a large transport case of 
Sigleran artifacts and secreted himself. 
Rosilla said, “I won’t see you 
again, will I, Jaro?” 
“It’s not likely. Thanks, Rosilla, 
Thanks for everything.” 
She looked at him tenderly, her 
eyes wet. “Goodbye, Jaro. You big, 
damn’ fool. I hope your one look at 
her is worth it.” 
She secured the side of the case 
lightly. Then Jaro was alone, isolated in total silence and darkness. 
THE TOUCH OF YOUR HAND 
He let his mind scan the sights of 
his seven subjective years aboard 
the Star born, the vast galaxies, the 
whirling suns and endless planets, 
their weird, alien creatures. Once 
upon a time — a long time ago — he 
could not get enough of these 
things. He wondered how it could 
ever have been that way. He was 
tired now. He wanted release from 
the starways. For his kind there was 
only one way out. 
He thought of Mara, and tried to 
picture how she would appear, 
without the intermediation of the 
picture-screen. What would her 
flesh and her hair look like? What 
would it smell like? 
He felt the sudden jolting as the 
belt jerked into motion. He pictured in his mind the conveyor line 
transferring the huge containers 
into the shuttle’s insulated chambers. He felt the shuttle drop beneath him as it broke away from 
the Starbom and spun away toward 
the docks below. Then the braking 
vanes took hold, pressing him 
fiercely into the corner where he 
huddled. 
The shuttle docked, and the containers were belted out again, this 
time to the entrance of the discharge-chambers. Jaro had not 
been sure he would survive this but 
there was only a momentary sense 
of vast, flowing energy, and then it 
was over. He was almost disap
pointed. He could have stood more, 
have lasted longer. 
There was no time to wonder 
now, however. He quickly worked 
himself out of the confining suit, 
breathed. He was not^consumed by 
the atmosphere of Earth, but it was 
like inhaling fire. He knew his 
lungs would soon be burned away. 
He pried open the side of the 
container and forced his way out, 
bathed in sweat and burning from 
contact with the sweet, fresh air of 
Earth. He prayed that Mara would 
be waiting. If not — but that would 
not bear thinking about. There was 
no way to get back to the safety of 
the shuttle even if he survived. 
He was on a conveyor that 
rumbled along the insulated ramp 
to the warehouse. He had to stay on 
the insulated ramp. The air in his 
lungs and on his skin was consuming him fast enough. To step on 
uninsulated substance of Earth 
would bring instant dissolution. 
Then he heard her cry out. He 
saw her. 
M ara was at the foot of the 
ramp, only two hundred feet 
away. 
He jumped off the conveyor and 
stood beside the track. The cargo 
moved on, the rumbling quieting 
now so that he heard her voice. 
“Jaro!” 
They looked at each other. 
And this is what it was all for, he 
thought. 
It was worth the price. 
She was all the brightest dreams 
he had ever dreamed on the starways. She was all the wonder and 
tender glory he had ever imagined. 
She was his. Even though they 
could never touch, she was his. 
Across a hundred million light 
years and the unfathomable paradoxes of time he had claimed her. 
“Mara,” he said softly, 
“Jaro — Jaro — ” 
He wondered what it would have 
been like to have walked in the 
night with her hand in his, the wind 
in their faces. He wondered what it 
would have been like to hold her 
fiercely and tenderly in his arms. 
And then suddenly she was running toward him. 
“No — Mara! Go back! Don’t 
come up here!” 
She was laughing and weeping, 
too, as she called out to him. 
“I don’t care. I love you, Jaro. 
Nothing else matters — ^nothing in 
the whole Universe!” 
“Mara — it will kill you up here!” 
“I don’t care, I don’t care!” She 
wept and held her arms out to him. 
“Touch my hand, Jaro. Touch 
me — hold me — for as long as we 
have.” 
He stood frozen, watching her 
come closer. What more was there 
for either of them? he thought. 
This was what it all meant — all the 
Galaxies, all the wheeling stars 
meant nothing. This was the only 
meaning in the Universe. 
To touch her. To hold her in his 
arms and feel the touch of her hair 
on his face and the warmth of her 
flesh against him. 
Then be was laughing, too, as he 
flung himself down the ramp, arms 
outstretched. This was the moment 
for which their whole lives had been 
lived. 
He had seen it all — the Galaxies, 
the starpaths — and there was nothing else but this. Mara kne^ it, too; 
never having left Earth she knew ail 
that he had learned over billions of 
light years. 
They touched. Miraculously, they 
touched. For one barely perceptible 
instant they clung to each other in 
wild abandon and loved long eons 
of love in each other’s arms. 
The burst of light shattered the 
tunnel and spread a shining fire 
over the south end of the city. It 
rocked the insulated palace of the 
Starborn's crew. Captain Heath 
watched the flare of light in the 
screens that let the prisoners see the 
external world. He knew what had 
happened. He lifted his glass and 
slowly drank a silent toast. 
His eyes softened as he looked 
across his glass into the far reaches 
of time. “Maybe it was worth it. 
Maybe it was really worth it.” • 
THE TOUCH OF YOUR HAND 
PORTUNISM seems to be on the 
rise among science fiction and 
fantasy novels these days. Opportunism is defined as “a taking advantage of opportunities or circumstances, with little regard for principles” and it always seems to 
follow hard on the heels of any unusually successful novel regardless 
of the subject-matter. Thus, in fantasy, Rosemary's Baby achieved a 
singular success; on the whole, deservedly so. But now we have a 
series of such “shockers” as The 
Exorcist, which fails as either legitimate fantasy or honest fiction. 
Well, science fiction had its suc
cess stories, too. Take the case of 
The Andromeda Strain — a novel 
with large elements of opportunism 
in its structure, which makes it 
even greater prey for other writers 
who care for nothing but a gimmick 
to get large rewards for little 
thought. Here, obviously, the trick 
is to find a menace to the life of 
mankind, stir in a bit of science (or 
what can pass as science to the 
average reader) and never, never let 
consistency stand in the way of sensation. After all, Hollywood has 
been using that formula for years in 
its monster movies. All a writer 
need do, apparently, is find a some
what less obviously silly menace, 
gimmick it in slightly more “adult” 
ways (probably with some sex), and 
make a pretense of developing 
serious characters. 
Occasionally, by some happy accident, the result will be fairly 
good; usually, even in the moderngothic field, opportunism produces 
exceptionally bad fiction. In science 
fiction, the result can be particularly awful. Consistency within its 
postulates, and logic in development are the essential requirements 
of this field and when the writer has 
“little regard for principles” he 
won’t bother with such a minor 
matter as internal logic. 
Unfortunately, such a book often 
makes more money than many an 
honest piece of sf. Outside of the 
regular readers of the field, nobody 
seems to care for logic. 
Thus, The Haphaestus Plague, 
by Thomas Page (Putnam, $5.95), 
has had some rave reviews in the 
newspapers but is a poor novel indeed when judged by science fiction 
standards. (To give it its due, it 
isn’t called science fiction on the 
front or back covers; but the 
featured puff inside says “it’s that 
rare science-fiction work that fascinates with intelligence . .”) 
It deals with an invasion of cockroach-like insects that erupt from 
somewhere inside the Earth. Oh, 
not giant ones! That’s too obvious. 
These are your average every-day 
sized roaches. Their threat comes 
from the fact that they have a sort 
of double stinger behind that somehow generates fire. Whenever 
they’re near combustibles they proceed to burn everything down. 
When they reach the cities, they 
proceed to burn everything in sight. 
The reason they do such a stupid 
thing, you see, is that they live off 
pure carbon. They set the fires to 
free it from its organic compounds, 
one gathers, so that they can eat the 
ashes — now there’s science for you! 
Apparently Page doesn’t know that 
ashes are what remain after the carbon and hydrogen in flammable 
material have been burned away. 
Anyhow, it develops midway 
through the book that they aren’t 
such a menace after all. You see, 
the insects evolved down in the 
Earth under all that pressure. They 
now have extremely high pressure 
inside their hard little bodies and 
can’t operate well when subjected 
to the internal strain caused by our 
lower external pressure. In fact^ 
they can’t breed, and they’ll all be 
dead in another season or so. No 
reason is given for their having such 
gastight bodies; and since they 
seem to breathe air — and must use 
oxygen to utilize carbon as fuel — no 
explanation is given as to why the 
pressure isn’t quickly equalized as 
the excess gas inside them leak^ 
READING ROOM 
away from body to blood and then 
through their breathing membranes. 
Page must have realized at this 
stage that he was losing the suspense of his story— so he hauled off 
and started in a new direction. His 
scientist-hero, Palmiter, decides to 
breed more of the menacing 
critters. (We all know that scientists tend to be mad, and Palmiter 
has always been a bit antisocial.) 
He rigs up a pressure chamber so 
his bugs will feel at home. But now, 
instead of breeding a male and a female Hephaestus bug, he breeds a 
male to a surface cockroach. Why? 
Well, probably because he’s mad! 
You can’t expect sense from scientists. 
First, though, he carefully sets it 
up so any intelligent reader would 
know they can’t possibly be crossfertile. Page has our scientist discover that these new insects have 
seventeen pairs of chromosomes, as 
opposed to six for a normal cockroach. (He also still believes that 
humans have twenty-four chromosome pairs, though it has been 
known for quite a few years that we 
have only twenty-three.) Now in a 
world where even a monkey and an 
ape can’t interbreed anything as 
complex in its structure as a sperm 
of that Hephaestus roach isn’t 
going to be fertile with the ova of an 
ordinary cockroach. But the author 
has used up all his initial plot and 
has to find another in a hurry; so to 
hell with logic. The female lays eggs 
which are miraculously fertile. 
And from there on, we’re given a 
tale where anything can happen, 
including the fact that the young 
crossbreed cockroaches soon learn 
to spell out messages to Palmiter. 
He’s forced to take them back to 
their beloved underworld home, 
which feat he manages in the silliest 
possible manner. And everything 
ends on a kind of reverse-kitsch 
attempt at bitterness. 
It’s an excellent example of what 
can happen to a story where everything is written for its effect on the 
reader rather than any purpose in 
plot. Things that seem important 
turn out to be mere window-dressing; thus, the scientist’s assistant 
is bitten by a Hephaestus bug, with 
suggestions that he’s now invulnerable to disease; but nothing 
comes of it — apparently nobody 
else wants to be immune to all illnesses. 
Most completely not recommended! 
C OLIN free’s The Soft Kill 
(Berkley, 75c) is not so obviously opportunistic, except in the 
material that it takes as its background and theme. It’s tailored to 
seem relevant, apparently, by 
Science fiction’s leading 
monthly celebintes its 
23rd birthday . with 
a special gift certificate 
for you! 
In just two decades GALAXY ASH 
has become the world’s number ^ 
one science fiction monthly. With 7 
a list of contributors that reads \ r 
like a who’s who of sci>fi ^ 9 Y 
greats ... i 
. Poul Anderson, Isaac ; ^ > 
Asimov, Alfred Bester, Robert 
Bloch, Ray Bradbury, Arthur C. 
Clarke, L. Sprague de Camp, '* 
Lester del Ray, Robert A. Heinlein, Frank 
Herbert, Ursula LeGuin, Frederick Pohl, Harlan Ellison, Robert Silverberg, Theodore 
Sturgeon, A. E. Van Vogt . and many, 
many others. 
This year we’re celebrating our 23rd an
ISAAC 
ASIMOV 
ov niversary And to help you celeI I brate with us, GALAXY offers this 
ni||L 1 1 special anniversary bonus; 12 
I gala issues for only $6.00, a 
mi I $3.00 saving over the regular 
I subscription price. 
Imagine enjoying today’s 
latest and best science 
I fiction — never before published 
- - •• • short stories, novellas, even 
complete novels — for just 50/c an issue. 
That’s far less than you’d pay for a sci-fi 
paperback of comparable quality. 
Join us now for a great year of science 
fiction reading ... at a price you can’t afford 
to miss. 
covering such fresh ideas as overpopulation, a world going to the 
dogs, and the purposelessness of 
life. And its development seems to 
seek the sensational use of such 
material. 
But it is definitely opportunistic 
in its lack of regard for the basic 
principles of science fiction — and 
this novel is clearly labeled science 
fiction. 
It all starts when Martin Clay is 
called down from his work in an 
orbiting satellite and mysteriously 
taken to High-Town, where we find 
all the bigshots who direct America 
in its struggle against foreign 
enemies and overpopulation. From 
there on all kinds of things happen 
and they all might just as well not 
have happened. 
For one thing, there is never any 
good reason the reader can see for 
the bigshots having summoned 
Clay in the first place', things that 
pass as reasons are mentioned, but 
none make sense. He’s certainly 
treate^i with contempt or disregard 
most of the time. And it never 
seems to occur to the author that 
telling the hero what it was all 
about might have resulted in his being more useful — though, of course, 
that might have destroyed what 
passes as the “plot.” 
With lots of effort the idea can be 
pieced together from the novel that 
the bigshots seem to be trying to 
control the population explosion; 
not very intelligently, however. 
Their best answer seems to be stirring up some kind of a war — which, 
of course, they are nominally trying 
to avoid. Such things as sterilization 
programs, anti-fertility drugs, taxes 
on excess children get mentioned, 
but are not followed up. 
Instead of any visible logic, we’re 
treated to a confused development 
of what seem to be plots and counterplots, most of which indicate 
that the men in control at HighTown are all insane. Maybe that’s 
the deep message of the novel — that 
the whole world, including the 
bosses, is mad and totally irresponsible. 
And yet that doesn’t fit with what 
we see. High-Town is an engineering marvel, and was obviously built 
by someone who knew what he was 
doing. But it never seems to bother 
the author that a group capable of 
building such a city and maintaining it couldn’t act the way he makes 
his characters behave. Again, a 
total disregard for consistency in 
background and action. 
The decline of our world from 
overpopulation and pollution may 
be relevant — even if not exactly 
fresh material for science fiction; 
but I can’t find anything relevant in 
this offering of bad fiction for the 
reader’s money. 
Pass it by. 
AS 1 indicated before, a book that 
I\. begins opportunistically does 
not have to be bad; if the writer is 
honest and competent, if he’s 
willing to think out his ideas and 
treat his characters seriously, he 
can take even a publisher’s idea of 
something designed to fit into a 
market slot and turn it into perfectly acceptable science fiction. 
Such seems to be the direction in 
which the Cap Kennedy series is 
moving. Generally, most seriescharacter books in which the hero 
is some kind of a world-saver tend 
to be imitative of the worst features 
of all its predecessors, beginning 
with Doc Savage as an example. 
These novels generally degenerate 
into mechanical plot formulae with 
the hero surrounded by a gang of 
stick figures whose only purpose is 
to fill in space between the hero’s 
action scenes. 
As I reported, the first of the Cap 
Kennedy novels seemed to avoid all 
the faults of this type of story, but 
while the characters were not cut 
out of the standard smart-aleck 
material they still didn’t emerge as 
true characters, and the story was 
only adequate. 
Looking at the third novel, Monster of Metelaze, by Gregory Kem 
(DAW Books, 75c), there has been 
considerable development, and the 
future of the series begins to look 
interesting. 
THE ALIEN CRITIC 
An Informal Science 
Fiction & Fantasy Journal 
Articles — Interviews — 
Reviews — Letters 
Columnists; JOHN BRUNNER 
and TED WHITE 
Scheduled for #8: ‘Tomorrow’s 
Libido— Sex and Science Fiction", an eye-opening survey by 
Richard Delap. 
Scheduled for #9: INSIDE HEINLEIN, a fascinating 13,000 word 
psycho-cultural analysis— 
“Reading Heinlein Subjectively” 
by Alexei & Cory Panshin. 
Every Issue; “THE ARCHIVES" 
—new book and story lists. 
Sample $l./$4. year/ 
$7. two years 
Alien Critic, POB 11408, 
Portland, OR 97211 
reading room 
By now, Kem is beginning to feel 
at home with his characters. Kennedy is no superman, though he is 
given some pretty extreme abilities; 
but while he’s a little larger than 
life, he is neither invulnerable nor 
exalted above government control. 
He has to use his skills — and his 
brains — without resorting to any 
sudden miraculous inventions or 
tricks. 
And now the lesser characters 
around him are beginning to 
emerge as fairly real people. The 
old scientist is developing some 
depth and still shows no dangerous 
tendency to become a super-genius 
nor a man who knows everything 
about every subject. The others are 
also finding their places, so that 
Kennedy now has a believable and 
workable team at his side. 
Even the villain in this novel is 
fairly well developed. He’s a dictator, but not quite the megalomaniac he might be; in fact, while 
he has to be defeated by Kennedy, 
we can almost feel sorry for him. 
There also seems to be developing 
throughout the series a background 
menace from an Ancient Race 
which offers good opportunities for 
greater revelations to come. 
The writing is on a good, professional level, and the series looks 
promising. I found this novel enjoyable enough for casual reading 
and worth the price. Beyond that. 
I’ll wait for later development. 
S TRANGELY, it sometimes seems 
that a writer can be too careful 
and honest in his thinking through 
of a story — or at least, he may 
develop the total story in such a way 
that the beginning seems less than 
it turns out eventually to be. That is 
the case with The Orchid Cage, by 
Herbert W. Franke (DAW Books, 
95 c). Franke has a fine reputation 
in Germany, and was a Guest of 
Honor at the World Science Fiction 
Convention in Heidelberg, 1970. 
This is the first novel of his I’ve had 
a chance to read, and I was curious 
about how well his reputation 
might stand up in translation. 
The basic idea seemed interesting. A world has been discovered 
where a highly advanced race once 
lived, but which now seems to be 
unpopulated and in ruins. A team 
of men are sent to explore it, and 
they run into some strange situations. There are no signs of life, but 
the city is far from dead. What 
seem to be the living quarters of the 
former inhabitants still operate to 
gratify every wish of anyone inside 
them — but only if that person 
knows how to operate them. And 
near the apparently long-deserted 
heart of the city, the explorers find 
activity still going on. A pageant is 
played out before their eyes, like a 
play out of Earth’s Middle Ages. It 
turns out to be a sort of camouflage 
to conceal the secrets of the city. 
Then we begin to find that there 
is another team and that it is trying 
to discover the secret of the city before the first team can. It also is 
composed of human beings and is 
headed by one of the two discoverers of the planet — ^just as our 
team is headed by the other. 
By then, I found myself getting 
highly impatient with the characters — and the conflict with the 
other team only increased it. The 
people all seemed to act like a 
group of silly children. One girl in 
particular, though an adult — seemed to have all the warmth and 
charm of a badly spoiled, selfish 
ten-year-old. The two groups meet 
and battle like a couple of petty 
street gangs caring for nothing 
beyond the lowest kind of machismo — in fact, they don’t even seem 
to have street-gang ethics, however 
low those may be. 
It gets worse. In the end, after 
having recklessly tried to use a nuclear bomb to break open what may 
be the priceless secrets of the city, 
only two of the characters survive. 
However, something strange has 
been going on all along. So far as 
we can tell at the end of Book I, our 
“hero” — if you can call him that — 
has been killed. When he wakes up 
next morning I wondered if I’d 
missed something — and couldn’t 
The Secret Galactics 
From one of the top writers in the 
entire fieid of science-fiction— one 
of his greatest novels. “The Secret 
Galactics” is a taut and exciting 
tale of battle for control of the world 
between a group of alien creatures 
disguised as ordinary humans— 
and— the still-living but disembodied brain of a great scientist 
mounted in a mobile fortress. 
Must reading for every sciencefiction fan! 
$2.45 at your bookstore, 
or write to: 
Mr. Joseph Sc haum burger, 
Dept. 6344-EK9) 
Prentice-Hall, Inc. 
West Nyack, New York 10994 
READING ROOM 
find any missing clue. But then he 
continues getting killed — apparently — but sticking with us. 
It all sounds like a mess. But it 
isn’t. In Book III, everything is accounted for and we find that there 
is a beautifully logical reason for 
every seeming fault of characterization and rationality. This whole 
fracas on the planet also has a 
meaning and relationship to what 
goes on back on Earth and everything is illuminated quite nicely. In 
fact, what looked like faulty handling on the author’s part is revealed as excellent characterization and 
a great deal of hard and logical 
thinking. 
Franke obviously deserves his 
reputation and I hope we’ll have a 
chance to see more of his work. It 
isn’t a book for the reader who 
wants to get into a story at once 
with no need for any thought from 
there on; but for the reader who 
will stay to the end and suspend 
judgment until he finishes it, this is 
a novel I most heartily recommend. 
I CAN also recommend Traitor to 
the Living, by Philip Jose 
Farmer (Ballantine, $1.25). As he 
often does. Farmer has picked a 
theme that is difficult to handle 
and handles it well. 
Basically, this novel deals with 
the announcement that a scientist 
has discovered a way to get in touch 
with the “spirits” of the dead. And 
he’s ready to demonstrate to the 
skeptic. Carfax, that this is no 
hoax. Carfax is shown what is purported to be a relative who died recently. But this isn’t the spirit 
world of all the mediums of the 
past. Instead, the souls (?) of the 
dead seem to be only parts in a 
complex arrangement. And if they 
really are souls, the arrangement 
isn’t one to delight them. They 
seem to be trying to exchange themselves for now-living souls — anything for a chance to be back in the 
world we know. 
Then Carfax discovers proof that 
the scientist is a fraud and swindler — and that he must be genuine, 
because there’s evidence that some 
of the dead are being placed in living bodies for reasons that may endanger everything good in society. 
Carfax has his troubles cut out 
for him, and nothing turns out to 
be simple. Farmer’s ending sews 
things up with fewer words after the 
final crisis than I’ve found in almost any other book. To some 
extent, the ending is more implicit 
than explicit — but it must become 
* evident to anyone who has read that 
far, and it does sew things up — 
Farmer is never opportunistic. 
A nice idea — or maybe not so 
nice, but at least fascinating; and a 
good adventure thriller on top of it. 
Recommended. • 
SCIENCE FICTION: TODAY & TOMORROW, eSSays OH SF by 
Sturgeon, Bova, Pohl, Clement, McCaffrey, Anderson, Dickson and others. Cloth $8.95 
OUR CHILDREN'S CHILDREN, by Clifford Simak. Major 
new novel. Cloth ...$5.95 
HIERO'S JOURNEY, by Sterling Lanier. Cloth. .$6.95 
WHEN ELEPHANTS LAST IN THE DOORYARD BLOOMED, by 
Ray Bradbury. Verse collection. Cloth $5.95 
AN ATLAS OF FANTASY, compiled by J. B. Post. Tremendous volume of fantasy maps. Oz, Middle Earth, 
Barsoom, Witch World, Zothique, Dying Earth, Narnia, Mongo, Chairman Island, Pellucidar, Prydain, 
Earthsea, many, many more. Cloth $20.00 
Paper $12.00 
THE LISTENERS, by James Gunn. Novel. Cloth. .$6.95 
THE SCIENCE FICTION NOVEL, essays by Heinlein, C. 
M. Kombluth, Alfred Bester, Bloch. Cloth.. $5. 00 
Paper. .$2.25 
RED SHIFT, by Alan Gamer. Novel. Cloth. .... .$4.95 
BILLION YEAR SPREE: THE TRUE HISTORY OF SCIENCE 
FICTION, by Brian Aldiss. Cloth $7.95 
A REQUIEM FOR ASTOUNDING, by Alva Rogers. History 
of Astounding SF 1936-1960. Cloth $7.00 
Paper $2.75 
THE DAY THE SUN STOOD STILL, novellas by Silverberg, Dickson § Anderson. Cloth..... $5.95 
MASTER OF MIDDLE EARTH, by Paul H. Kocher. Definitive study of J. R. R. Tolkien. Cloth $5.95 
Paper. .$2.95 
Postpaid from: T-K GRAPHICS, Dept. G, PO Box 
imore. MD 21203. Catalog free. 
T oday I said Daddy. “Daddy,” I 
said. Clear. Just like that, the 
way Tve been trying to for so long. 
Daddy wasn’t around yet, so I 
rolled over and practiced saying it. 
It’s not an easy thing to say, but it’s 
lots easier than Fingers. I don’t 
think I’ll ever get Fingers right. I 
keep trying but it comes out all 
funny and shrill. Even so. Fingers 
knows 1 mean her when 1 make that 
sound. Twofoots are pretty smart. 
Daddy thinks Fingers should 
come in here with me when he does. 
I think he just wants to see her 
without that extra skin she usually 
wears. But Daddy puts on an extra 
skin for the tank anyway, so maybe 
that’s not it. 
Daddy feels Fingers with his 
eyes. She pretends Daddy isn’t 
there feeling her but she knows. 
She tries to stay away from him but 
she can’t except when he’s in the 
tank with me. Then she tries not to 
look at him. Sometimes when she 
does she changes color. Daddy 
hasn’t explained. I wish he would. 
I can’t understand why she stays 
away from Daddy. After all, they 
are adults and well made. She has 
no other mate or offspring and 
neither does he. He said once she 
has “hang-ups” and so that might 
be what’s keeping them from mating. I don’t have words enough to 
ask him what she has hung, but 
when he said it he looked angry so 
maybe it’s a good idea I didn’t try. 
My mate is in the sea jand I’m 
going back to her soon. The Twofoots are almost finished with me. 
Daddy says they’ve found out what 
they want to know about dolphins, 
which is what the Twofoots call us. 
The Boss thought it would be 
nice to get some money (?) out of 
this after all the work they’ve done. 
He wanted to sell me because there 
are a lot of places that would pay 
good money for a speech-trained 
dolphin. Daddy said no because 
they promised to let me go when 
they brought me here. 
A whole bunch of Twofoots that 
Daddy called The Foundation — a 
foundation is what holds buildings 
up; Daddy didn't tell me what this 
bunch held up — came in here and 
talked to me, and then they talked 
at the Boss. Twofoots talk loud 
when they want to feel important. 
They, all talked loud. And Boss 
pushed at one of the Foundation 
with a balled-up hand. Hands are 
the tentacled part of their flipper, 
which they call an arm. I can’t push 
things with my flipper, only with 
my nose. 
When they are speaking Twofoots make many strange noises. 
There are several I cannot duplicate, although I’ve tried. It’s partly 
because they breathe through a 
mouth and the bump just above it, 
the nose. They grow find strands of 
special skin called hair all over 
their headtops, so they couldn’t 
breathe properly even if they had a 
blowhole in the right place. The 
Boss doesn’t have hair all over his 
headtop but he still has a nose. 
Fingers says the Boss is “bald” so 
maybe that makes him special. 
This bald is an ability I haven’t 
figured out yet. I haven’t got 
enough words. There’s so much to 
learn. 
I found out something the other 
day that worries me a bit. /Twofoots 
can’t hum in water to find their 
way. They can only go by sight and 
feel. This surprised me, because 
Daddy made such a big thing about 
my humming. It isn’t humming 
really, but that’s the only word 
Twofoots have for it. Daddy can’t 
say my word for it. 
That’s another thing. Daddy 
calls it semantics. It’s about what 
words mean. He says it’s very important to know what words mean 
and that when I have more of his 
words and he has more of mine 
then we can really talk. That would 
be good. I wish I knew what goes on 
in Twofoots’ minds. 
The dish on the wall is past right 
angles. That means Daddy is late. 
He always gets here just before 
right angles except on every seventh 
day. He says that is a rest day. He 
goes boating on rest days. 
Daddy is always here just before 
right angles. Fingers is usually here 
by then, too. Maybe they’re mating. That might make them late. 
No. Fingers just came in. She is 
shaped like all the Twofoot females. 
She goes in and out a lot and has 
some big nursers on her. Daddy 
thinks this is good. Daddy calls her 
Felicity, or sometimes Sees. She 
calls him Dr. Reynard and once in 
a while Tad. 
This business of callings is pretty 
strange to me. I have my one name 
which is my name and not like any 
other. Daddy tells me that many 
Twofoots have the same names, 
and sometimes all th^ir names are 
the same. He has four names. The 
Doctor part, he says, is added. He 
calls it a title. Then he is called 
Simeon. After that he is called Preston. Or Tad. He says that’s part of 
Preston. He calls it a nickname. 
Nick is a little cut, so I think this 
means they cut his name. He didn’t 
tell me how they cut names. 
The last of his names confuses 
me the most. It is Reynard. He told 
me it is French for Fox. French is 
another way of speaking. He says 
that all people don’t say the same 
things the same way. When he says 
people he means Twofoots, not us. 
We’re dolphins. 
Daddy speaks English. But his 
name is French. But the English 
word for his French name is Fox 
and a fox is a kind of wild dog. If I 
had more words I would ask him 
why he calls himself by another language when there is a word in hiS 
own that would do. These Twofoots 
are very strange. 
F ingers is working hard. She 
usually makes friendly sounds 
in the morning before Daddy comes 
in. But Daddy is late and she is not 
making those sounds. Daddy also 
makes those sounds; he calls it singing. I wonder if his being late has 
something to do with her not 
singing? I wish I could ask Daddy. 
He better hurry up and get here. 
I want to show him how I’ve 
learned to call him. He’ll be happy. 
I think I’ll splash Fingers. She’s 
all busy with one of the things she 
touches. It looks like a flat wall of 
mollusks. Daddy calls it a monitor. 
He says it watches what we do and 
makes a record of it. I can’t see any 
eyes on it but Daddy says it sees. It 
doesn’t hum. And it doesn’t tell me 
things. It only tells things to 
Fingers. Maybe there are things I 
can’t see in it. Daddy will tell me 
when we both have more words. We 
can catch up with each other. 
“Good morning. Miss Amaris,” 
Daddy says as he comes in. 
“Good morning, Doctor Reynard.’’ I like to hear them talk like 
that, all crisp’. They are communicating information. He says that’s 
what talking is for. That words tell 
things and explain. He just said 
good morning, just like that. I 
guess I was wrong about the trouble 
between him and Fingers. 
“Hi there, Tddeddtch!’’ calls 
Daddy, waving. He’s got my name 
down pretty well. He gave me a 
nickname. He calls me Deech 
sometimes. I can’t tell him that 
that’s my brother’s name. 
About this waving. They do a lot 
of weird things with their flippers. 
But they have hands, and the 
flipper parts are so long and stringy 
that they can do things like that 
easily. It looks wrong. 
“Daddy! Daddy! Daddy!” I yell 
at him. I push up on my tail and 
slap water at him, still going 
“Daddy!” happily. 
“Deech! Deech! You did it!” He 
jumps into the water with me, 
making a lot of noise. I spin him 
around a couple of times, just to 
show off, and he pats my side as I 
slide by. 
“Did you hear that. Sees? Deech 
finally got my name right.” 
“Very good. Doctor,” she says 
without turning around. She is 
clicking the things on her feet 
TRAINING TWOFOOTS 
against the floor very hard. Her feet 
aren’t made like that. Twofoot females have feet just like the males. 
This seems to make Daddy 
angry, and his face gets that sharp 
look that he uses to show anger. 
Twofoots have a whole set of ways 
to use their faces. It seems to be 
pretty much the same set for all. 
“Miss Amaris, will you please 
tell me what the monitor indicated 
when Deech said my name?’’ He is 
talking in a way the Twofoots call 
cold. 
“I’m afraid I wasn’t watching the 
panel just then, Doctor. Would you 
like me to program a check on it?’’ 
“Never mind. I’ll see it when we 
go over the records at noon.’’ 
“Yes, Doctor Reynard.’’ 
I nudge Daddy for a bit, trying to 
get him to play. But he isn’t really 
interested. He keeps watching Fingers over his shoulder, feeling her 
with his eyes, trying to make her 
turn around and change color. 
I pick up a few new words myself 
but Daddy can’t keep his mind on 
the words I tell him. He tries to say 
them and then glares at Fingers for 
a while. I never before saw any 
creature that makes such a fuss 
about matings. If any people had 
told me that the clever Twofoots let 
matings interfere with their lives so 
much I wouldn’t have believed it. 
By the time noon comes. Daddy 
is breathing hard and it isn’t because of our work. He pulls himself 
out of the tank and slams the door 
as he leaves. Fingers makes a point 
of not watching this. This is very 
strange, even for Fingers. 
I push up out of the water calling 
to her. I can’t say Fingers at all. It 
comes out “Veegees!” but she 
knows I mean her and she turns 
around and asks me, “Well?’’ 
If I had the words I would tell her 
that she should go find Daddy and 
get it over with. But I speak as the 
people speak, and she doesn’t 
understand me. She gets all tightlooking and goes out the door. 
There has got to be a way to fix 
this. Fingers and Daddy are going 
to ruin themselves. They are acting 
like crazy tuna who get so frightened they swim into the nets they are 
trying to avoid. 
I swim around and around the 
tank, thinking. I have watched 
Daddy do this on his feet. He calls 
it pacing. If you’re around Twofoots enough, you get to be like 
them. 
B y the time noon is over I have 
an idea. Usually Fingers comes 
back and gets some papers ready. 
Then Daddy comes in wearing the 
normal kind of Twofoot male 
second skin and they go over all the 
things the monitor says. Then 
Daddy goes and puts on his tank 
skin and he spends the afternoon in 
here with me. This time it is going 
to be different. 
Here comes Fingers, making 
those sharp sounds with her feet. 
She closes the door and goes over to 
her monitor. Now is when I start . 
I push up on my tail and start 
slapping water at her. She just pretends not to notice at first. So I 
splash harder. The sea color of her 
extra skin gets darker. Her face 
gets that Twofoot sharp look. 
“All right, Deech, stop it right 
now.” 
I really slap at her this time. 
“Damn it.” She starts toward the 
tank, bright and hard-eyed. “I told 
you to stop it. I know you understand me. You understand well 
enough when Tad tells you to do 
something.” 
A great bright curl of water goes 
over her. She steps back. I want her 
to come nearer. I sink down and 
come close to the edge, calling 
softly. 
This is just what I wanted. She 
comes back toward, me. ‘T know 
you don’t mean any harm, Dee — ” 
I rise up on my tail, putting my 
nose through her legs and tossing 
her over my back mto the tank. 
She makes a wonderful singing 
noise until she hits the water. 
I call “Daddy! Daddy!” a few 
times, and Fingers does too. I keep 
swimming around her, looking like 
I’m trying to help her but keeping 
her from getting to the edge. She 
doesn’t swim very well. 
In a short while Daddy bursts 
through the door, looking^ to see 
what is wrong. He sees me trying to 
help Fingers and her thrashing all 
around. He comes into the tank 
head first, heading for Fingers, I 
shove her gently underwater just to 
make it a little more interesting. 
Soon Daddy has an arm around 
Fingers and is pulling her to the 
edge of the tank. I get behind and 
give them a push to help. 
Daddy gets out first while I hold 
onto Fingers, who Daddy says has 
fainted — she’s limp. I haven’t seen 
a Twofoot do this before. I don’t 
think it happens very often. Daddy 
takes her arms and slides her out. 
When she is resting on the wet 
floor. Fingers opens her eyes. 
“Tad—” 
Daddy puts his hand on her 
mouth, which makes her stop talking. It might mean that he wants 
her to eat his fingers, but I don’t 
think so. I’ve said they do a lot of 
weird things with their arms and 
hands. 
“Oh, Tad, he pushed me in.” 
“Shush,” says Daddy. 
“But he did. Tad. Truly. Oh, 
you don’t believe me — ” 
“You’re just frightened. Here,” 
he says, rubbing his hands on her 
arms. The skin on her is tiny 
bumps. So is his. I’ve seen this 
happen before. There is something 
in here called air-conditioning. It 
makes twofoots cold, 
“But he did. He did.” 
“All right, maybe you both got 
confused. But don’t take it out on 
him. I’m sure he never meant to 
hurt you. You saw how he tried to 
help you.’^ 
She moves her head up and 
down. Her big eyes are dark and 
watery. She looks pretty strange 
TRAINING TWOFOOTS 
even for a Twofoot, with her outer 
skin all tight to her other skin and 
her headtop hair all flat and 
drippy. She’s leaning more against 
Daddy, making some little sounds 
almost like people’s talk, very short 
and hard to understand though. All 
the water in her eyes has started to 
run out. 
“Oh, Sees,’’ Daddy says, reaching over and drawing her head 
against his shoulder. He wraps an 
arm around her and starts talking. 
He pats her with long sideways motions of his hand. Fingers seems to 
like this. She goes limp against 
him, but I don’t think this is fainting because her eyes are still open. 
Limp is not the right word. More 
kind of soft and slidy. 
“Tad — ’’ She turns those great 
big wet eyes up at him. 
This thing that they do next is 
puzzling. They have got their 
mouths together tight. I saw Boss 
do something like that when one of 
the other Twofoots had been 
breathing water, so maybe Daddy 
thinks because she’s got water in 
her eyes she breathed some. 
W HEN they are through with 
that, she keeps close against 
him, quiet and shivery. Maybe they 
are going to mate after all. I push 
up on my tail and watch them, but 
this time I don’t splash them at all. 
I tell them that it is all right to go 
on. I don’t mind. Really. I’m 
curious. They have some very 
strange ways, these Twofoots. 
I don’t think Daddy bas understood what I said, but then one of 
those looks comes into his eyes, the 
way he looks when he figures something out. He says a couple of 
things to Fingers, kind of fast and 
low so I don’t catch them. She 
makes some answers. 
I slip back down into the water, 
watching them as they get to their 
feet. 
While Fingers goes for another 
skin, Daddy stands and looks down 
at me, his mouth pulled back like 
mine. 
“I’ve got to hand it to you, old 
boy. You’re a genius,’’ he says. 
I don’t know what he wants to 
hand to me, but the words sound 
good. 
“Thanks, Deech.’’ 
Fingers comes back and they put 
their mouths together again for a 
long time. 
When they get to the door. 
Daddy turns and closes one eye at 
me. He hasn’t done that before. I 
wonder if there is something wrong, 
or if this is part of their courting 
ritual. I told you about the set of 
things they do with their faces. This 
is one thing I haven’t seen before. 
His face is full of happy wrinkles. 
If he’s going to be gone the rest 
of the day, that means that the Boss 
will be in here. His Fingers is a 
much better shape; all round and 
sleek. She doesn’t have a mate any 
more. 
I wonder what I can work out between those two. • 
SO 
t THE ICEMAN 
^ weighting ice from the rmqs of Saturn 
to the Martian colonists was the easiest 
milk-run in the System untii 
fhey plugged in Scanioni 
HUDSON floated near the 
J^Anain port. His lineless freckled 
face and red hair reflected on the 
quartz and mingled with Saturn’s 
sunlit disk. The seething ribbons of 
the planet’s surface fascinated him. 
He could not believe he was more 
than a billion kilometers from 
Earth, lying twenty kilometers off 
Janus. This was Dale’s first berth 
after graduating from the Academy, and while hauling ice from 
Saturn’s rings to Mars colony was 
not as exciting as patrol duty, he 
could hardly wait for the long bum 
that would send the deep-space tug 
SI 
drifting toward the port on Phobos. 
The run, called “the pipeline,” was 
a long way from the family farm in 
Indiana. 
The pilot shuttle crossed the 
port, clanged against the sturdy 
tug. Magnetic docking collars engaged. The tugboat creaked in protest as it absorbed the shuttle’s momentum. Locks cycled, and there 
was some loud swearing and laughing. They cycled again. The shuttle 
drifted back toward Janus station. 
Scraping sounds came from the 
starboard passage as the new crewman floated his duftel to the control room. Then his hundred-kilo 
G.I. duftel bag sailed through the 
hatch and slammed into the sleepwebbing. Dale rolled to get a look 
at the man. 
A short husky type glided in behind the duftel. His shoulders were 
thick add powerful, his waist 
narrow. Heavy muscles rippled 
under the skin-tight space suit. 
Eyeing Dale, the newcomer removed the helmet collar from his neck. 
Curly hair spilled from the skullcap 
as he pulled it oft, and a smile 
creased his darkly tanned face. 
“I’m Julio O’Mally. You’re Dale 
Hudson, right?” 
They shook hands. Dale helped 
Julio stow his gear, then resumed 
the Saturn-gazing. 
“This must be your first run,” 
Julio said, busying himself at the 
communicator board. Dale nodded 
vaguely, mesmerized by the great 
luminous sphere. “Don’t look too 
long. Makes you feel like you’re 
falling into it. Screws up your 
equilibrium.” Julio popped some 
switches, ran a quick radio check. 
“Who’s the skipper. Dale? The 
shuttle mate gave me your name 
but wasn’t sure who commands 
here — ” 
Dale turned and fought the momentary dizziness, unable for a 
moment to focus on the cabin. 
“See?” Julio said. “Told you 
so.” 
“Whoever the skipper is, he 
hasn’t showed his face yet.” Dale 
checked the nameplate on the captain’s console and squinted to read 
the name. “Conrad Scanlon. Do 
you know him?” 
“Scanlon? I’ll be damned! 
Thought he’d been washed out,” 
Julio said, snapping his head 
around. 
“What’s the story on him?” Dale 
asked, surprised by the venom in 
Julio’s voice. 
“Uh, let’s see. Seven years back, 
Scanlon was pushing ice out of 
Deimos. Pirates got a line on him 
as he was picking his way through 
the Belt. When they slammed a 
minitorp into his bow screen Scanlon panicked. He dumped his ice, 
sent the crew out in the escape capsules. Then he rammed the pirates. 
Both ships popped like balloons. 
All the pirates were killed and his 
crew died before we could pick 
them up. Scanlon floated unconscious for a week — the only survivor. They held a general court but 
he got off with a bad judgment.” 
“Is that all — and his two men 
dead?” Dale asked. 
“Well, out here, bad judgment is 
good enough for murder. It takes 
pilot error to bust you out of the 
corp.” Julio busied himself at the 
console. “Still,” he said over his 
shoulder, “I thought he was gone. 
Didn’t think he’d ever space again, 
even hauling ice.” 
Dale watched as Mars emerged 
from behind Saturn’s disk. Then he 
remarked, “I remember that name. 
I read about a Connie Scanlon. 
Would that be him?” 
“Connie was what he went by,” 
Julio said, finishing the check-out 
of his board. 
“It was five years ago, when I 
started at the Academy. They told 
us about the cyborg program. His 
name was one of the first ones.” 
“A cyborg,” Julio snarled. “So 
Connie is a damned cyborg. That’s 
how he got back on a ship! I’m beginning to wish I’d stayed drunk on 
Janus.” 
“What’s wrong with cyborgs?” 
Dale asked, pulling himself down 
to his console and beginning his 
preflight check. 
“They’re not men any more, 
that’s what’s wrong with them. It’s 
like taking orders from machinery. 
They wire them into computers, 
you know. This big plug on the 
chest hooks them into the ship, and 
they live in a big fishbowl. Creepy, 
damn things.” 
Dale’s face had reddened during 
Julio’s outburst. “Shut up. He can 
probably hear us.” 
“You’re damned right he can 
hear us. If he’s a cyborg, the intercom is plugged into him like everything else. I don’t like this, kid. 
Sometimes things get though — and 
that’s when I want a skipper who’s 
flesh and blood. You hear me, 
Connie?” 
The ship was silent. 
E ighteen hours down the pipe. 
Dale was still awake. Saturn’s 
shrinking disk in the screens no 
longer commanded his full attention. Frequently he gazed into the 
blackness of the space ahead. A 
brilliant white pinhead marked the 
sun'. Planets were visible as flecks 
of slowly moving light. 
The whole adventure fascinated 
and thrilled him. Dale knew it was 
silly but he could not stifle his excitement. Besides, hauling ice to 
Mars colony was important — the 
colony would die without the ice 
shipments. And Julio had mentioned pirates. Dale’s heart refused to 
settle down to normal rhythm. 
He wondered about the captain 
and Julio. Spacers were a superstitious lot and some classed cyborgs 
with zombies. But Dale felt there 
had been more behind Julio’s outburst than simply that the captain 
was a cyborg. 
Dale had read about the cyborgs, 
had even considered training to be 
one when the program recruiter 
THE ICEMAN 
had come to the Academy. They 
were the future. They would man 
deep-space probes and the supply 
runs to Pluto station. The recruiter 
had said there were no changes in 
the men except for attachment of 
microscopically fine wires to nerves 
in brain and spine. The impulses 
carried on these ^nerves were transferred to the wires and then 
conducted to transducers. The 
entire ship was run through the 
hook-up. Nerves regulating heartbeat, body temperature and respiration regulated life support systems, and the impulses to the 
muscles ran the engines. The 
trickiest part was hooking the 
ship’s computer into the higher 
brain centers. If the link were done 
properly the computer became an 
integral part of the cyborg’s brain. 
Instant calculations of trajectory, 
pitch and yaw yielded minimumdeviation flight plans that required 
less fuel and less drain on life 
support. These were precious commodities so far from Earth. Also, 
the cyborg had less demanding 
physiological requirements. His 
metabolism ran at a minimum 
since no physical exertion was 
necessary. Drugs slowed it to the 
lowest level needed to maintain 
mental activity. Cyborgs were the 
perfect space explorers. They would 
put everyone else out of a job as 
ssoon as they had established their 
reliability. 
That was what Dale knew about 
cyborgs. But he knew nothing 
about Scanlon as a man. So far 
Dale had not even heard Scanlon’s 
voice over the intercom. Julio’s 
insults were ignored. Countdown 
began, its progress marked solely 
by signals on the consoles. There 
w^s no contact at all with Scanlon. 
The only indication of his presence 
was the continued smooth running 
of the ship and occasional jolts 
from the steering jets. 
Curious and somewhat uneasy, 
Dale decided to tour the trim tug. 
Like all vessels constructed to haul, 
the tug was mostly engines and fuel 
tanks. Eight fusion engines, each 
with a billion-kilo thrust, were set 
out from the ship’s frame so the exhaust cleared the cargo in tow. A 
pair of tanks each held a million 
liters of liquid hydrogen to feed the 
vast engines. They easily accelerated the two billion liters of ice to full 
velocity on the long burn. He could 
not check the ice. It was contained 
in twenty dura-plastic sausages 
linked one behind the other by 
cables. 
Other than tanks and engines, 
the ship consisted of crew livingquarters and compartments housing the life-support systems, the 
computer and the reactor that 
heated the hydrogen to plasma 
temperatures. There was also the 
captain’s berth — a detachable command-module affixed for reasons of 
electronic convenience to the 
underbelly of the vessel, almost an 
autonomous spaceship in its own 
right. For some reason the arrange
ment brought to Dale’s mind an 
image of an ancient dive-bomber, 
torpedo-slung and deadly . 
Dale floated down the starboard 
passage, pulling himself along by 
handholds. He checked supply, 
computer and reactor rooms and 
came back up the port side. Finally 
he checked the captain’s “cabin.” 
Dale knew pretty much what he 
would find. The hatch slid open 
silently. There were no lights on so 
he started to feel around but. lowintensity green illumination came 
up before he could locate the 
switch. 
The module was just about large 
enough to house a sphere three 
meters in diameter. Completely 
filled with an amber liquid, it displayed a man folded in the fetal position floating inside. He wore what 
looked like an ordinary spacesuit, a 
mask with a blackened face plate, 
and an air line that ran from the 
chest then combined with an 
umbilical some ten centimeters 
thick. The cable left the tank and 
plugged into the computer plate on 
the far wall. A ladder ran up the 
side of the sphere. 
“Skipper?” Dale asked, just 
above a whisper. 
“Yes, Dale. I’m here,” came the 
voice over the intercom. A metallic 
voice, like a computer simulation of 
a human voice. The body in the 
tank did not move. 
“I was looking around and 
thought ...” Dale’s words trailed 
off. He could , think of no way to 
justify invading the captain’s cabin. 
“That’s all right. I know why 
you’re here.” 
“I’d better get back. Julio may 
be looking for me.” 
“He’s asleep. Don’t feel selfconscious. It’s only natural that you 
should be curious about me. But I 
assure you that I’m no more a freak 
than you are. I’m just older.” The 
body still floated motionless in the 
tank. “I heard you and Julio 
talking earlier.’’ 
“Julio is excitable,” Dale said, 
wishing he were anywhere but in 
the module. 
“It’s more than that. I’ve known 
Julio a long time. His ship picked 
me up after I rammed the pirates. 
His brother was my navigator.” 
S IXTY-FOUR days down the pipe 
they came to the Belt. Dale was 
floating in his webbed bed when the 
klaxon sounded. That jerked him 
out of a doze and he tangled one 
arm in the web. He pulled free, 
glided over to his console. Julio was 
already at station. “What’s going 
on?” muttered Dale, rubbing sleep 
from his eyes so he could read the 
dials. 
“Entering the Belt. Next couple 
of days we’ll be at general quarters. 
It’s S.O.P.” 
“Why? Any danger?” 
Julio snorted a laugh. “Look, 
kid. This is a milk run. Nothing 
ever happens when you haul ice. 
It’s three months of boredom. Only 
THE ICEMAN 
good thing is pay without a place to 
spend it. Makes for quite a party at 
Mars port.” 
Dale blushed. He hated having 
his inexperience flaunted. “But you 
said there were pirates.” 
“Hell — they aren’t really pirates. 
About twenty years ago some convicts from the Titan penal colony 
knocked over a couple of ore 
tenders. They hide in the Belt and 
come out only when they need provisions. Aren’t even worth tracking 
down.” 
“Why should Scanlon risk his 
men and lose a ship for such unimportant prey?” Dale asked. 
“I told you, sailor! Panic. He lost 
his head.” Julio cursed bitterly. 
“Oh, there’s a standing order with 
the patrol to take the runaways if 
possible, but nobody is hunting 
their ships. Funny, if Scanlon 
hadn’t lost good men, he’d have 
been a hero. As it is, they cut off his 
balls and made him a cyborg.” 
“They don’t do that,” Dale said, 
swinging his chair around to face 
Julio. “Cyborgs are the same as us, 
except — ” 
“Look,” insisted Julio, “I heard 
it from a lady who ought to know.” 
“She’s wrong. And maybe it 
wasn’t panic at all. Maybe Scanlon 
was on a planned attack — ” 
“All the worse, then. He wanted 
to win medals, you’re saying, so he 
sacrificed enlisted men like they 
were dogs. Suppose I told you or e 
was my own brother? He was worth 
a thousand pirates. I — ” 
The klaxon shattered his words 
with its strident hooting. 
“Now what?” blurted Julio. 
“Damn cyborg — ” 
The* cool metallic voice came over 
the P.A. “Suit up, misters. A ship 
is approaching on the starboard 
quarter. She doesn’t answer hailing. Suit up and go to your battle 
stations.” 
“Battle stations in this tub?” 
Julio shouted. The P.A. speakers 
did not answer. 
Dale’s heart pounded frantically. 
His stomach wrenched. His bladder 
strained to empty. Maybe the 
stranger was a pirate. Fear gripped 
him as he recalled the captain’s last 
encounter with the buccaneers. 
Dragging his outside suit from its 
compartment. Dale drew on the 
thin skin-tight garment. 
Julio did the same. Dale knew 
the suit like the palm of his hand 
but fumbled with the seals from 
sheer nervousness. He did not 
marvel at the miracle of thin material being strong as steel yet 
allowing the freedom of nudity. He 
just put it on and got a red light at 
his first integrity-check. He repositioned the seals around gloves, 
boots and helmet. Green light. 
He launched himself across the 
cabin to the laser control board, 
overshot the chair and banged into 
the bulkhead. Floating free in the 
cabin, he made frantic swimming 
motions until he got a grip on the 
chair. 
“Battle stations. Ha! One crum
my set of meteor-screens and a 
lousy six-centimeter laser,” Julio 
fumed. 
Dale turned on his view-screens 
and went to full magnification. A 
sleek cruiser with full battle-gear 
grew large off starboard. As he 
watched, two puifs of smoke exploded from her bow. White contrails approached in parallel 
beauty. 
The first minitorp exploded on 
the bow meteor-screening. The second passed astern, hitting one of 
the ice tanks. A cloud of ice crystals 
half a kilometer wide spread from 
the ruptured tank, making tug and 
tow easy to spot even on a visual 
scanner. 
The skipper made a hard turn to 
port to position the cargo between 
them and the enemy. The P.A. 
clicked and Scanlon's voice came 
dry and flat as escape capsules, released by his brain, sealed them 
into their seats. 
“Hear this. We’re abandoning 
ship. Stay with the cargo. There's a 
twenty-one day life-support system 
in the first bubble, so get in there 
and stay in.” 
“Where will you be, sir?” Dale 
queried, voice cracking, mouth 
dry. 
“Don’t you get it, kid? It’s just 
like last time. He’s dumping us to 
go after them,” Julio bellowed* 
“You won’t get away with it, 
Connie. I’ll see you hang for this 
one!” 
“Is it true, captain? Is that what 
you’re going to do?” Dale asked, 
his stomach sinking. 
“Exactly,” came the voice. 
Sudden acceleration smashed 
Dale into near blank-out as his 
blood popped from g-forces. When 
he regained sensation he discovered 
himself floating free in space inside 
his escape capsule. Tug and cargo 
drifted above him. Julio was to his 
left. The tow coupling opened and 
the tug floated free of its massive 
cargo. Steering jets flared until the 
tug lay well clear of her erstwhile 
burden. Then she turned hard to 
starboard. All eight main engines 
fired. The ship accelerated like a 
comet stung by antimatter. 
Julio screamed obscenities at the 
captain and worked his attitude jets 
frantically, trying to follow the receding ship. “You crazy Connie! 
Let us back aboard. Help! You’re 
killing us the way you killed my 
brother—” 
“Julio, come back! You can’t 
catch him . .” But Dale’s radio 
voice was drowned in Julio’s raving. 
His capsule receded and disappeared. Suicide^. Poor Julio. Dale 
sobbed and prayed and cursed, at 
the same time steering reflexively 
toward the long sausages of ice. 
The towing hawser floated free. 
Dale opened his capsule and 
caught the cable in his hand. 
Floating there he watched the 
battle. 
The cruiser bracketed with five 
more minitorps but the tug’s 
engines abruptly shut down. So 
THE ICEMAN 
four shot past harmlessly. Only the 
fifth detonated — on what was left 
of the bow screen. A pink glow surrounding the cruiser signified that 
her own -screens were up. The tug 
fired her main engines in a 25-g acceleration. 
Hideous green and yellow lightning played between the ships as 
their screens interfaced. But the 
tug had too much momentum for 
the cruiser. Its screens overloaded 
after vaporizing the tug’s nose. The 
vessels met head on. Huge shards 
of metal flew from the collision. A 
spherical object — Dale could not 
identify it — rocketed off in a tight 
trajectory of its own. Air and water 
formed a dense white cloud spewing out of the locked and gaping 
hulls like a great amoeba. The 
mass of wreckage turned slowly end 
for end as the cloud drifted off on a 
tangential course. 
Dale watched for a long time, 
hoping to see a suited figure, any 
sign of life. The ships lay quiet in 
their death-grip. 
He pulled himself along the hawser until he reached the first cargo 
sausage. Undogging the hatch, he 
climbed into the narrow room, 
pressurized it and turned on his 
space beacon. Then he settled 
down for a long, lonely wait. 
T he pharmacist’s mate on the 
heavy cruiser Andromeda was a 
perky brunette named Tina Janson. 
She met Dale as he came out of the 
air lock, steadying him when the 
spin-gravity buckled his knees. She 
introduced herself and led him to 
the sickbay. There he unsuited. She 
checked him over. 
“Did they find Julio?’’ was 
Dale’s first question. 
“He’s dead. His capsule ran out 
of air. I’m sorry.’’ 
“He wouldn’t stay with me. He 
tried to follow the ship — ’’ 
“You’re all right, sailor,’’ Tina 
said, firmly changing the subject. 
“You just need something to eat 
other than emergency rations. Also 
some gravity to get you back in 
shape.’’ 
“1 guess there’ll be a board of 
inquiry,’’ Dale said, as Tina began 
pushing him toward a stretcher. 
“Just a formality, I hear.’’ 
“I guess it’s pilot error to drop 
cargo and crew for a nuisance like 
those pirates.’’ 
“What are you talking about? 
Those pirates are number-one priority in the patrol. They’ve been 
raiding practically everything coming through the Belt — and have 
begun to raid stations as well. Our 
flotilla was on a search-and-destroy 
mission when we got your distress 
call. You’ll probably get a decoration. Now lie down and let the 
nurse take you to the ward.’’ 
Dale allowed himself to be wheeled into the bay, where he was transferred to a bed and given a sleeping 
pill. 
A lean figure in hospital pajamas 
was propped up in the bed across 
from him. Middle-aged, the other 
patient had gaunt features and hair 
graying at the temples. The rest of 
his hair could not be seen because 
white bandages covered his skull. 
The pill clouded Dale’s mind and 
vision. Ripples of warmth eddied 
over him, and he slid down in the 
sheets. He felt obliged, though, to 
March 1-3. BOSKONE II at the 
Sheraton Boston Hotel. GoH: Isaac 
Asimov. Adv. reg: $3, $5 at door. 
For info: NESFA, Box G, MIT 
Branch P.O., Cambridge, Mass. 
02139. 
March 29-31. MARCON at the 
Holiday Inn East, Columbus, Ohio. 
GoH: Hal Clement. For info: Larry 
Smith, 194 E. Tulane Rd., Columbus, Ohio 43202. 
• 
April 12-14. EQUICON ^74 at the 
Marriott Hotel, Los Angeles, Calif. 
GoH: D. C. Fontana, Special 
Guests: Gene Roddenberry and 
Majel Barrett. Adv. reg. $8 to Jan. 
1, $10 to April 1, $15 thereafter; $5 
supporting. Checks payable to: 
Equicon ’74, c/o Pat Zotti, 18242 
Calvert, Reseda, Calif. 91335. For 
info: P.O. Box 23127, Los Angeles, 
Calif. 90023. 
at least nod at the gaunt man. 
The man smiled. “Hey, doesn’t 
your skipper rate a salute?’’ 
“You . you’re Connie Scanlon? My God!’’ 
“In the flesh, and with wires still 
stuck in my head. Sleep some. 
Dale. We’ll talk later.’’ • 
April 12-15. TYNECON '74 at the 
Royal Station Hotel, NewcastleUpon-Tyhe, England. GoH: Bob 
Shaw, Fan GoH: Peter Weston. 
Reg. 50p supporting to: Ian Williams, 6 Greta Terrace, Chester 
Road, Sunderland, County Durham, SR4 7RD, England. 
• 
May 24-27 THE CONVENTION 
WITH NO NAME at the Americana Hotel, Seventh Ave & 53 St., 
NYC. Adv. reg. to Nov. 30: $6, 
Dec. 1 -April 30: $7.50, $10 thereafter; $4 nonattending. For info: 
P.O. Box 561, New York, N.Y. 
10022 . ^ 
May 24-27. EYECON at the International Hotel, Los Angeles. GoH: 
Ian & Betty Ballantine. Adv. reg: 
$6.50 to April 15, $10 at door. For 
info: Eyecon Committee, 10170 
Gould St., Apt. C, Riverside, Calif. 
92503. 
• 
May 31 -June 3. 1974. SCANDINAVIAN SF CON in Stockholm. 
GoM: Brian Aldiss. Membership 
$6. For info: Fancon 2, Box 3273, 
S-103 65 Stockholm, Sweden 
THE ICEMAN 
PAPERBACKS OF LASTING FASCINATION 
THE GALAXY LIBRARY OF SCIENCE FICTION is a series 
of the best science fiction published today about worlds of 
tomorrow .... Outstanding authors . magnetic stories ... 
scientific believability . low cost .... To be savored again j 
and again ... a must for your science fiction library .... 1 
OW I HISS i« imosiKi 
TwniTinM CINTUIIf fOI MM' 
BATTLE FOR 
THE PLANET 
OF THE APES 
JUST PUBLISHED 
.( 
BATTLE FOR THE PLANET OF THE APES, David Gerrold 
The city of the apes was on the brink of an horrendous t 
destruction that had happened once— and was suddenly 
inexorably, happening again.... The apes are back In a new 
shocker from Twentieth Century-Fox. ..that will keep you 
glued till the last page.... ANII39 95^ 
RECENTLY PUBLISHED 
PATTERNS OF CHAOS, Colin Kapp 
A suspense-filled adventure about one man against an unknown civilization 
that knew of his existence before he was born! ASH 18 75^ 
OFF CENTER, Damon Knight 
A collection of unpredictably imaginative tales by a modern master of 
science fiction. AS1071 75^ 
THE BEST FROM GALAXY, i 
Galaxy Magazine i THEBESTIV i 
A collection of science fiction that challenges i FROMII 
the mind and captivates the Imagination 
AN1039 95(f 
THE BEST FROM IF, If Magazine 
A collection of mind-bending science fiction 
adventure that soars beyond the Imagination 
AN 1065 954 
of Science Fiction 
THE RITHIAN TERROR, Damon Knight 
Two men pursue the Rithlan Monster who has successfully disguised 
itself as a human being. AS1008 75^ 
THE INVASION OF THE BODY SNATCHERS, Jack Finney 
A nightmare suddenly wrought Into stark reality ... as men and women 
who look like themselves, act like themselves, but are not themselves. 
AN1125 95^ 
OTHER TITLES YOU MAY HAVE MISSED 
MEN AND MACHINES, Robert Silverberg, editor 
A collection of science-fiction masterworks from Lester Del Rey, 
Robert Silverberg, Fritz Leiber, James Bllsh, and six other great 
writers. AN0765 95 ^ 
GODS FOR TOMORROW, Hans Stefan Santesson 
Ten top science fiction writers advance brilliant yet terrifying 
prediction of tomorrow's beliefs. AX0240 60^^ 
THE ENDS OF TIME, Robert Silverberg, editor 
A compelling and fascinating anthology of seven science-fiction masters 
exploring the “ends of time." AS0778 75^ 
FEAR TODAY — GONE TOMORROW, Robert Bloch 
Here Is a portrait of ordinary men and women who sought the 
wrong answer, opened the wrong door to evil. AS08II 75^^ 
CHAMBERS OF HORRORS, Robert Bloch 
Twelve spine-chilling trips into the macabre mind of the author of 
“Psycho." AX0I87 60^ 
THE DEMONS OF SANDORRA, Paul Tabori 
Voyage only two centuries into the future to find a world 
filled with luxurious houses of execution. AS0716 75^ 
THE AWARD SCIENCE FICTION READER, Alden H. Noron, editor 
A completely new anthology of stories never before published in 
book form by masters of science fantasy. AX0181 60^ 
THE END OF MAN?. Olof Johannesson 
A look into the future when a massive computer system provides 
all of man's earthly needs. AX0448 60^ 
AT GOOD NEWSSTANDS AND BOOKSTORES, OR ORDER 
DIRECTLY FROM: AWARD BOOKS, Dept. - IF, Box 500 
Farmingdale, N.Y. 11735 (Please add 25<7 for shipping) 
TAR BABY 
In the face of the deadly and 
sentient Sargasso they reaffirmed the 
principle of life! 
EDWARD WELLEN 
E ither the spaceworn Homingbird had zigged when it should 
have zagged or the GO-type star 
and its lone planet loomed where 
they didn’t belong. 
Mate Gwyn Vestring grimaced. 
Just when they were on the homestretch, getting set for the last 
jump — the jump to Earth. She 
fought down the urge to glance at 
her husband-captain. Maybe Boyd 
had not seen; he had said nothing 
yet. 
As though making a simple adjustment she swung the astrogate a 
touch to starboard. This swept the 
star and its tempting planet off the 
screen and brought a more familiarlooking array into view for real-time 
register with Homingbird's inertialguidance log. 
Too late. Boyd had spotted the 
planet. He overrode the astrogate 
and swung the aperture back. 
“Hold it, honey* What have we 
here?” He centered the planet and 
zoomed it nearer. “Hmm. The lifepotential reading’s positive. One 
point two on the evolutionary 
scale.” He turned to face her with a 
cool smile. “Now don’t tell me you 
missed that apple.” 
Gwyn forced an answering smile. 
“1 wasn’t looking for one more 
juicy prospect. We already have our 
quota twice over.” She rested her 
hand on his arm. “Boyd, you 
agreed that we have a good cargo 
and that it’s time we got back 
home.” 
Boyd patted her hand but somehow managed to lift it off. 
“I know, honey. I did and we 
have and it is. But how can we pass 
this up after falling over it like this? 
I ask you.” 
He was obviously determined. 
She sighed, looked down at the 
roundness of her belly. She slid forward in her contour couch to make 
room to put her hands to the small 
of her back. She gave an isometric 
shove to her back to counter the 
weight within. 
If Boyd saw, it didn’t change his 
mind. 
Gwyn said no more and made 
her face a mask of indifference as 
Boyd swung Homingbird into recon 
orbit. 
The Homingbircfs sensors took 
note of the planet’s conditions and 
under her mask Gwyn felt satisfaction that they would have to suit 
up if they landed and went out 
among the natives to trade. The inconvenience would serve him right. 
But she felt a pang as she saw the 
eagerness fade from Boyd’s face. 
After all, it was that eagerness, the 
light of a free spirit, that had drawn 
her to him in the first place. 
Boyd’s face grew longer and 
more puzzled. Where was the 
promised life? Was he failing to 
recognize its form? The planet 
looked all plain, smooth and dark, 
the chocolate coating of lava flow. 
Nothing else was visible. Gwyn 
could see him shepherding himself 
toward sheepishness, toward grinning defeat. 
Then he spotted a spaceport. 
There was no mistaking it. He held 
Homingbird above a vast stand of 
spaceships. Hundreds of ships, all 
sizes, all shapes. Though most conformed to the cigar shape, some 
looked so grotesque as to seem incapable of landing or lifting off. 
But, as bees had proved, with 
enough power anything is aerodynamic. 
This planet out of nowhere had 
to be a trade center of some importance, though the general barrenness and the forbidding atmosphere 
would make it uncomfortable for 
most species. 
He switched on the transceiver 
and over the intragalactic trade 
band gave Homingbird'^ call sign. 
The answer came almost at once, 
in an artificial but warm voice. 
4^m^ELCOME to Tahrlabi. You 
TV may land two ship’s lengths 
primary-ward of the green-andorange ship.” 
Boyd helped Gwyn fasten herself 
into her contour couch. He patted 
the roundness. 
“Cheer up, you two. We’ll zoom 
in and zoom out.” 
Gwyn smiled for two. 
Boyd picked out the green-andorange ship at the far edge and 
tapped the instructions into the 
descent-mode coordinator. While it 
took over he gave himself up to 
rubbernecking at the monitor. He 
had decided that the natives of 
Tahrlabi lived underground and he 
hoped to catch sight of them as they 
popped up to greet the Homingbird, 
They were almost down when 
Gwyn grasped his arm convulsively. 
“Boyd, look!” 
He saw. All the spaceships were 
stumpier than even fore-shortening 
would have made them appear. 
There were no launch pads visible 
beneath the spaceships, there were 
no flame buckets. All the spaceships were meters deep in Tahrlabi’s crust. Colored candles stuck 
in a chocolate birthday cake. 
Boyd’s face tightened but his 
fingers moved swiftly and smoothly 
to shoot the Homingbird back up. 
The Homingbird stopped descending, poised, started to ascend. Boyd 
and Gwyn heard loud slaps against 
the hull. The Homingbird stopped 
ascending, poised, started to descend. 
The monitor showed them a 
great spout of lava lipping and 
lapping at the Homingbird, The 
clinging solidified and in a linear-g 
tug of war the lava overcame the 
Homingbird' s thrust and pulled it 
down and down and down. The 
poor old Homingbird shook as 
though it would tear itself apart as 
Boyd refused to ease up on the 
thrust. 
In the end he had to cut it off. 
The air was stiflingly hot and stank 
of scorched insulation. The Homingbird had sunk three meters into 
the crust, which had hardened 
about its base. He was wasting fuel. 
With a sinking feeling to match 
the Homingbird, Boyd scanned the 
trapped spaceships the Homingbird had joined. There was a 
blurred vagueness of outline to 
them. Were they even spaceships? 
Perhaps they were mere decoys designed only to lure passing vessels 
such as the Homingbird into range. 
If so, they had worked. 
He grimaced. Time later to worry 
about that. Time now to put first 
things first. To save power, he shut 
down all of the vessel but essential 
life-systems. 
The cabin air grew even stuffier. 
Sweat beaded on Gwyn’s face. 
Boyd unbuckled, got up moving 
a bit too fast for a man who hadn’t 
yet got his planet-legs, undogged 
the hatch to the cargo hold. He tore 
a fingernail on the ring pull of the 
unsealer in his haste to break open 
a crate of hibernating gokdrob 
seedlings. He carried an armful of 
vacuum cans back into the cabin, 
op^ed them, and stood the seedlings strategically about. 
For a few minutes he feared the 
Bordorg trader had didcfled him. 
Then the seedlings came slowly to 
life, and with them the atmosphere 
inside the Homingbird. 
Gwyn breathed deeply and smiled 
gratefully at Boyd. 
“Better.” 
Boyd nodded, but his face had 
not lost its tightness. He returned 
to the console and set himself to 
make contact with the spaceport — 
assuming it wa5 a spaceport. 
“Interstellar vessel Homingbird 
calling Tahrlabi control. Come in, 
Tahrlabi control.” 
The warm artificial voice responded at once. 
“This is Tahrlabi. Welcome, 
Homingbird. May you have a 
happy stay.” 
“Happy stay, hell. What do you 
TAR BABY 
mean by telling me to land in an 
area of volcanic activity?” 
“You sought permission to land. 
I welcomed you.” 
“Some welcome. Some welcome 
mat.” Still, the voice \^as warm and 
seemed to be genuinely friendly. 
“Let that pass for the time being. 
We’ll straighten it out later. Meanwhile, as long as I’m here, let’s do 
business. What have you got to 
trade?” 
“Nothing.” 
Boyd stared openmouthed at the 
blasphemy. Had he heard right? 
“What was that you said?” 
“Nothing.” 
He had heard right and left, in 
both ears. It was not the cabin 
heat, w,hich the gokdrob seedlings 
were dissipating nicely; he was 
burning up: zero results for all this 
waste of time. 
“Then we’d better straighten it 
out right now. No use my sticking 
around. What are you going to do 
about helping me lift off?” 
“Nothing.” 
“What was that you — ?. Never 
mind.” He knew he had heard right 
the first time the second time. 
“Now listen here, I know my rights. 
I demand permission to lift of, and 
all necessary assistance thereto, 
under intragalactic law.” 
“Sorry. No liftoffs.” 
Well, there might be emergency 
conditions he was unaware of 
calling for the temporary grounding 
of all spacecraft. 
“For how long?” 
“Forever.” 
CE they got past bluster and 
standfast, the question had to 
be why. 
Boyd put all the reasonableness 
he could into his voice. 
“Why?” 
The answer came back with even 
more reasonableness. 
“I have extended you my hospitality. You have accepted it. It 
would be ungracious of me to withdraw it. It would be unkind of you 
to renounce it.” 
“Hospitality? You mean imprisonment.” 
“Imprisonment?” The voice 
sounded shocked. “Did you feel 
your ship to be a prison when you 
were in space?” 
“Of course not. But — ” 
“Then why should it be a prison 
now?” 
“Because you’re immobilizing 
it.” 
“How, immobilizing? Does it not 
move with me as I move through 
space?” Editorial we, yes; but 
planetary I? Local idiom? 
“I suppose so. But — ” 
“There is no profit in talking 
longer at this point. You will have 
time to rethink your terms and you 
will come to see I am right. 
Meanwhile 1 am plugging your ship 
into my power source. From now on 
you have ^1 the energy you need. 
However, I must warn you — it is 
against my law for you to cut the 
umbilical once I have patched you 
in. I will sign off for now.” 
“Hold on damnit!” 
“It’s no use, friend.” This was a 
new voice breaking in. “We’ve all 
argued our cases and lost. Tar 
Baby has solidified its logic around 
the basis of its thought. You may as 
well relax and enjoy.” 
“That’s right, Homingbird. ” 
Another voice joining in. “Once 
you touch the sacred surface you 
can never leave it. Tar Baby can’t 
understand how anyone could want 
to leave it. In any case, it won’t let 
you leave it. You’ve accepted Tar 
Baby’s welcome and you’re stuck 
with it.” 
There was sympathy in the voices 
but there was also welcome-to-theclub satisfaction. Boyd steamed. 
""Now you tell us. Why didn’t you 
warn us while we were still in. recon 
orbit?” 
“Couldn’t.” It was the first voice 
again, apologetic. “Whenever a 
sucker comes along Tar Baby jams 
all communications but its own.” 
Sucker. It was a long time since 
anyone had called Boyd Moomaw a 
sucker. His ears burned and he 
avoided Gwyn’s eyes. 
“Tar Baby. Is that a corruption 
of — ^what is it? — Tahrlabi?” 
“Right.” 
Boyd scanned the obsidian matrix holding all of them fast. 
“I see what you mean. But I 
don’t see the natives. When do they 
come out?” 
“They don’t. There aren’t any. 
There’s just Tar Baby.” 
Boyd had just absorbed the fact 
that Tar Baby was the planet itself, 
and that it was in effect one piezoelectric crystal unit, when the sinking sun suddenly picked out in glow 
and shadow cobweb strands 
running from spaceship to spaceship. 
The sight nearly drew a hysterical laugh from Boyd and did start 
him ranging the scope for a monstrous spider before he saw the catenaries were hawsers and lines of 
breeches buoys. Sighting a monstrous spider would not have turned 
him paler. 
“Tell us, is there a law against 
setting foot on Tar Baby?” 
“Ah, you’ve spotted the web. We 
were going to warn you of that, 
Homingbird, We’ve learned by unhappy example — the poor fellow — 
that Tar Baby can’t help embedding anything or anyone that 
touches its surface. That’s why 
we’ve rigged this aerial network for 
paying each other visits. Suit up 
and open your air lock and I’ll 
shoot you a line.” 
TAR BABY 
I T WAS Hapyr Atirk who shot the 
line. He was a fellow Terran but 
Boyd and Gwyn couldn’t place the 
latitude of Atirk’s clothing style in 
Earth’s past. And Boyd wasn’t sure 
he liked Atirk’s attitude; Atirk was 
a young squirt but his smile said he 
looked on Boyd and Gwyn as 
younger than himself. 
The other member of the welcoming committee was Sizri, a 
Thubani. As they passed into the 
Homingbird'% cabin, Sizri showed 
embarrassment at seeing a Terran 
woman, and a pregnant one at 
that. He remained but closed all his 
sensors throughout the visit. 
Boyd made to introduce Gwyn 
and himself but Atirk, smiling his 
knowing smile, stopped him. 
“Don’t tell me. You’re Boyd 
Moomaw and Gwyn Vestring, the 
first of the free traders. You 
became something of a legend. 
Back on Terra they wrote ballads 
and plays about the mysterious disappearance of the Homing bird: 
Your exploits as traders— or the 
legend of your exploits — inspired 
those of us who came later.” 
Boyd and Gwyn stared at each 
other and saw in each other’s eyes 
they shared the feeling of being 
mired in madness or nightmare. 
The cords of his neck swelling and 
straining, Boyd turned back to 
Atirk. 
“For psych’s sake, man, what 
are you talking about? We just now 
got here.” 
“That’s right.’’ Atirk’s smile, 
faded, changing the reading of his 
face. It was now a smileless knowing. He sighed. “It’ll take some explaining. But one thing you learn 
here is not to satisfy all your curiosity at once. You have to save 
some for later. Sitting here we see 
only the long dry stretches of later. 
The most immediate thing to talk 
about is the makeup of Tar Baby. 
You have to know that in order to 
survive.” 
But Atirk was in no hurry to talk. 
It was as if he had to roll this moment on his tongue. Gwyn filled in 
by playing hostess. Sizri, of course, 
was unresponsive but Atirk did not 
let that stop him from helping himself to handful after handful of 
dried thagvo berries. He sighed 
again — or was that the thagvo 
berries reconstituting themselves 
explosively in his mouth? He fixed 
his gaze on Boyd. 
“You asked where the natives are 
and I said there aren’t any. That 
doesn’t mean there never were any. 
There’s evidence a life form did 
evolve here. When Tar Baby 
trapped the last spaceship — ” apologetic correction— “ — ^the last one 
before Homingbird, that is; the 
orange and green spaceship . 
Let’s see, that was about a yearand-a-half Terran ago. Just a 
8F 
minute; Sizri can tell me the precise 
date.” 
Atirk made to shake Sizri open. 
Boyd stopped him with a gesture 
just short of curt. 
“Never mind. Save it.” 
“Right. Well, in its heavings 
when it trapped the orange and 
green spaceship — Sizri’s, by the 
way — Tar Baby threw up some 
fossil remains. I caught the fossils 
on tape before they sank again.” 
Atirk produced a pocket tapeprojector that hologrammed on astonishingly real image in their 
rnidst. Boyd and Gwyn watched 
three slug-shaped creatures boil in 
slow motion out of a fire-edged rip 
in the crust. 
Gwyn frowned. 
“How do we know it was native 
to this planet? They might have 
come from a spaceship Tar Baby 
swallowed.” 
Atirk smiled. 
“They might’ve. But I prefer 
them native for my guess as to how 
Tar Baby came to be the thinking 
thing it is.” 
He froze the tape a frame before 
the last of the specimens sank out 
of sight. He pointed with weary 
enthusiasm. 
“Look at the armored plate. 
Read the spectroscopic data on the 
outside of the picture. When we 
think of armor on a creature we 
think of horn. But this armored 
plate’s an assembly of bituminous 
tubes, each with a spine of antimonial lead. Lead oxide fills the 
space between the spine and the 
tube.” 
Boyd started. 
“Then these things were — ” 
Atirk wasn’t going to let anyone 
do him out of the telling. 
“ — living batteries. See, the spine 
collects electric current. And where 
did it get electric current? Notice 
these temporary quartz-outcroppings in the far corner of the 
picture. Remember; piezoelectric 
quartz crystals produce a voltage 
when subjected to mechanical stress 
and undergo mechanical stress 
when subjected to voltage. There’s 
a hell of a lot of internal groaning 
in Tar Baby. The damned things 
plugged into quartz whenever they 
needed recharging.” 
He grinned. 
“As for sex life, see here how 
they could hook up in series or in 
parallel. As for getting around, 
look at these rods in the underbelly 
of the creature; before it got 
trapped in lava flow it walking on 
them. Probably had a built-in kneejerk reflex that kicked each rod 
backward in its slot as it hit the 
ground, shoving the whole assembly, 
forward like a stiff-legged centipede. 
“This baby was a two-tonner, 
having. I’d guess, around a thou
TAR BABY 
sand amperage per hour capacity 
and capable of going six years 
Terran before needing a recharge.” 
The picture vanished. Atirk 
pocketed the player. He shrugged. 
don’t know how long the 
J. species roamed Tar Baby before evolution took the next step. 
Willingly or unwillingly — it doesn’t 
matter now which — the living batteries gave their minds and bodies 
to Tar Baby. Tar Baby became one 
great piezoelectric crystal unit. And 
that unit said unto itself, ‘Let there 
be power.’” 
Atirk smiled. 
“And Tar Baby felt the power, 
and it was good. And Tar Baby got 
religion. And that religion is Tar 
Baby.” The smile faded. ‘‘And with 
reason; Tar Baby has power like 
you wouldn’t believe.” 
Boyd raised an eyebrow. 
‘‘For instance?” 
Atirk looked sulky, as though he 
had wanted to save that for later. 
Then his weary -enthusiasm took 
over again. 
‘‘For instance, this crystal unit is 
powerful enough to cavitate space. 
Tar Baby can create a pseudo black 
hole and twist itself — and its primary- — out of the universe and back 
in again.” 
He smiled his knowing smile 
again. 
‘‘You’re staring at me. You think 
I’m kidding — or crazy. Then tell 
me how Tar Baby and its primary 
got here — ”a nod skyward” — where 
all the star charts show empty 
space. I won’t press it. You’ll have 
a chance to see for yourself. One of 
these nights you’ll find a new star 
pattern out there. And some other 
night another pattern. Tar Baby 
really gets around.” 
The smile faded again. 
‘‘From our point of view there’s a 
bad side effect. I won’t get into the 
relativistics of spatial cavitation, 
but e over m does give Soonerthan-instantaneous travel. Each 
time Tar Baby pops out of the 
universe and back in it’s gone 
further into the past. That’s what I 
was trying to tell you earlier — you 
were before my time and yet I got 
here first.” 
Atirk stood up to leave them with 
that thought. 
Boyd shook his head, trying to 
take it all in and not wanting to 
take it in. Even if they managed to 
tear free they could never go home 
again. 
Atirk shook Sizri open and they 
departed to their respective homes 
away from home. 
T he fleet that had lost its fleetness held gams here, just as the 
ancient sailing ships had allowed 
their crews to visit back and forth 
when two vessels fell in with each 
other in alien seas in the old whaling days on Terra. Homingbird 
quickly wove itself into the web. 
Boyd noticed one spaceship that 
stood aloof from the web of hawsers 
and lines. 
“What about that one? Why is 
whoever’s in there so stand-offish? 
Sulking? Dead? Or is he ostracized?” 
It was a stag party at Sizri’s and 
Sizri was the life of it. Sizri 
laughed, flapping the wings of his 
nose In the manner of his kind. 
“No one’s in there. It’s a fullyautomated ship. Friendly enough, 
though. It was on its shakedown 
cruise and its hold was empty when 
Tar Baby trapped it, so naturally 
it’s out of things. Now about that 
lot of vulnyl you want to trade for 
my srikvi — ” 
I N a manner of speaking they took 
in each other’s laundry. Out of 
habit and to have something to do 
with their time they traded. Aside 
from trading their various recycled 
foods for the sake of variety, they 
traded cargoes for the sake of trading. In fact, trading for trading’s 
sake had become the way of life on 
Tar Baby. 
What with wear and tear, goods 
in general had grown scarcer, more 
precious. Homingbird^ novelty and 
its promise of replenishing the total 
inventory made it Tar Baby’s 
busiest captive for the time being. 
Boyd had no time to sit and 
think, and was glad to have no time 
to sit and think. 
It was when he found himself 
bartering listlessly the second time 
the same crate of jila that had come 
to Tar Baby in the Homingbird' s 
hold and had since been in almost 
all the other holds that he cried 
silently. Hold, enough! It shocked 
him into awareness. 
Boyd upped his asking price with 
a savage suddenness that drove the 
Aldebarani he had been haggling 
with out of the Homingbird in a 
huff and a puff of indignant blue 
smoke. 
Alone now with Gwyn, Boyd 
braced himself to really look at her 
for the first time since Tar Baby 
had trapped them. He saw by the 
set of her jaw that she had made up 
her mind not to reproach him, not 
to show her despair, not to break 
down. It might have been healthier 
for her, for both of them, for all 
three of them, if she had let her 
feelings out instead of holding in. 
But that was Gwyn. 
Her time was near and he had 
promised her that their child would 
be born on Terran soil. She smiled 
now, meeting his gaze, but he felt 
that she would never truly forgive 
TAR BABY 
him. And he felt something worse — 
that she would be right never to 
forgive him. 
He felt guilty too that there were 
no other Terran women among 
them. There were females of other 
species and they were kind to her 
but they were not the same. 
But what could he do to make up 
for letting her down short of lifting 
off and escaping? 
Escaping from Tar Baby’s hold 
was impossible. They all said so. 
Many had tried. All had failed. 
He slammed the cargo hatch 
shut on the priceless and useless jila 
and all the other goods choking the 
Homingbird's hold. He stood looking down at the cargo hatch, now 
flush with the cabin deck. Below 
the cargo hold was the engine room 
housing all Homingbird's thrust, 
locked in Tar Baby’s crust. 
Maybe, just maybe . 
H e called the Aldebarani back. 
The Aldebarani got the jila at 
less than the original bid price, in 
exchange for a handful of ghir. The 
Aldebarani examined the jila suspiciously, then buoyed the crate 
away quickly before Boyd could 
change his mind. 
It went against Boyd’s grain to 
strike bad bargains but beginning 
with this trade Boyd took losses and 
ill-hidden scorn with a wild zest. 
Always he bartered more for less. 
giving ten fat kilos of, say, vulnyl 
for a microscopic milligram of, say, 
srikvi. 
If Gwyn wondered, she said 
nothing, only set her jaw harder 
and went on making ready for the 
third member of the Homingbird's 
crew. 
In spite of the tendency of the 
others to dawdle, to stretch out, to 
make a Japanese tea ceremony out 
of a trading session, Boyd made 
rapid headway. At those prices no 
one could go wrong and no one 
dallied over a deal — there was 
always someone else waiting to 
snap it up. 
But when the cargo hold was 
one-fourth empty his plan threatened to hit a snag. If the Spican twinsome had their way the Homingbird's hold seemed doomed to stay 
three-fourths full, unless Boyd jettisoned his cargo — but that would 
only alert Tar Baby. 
The snag came up at a general 
meeting. All but the automated 
spaceship attended in person. The 
meeting took place inside a Vegan 
vessel because it was the largest. 
The Spican twinsome had the floor 
and the wall. They had lately lost a 
valuable load in transit when a line 
snapped and the lot plunged to the 
surface and Tar Baby swallowed it 
whole. 
“We propose eliminating the 
tedious and dangerous business of 
transferring goods from ship to 
ship. Everyone knows what everyone has. There is no need to unstow 
stock. We move that there be 
simply the exchanging of scrip.” 
Boyd shot to his feet. 
“That sounds good. But what are 
we going to do with the time and 
trouble we save? Isn’t the whole rationale for this stupid business to 
keep us busy?” 
There was much- more on both 
sides but the sentiment slowly but 
surely swung Bo^j^s way. The 
Spican held out, then split with itself. At last the recalcitrant half 
made it unanimous. 
Sweating to beat the birth deadline and frightened by the close 
call, Boyd now made offers no one 
could refuse. Even so, the hold 
failed to empty out as swiftly as he 
had hoped. The others knew they 
were here forever; he could push 
them only so fast. 
In a flash of inspiration he 
staked the automated spaceship to 
much of the bulkiest of his slowermoving stuff. It was pathetically 
grateful to get into the swim. Boyd 
had the feeling, though, that if his 
plan went wrong and he had to 
stick around he would find it as 
stiff a competitor as the others. 
LAST the hold was empty 
/V enough. At last he could tell 
Gwyn what he was up to. 
Her jaw loosened and her mouth 
trembled. She felt light as she ran 
heavily into his arms. The unborn 
child that had come between them 
bound them together with its kick. 
Gwyn’s suit was a tight fit but 
they thought it best to suit up. Even 
if the lava seal about the Homingbird's base were perfect some of 
Tar Baby’s atmosphere might be 
trapped in the space around the 
rocket motor. 
The smile Boyd had let Gwyn see 
as he climbed down into that 
trader’s nightmare, a nearly empty 
hold, became a rictus. Careful not 
to touch the umbilical Tar Baby 
had fastened to the Homingbird, 
Boyd lowered himself through the 
service hatchway, then through the 
inner and outer valves of the emergency hatch. 
Careful not to touch Tar Baby’s 
surface, Boyd hung onto the bottom 
rung and played his lamp around. 
Blocking the nuclear ticking from 
his mind, he hung there till he had 
made sure the Homingbirds last 
burn had kept lava from clogging 
the tubes. When he climbed back 
up he could give Gwyn a smile 
smile. 
She helped him rig tackles. The 
service hatch was too narrow to 
pass the motor through. Boyd 
lasered a larger hole in the deckbulkhead between cargo hold and 
engine compartment and they lifted 
TAR BABY 
the resultant doughnut out and 
shoved it to one side. Boyd attached 
the hook to the hoisting eye of the 
motor and drew the self-locking 
hoist taut. It would be close. If and 
when the motor cleared the cargo 
deck the tackle would be chock-ablock. 
Boyd carefully lasered the motor 
free of its mounting. Gwyn pressed 
the power button and at the lowest 
speed hoisted the motor while Boyd 
took up the slack in the flexible 
cables and tubing. Boyd welded the 
motor into the new opening and 
filled in around it with bites of the 
doughnut to make the new bottom 
spacetight. Now the cargo hold was 
the new engine room. 
He cut a new hole in the deck, 
welded the service hatch — the hole 
in the doughnut — into it, swung 
back down into the old engine 
room, and twisting around on a 
bosun’s chair^used the laser to slice 
the hull through and through just 
above the lava line. Now a truncated but spaceworthy Homingbird 
rested freely on the cut rim — ready 
for liftoff. 
He lashed the laser in place beneath the cut, aiming it at the umbilical, and left it waiting for him to 
switch it on by remote control. He 
took one last look around, pulled 
himself back up into the new 
engine room, dogged down the 
hatch. He and Gwyn sealed them
selves inside the cabin. 
While Homingbird computed its 
new weight and adjusted itself Boyd 
carefully webbed Gwyn in, theh 
himself. He patted her hand and 
smiled. Even if they never got back 
to the Earth of their own era, what 
a trading advantage they would 
have on an earlier Earth! 
Homingbird gave the green light. 
Boyd said a silent goodbye and 
good riddance to Tar Baby, and 
a mute farewell to its captives. He 
switched Homingbird over to internal power, fired the laser to cut the 
umbilical, pressed for liftoff. 
Homingbird rose, dripping festoons of hawsers and lines. Boyd 
looked in the monitor and laughed 
to see Tar Baby lick up futilely at 
the Homingbird, Then they were 
shuddering up through Tar Baby’s 
atmosphere into a wonderful free 
stillness. They had made it! 
ALL that remained was the aborted 
/\jump to Terra. As Boyd 
switched on the astrogate and 
brought a familiar-looking array of 
stars into view for real-time register 
with Homingbird"^ inertial-guidance log, the stars vanished. 
For less than an eyeblink the 
stars swam as in a whirlpool, trailing watery streaks of light as in a 
time exposure. Then there came a 
blackness beyond that blackness 
which is the absence of light. In this 
blackness Tar Baby’s primary remained the only light, not so much 
accenting the blackness as lost in it. 
Boyd stared. He saw now what 
Hapyr Atirk had meant by spatial 
cavitation. They were outside the 
universe. 
With nothing to lose, Boyd 
pressed the jump button anyway. 
Nothing happened. Homingbird 
was stuck in Tar Baby’s local space 
as it had been stuck in Tar Baby. 
There was no way but back. But 
Boyd was slow in returning the 
Homingbird to recon orbit and 
even slower in acknowledging Tar 
Baby’s signal. 
Tar Baby sounded anxious. 
“Are you all right. Homings 
bird?'' 
Boyd winced to see Gwyn looking 
pale and sweaty in spite of her reassuring smile. Was this latest 
shock bringing on premature labor? 
“Are you all right, Homingbird?" 
“Well enough.’’ 
“Ah. Then welcome back to 
Tahrlabi. You may land two ship’s 
lengths primary-ward of your old 
spot.’’ 
Boyd grimaced. 
“No, thanks.” 
They had only this one card to 
play. By staying in recon orbit 
Homingbird remained a reproach 
to Tar Baby, stood out as a re
latively free denial of Tar Baby*^s 
sacred hospitality. 
It was Tar Baby’s turn to take 
long. 
“Why not?” 
“Your surface is sacred, right?” 
“Right.’’ How smug could a 
planet get? 
“Well, so is our planet’s to us.” 
“Oh? Can that be?” 
“It damned well is. So much so, 
that we were returning to Earth because my mate is with child and I 
have sworn that my child would be 
born on Terran soil.” 
The jealous warmth of Tar 
Baby’s response surprised him. 
“Why is your home planet’s soil 
so holy to you?” 
“You have no soil, so you 
wouldn’t know.” 
“Behold!” 
Looking down, Boyd watched a 
pyrotechnical display, a vast 
pattern of scintilating iridescence 
on the dark glassy hemisphere. 
“Can your home planet’s soil 
perform wonders?” 
Boyd frowned. Talc? Mud packs? 
He shook his head with an angry 
smile. This was too serious. Aureomycin, streptomycin, terramycin? 
More like it but still not good 
enough. The Homingbird passed 
over the field of trapped ships. Of 
course. Life, 
“Earth gives rise to life. You 
swallow life.” 
TAR BABY 
Again Tar Baby took long. 
“If I fix it so your child is born on 
Terran soil will you acknowledge 
my holiness?” A strange note had 
crept in. “Is it a deal?” 
So Tar Baby had been eavesdropping on its captives as they 
whiled away the time of their 
captivity! The note, strange to Tar 
Baby, was familiar to Boyd. It was 
the sound of a trader convinced of 
his own trickiness. Boyd ate such 
traders for breakfast. Quick, before 
Tar Baby could change its mind. 
He kept the smile out of his own 
voice. 
“It’s a deal.” 
A SUDDEN light on the panel 
^ caught Boyd’s eye. The HorningbircTs inertial-guidance log had 
gone mad. Homingbird, as far as 
Boyd could tell by eyeball, remained in orbit just as it had been. But 
it was also moving in directions the 
log could not handle. 
Timelessly a shimmer grew in the 
middle of the blackness. Now, 
while Homingbird froze in orbit, 
the shimmer became a ghostly 
skein. Could that small thing be the 
universe? Once you were outside 
the universe you were everywhere. 
You surrounded the universe. You 
could touch it where you willed. 
Tar Baby reached out, touched 
Earth. Tar gaby’s local space 
followed the thread of a wavicle 
into the skein. 
The Solar System filled the 
monitor, then Earth alone. Because 
he saw what he wanted most Boyd 
was afraid to let himself enjoy the 
sight too much. Gwyn, Boyd saw, 
felt the same. She closed her eyes, 
tears squeezed out. 
Boyd brought Earth’s surface 
and Tar Baby’s as close as he could 
in the monitor. The two were one at 
one point. 
Holding itself delicately in a state 
of masslessness, relative to the rest 
of the universe. Tar Baby touched 
one of the rolling hills of Earth. 
Boyd’s throat swelled with all the 
emotion he could not express. He 
longed to land the Homingbird 
right now and open the airlock and 
breathe the fresh air of Earth. But 
that gate between two worlds looked a shimmering almost immaterial 
thing. Besides, Homingbird seemed 
frozen in orbit. 
Now the resolution improved, as 
if Tar Baby had got them in phase. 
Boyd saw a startled cave bear 
lumber away. 
Again Hapyr Atirk had proved 
right. Twisting in and out of the 
universe. Tar Baby moved back 
through time. 
Was marooning Homingbird and 
its crew in Earth’s past the trickery 
Tar Baby’s tone had hinted at? 
Well, being stuck in Earth’s pre
historic past beat being stuck on 
Tar Baby any time. This was hardly 
the Garden of Eden, but it was life, 
it was freedom. He had the sudden 
feeling of reliving something. Was 
this how it had all started on 
Earth? 
Wondering, he awaited Tar 
Baby’s signal freeing the Homingbird to land on Earth. 
But Tar Baby gave no such signal. Instead Boyd watched an arm 
of lava reach out and scoop in 
several hundred cubic yards of 
earth. 
Then Tar Baby broke contact. 
Earth, then the Solar System, 
diminished in the monitor. The 
universe shrank to a ghostly skein 
out of which Tar Baby’s local space 
had followed the thread of a 
/ 
wavicle. The blackness beyond 
blackness. Then the watery lights, 
unwhirling. They were back in the 
universe, though the star patterns 
showed them to be in another part 
of it. They had lost Earth forever. 
HEIR child was a girl. 
Tar Baby had the decency to 
wait. Only after Sizri opened his 
sensors and left, the last of their 
fellow captives to pay a breechesbuoy call on the proud parents, did 
Tar Baby signal Homingbird, 
“Remember our deal.” 
Boyd smiled. He had to admire 
the tricky bastard. The child had 
been born on Terran soil. Tar Baby 
had packed the several hundred 
cubic yards of earth down hard 
with great tamping wallops. And 
here, two ship’s lengths from the 
buried stump of its old self, the 
Homingbird had landed and stood 
now and forever on Terran soil. 
“I acknowledge your holiness.” 
“It is good.” 
B oyd wondered how long Tar 
Baby would think so. There 
were more roots than the new umbilical Tar Baby had tied to Homingbird. Already bits of green had 
broken up through the packed 
earth. 
The soil held lichen and molds 
and insects and bacteria. The 
lichen would begin the process, the 
acid in its rootlike fibers dissolving 
out of the lava rock the minerals 
the lichen lived on. The lava would 
grow spongy, hold water. The water 
would freeze, the rock would crack, 
the soil would deepen, spread. In 
time all Tar Baby wotild live as did 
this handful of dirt. Many generations from now Tar Baby would 
teem with life. And see who would 
own Tar Baby then! 
Meanwhile . 
Boyd signaled his potential sonin-law, Hapyr Atirk. 
“Be interested in a nulvuv-jila 
trade?” 
“Be right over.” • 
TAR BABY 
I N MALORi’s first and only combat mission the berserker came 
to him in the image of a priest of 
the sect into which Malori had been 
born on the planet Yaty. In a 
dreamlike vision that was the analogue of a very real combat he saw 
the robed figure standing tall in a 
deformed pulpit, eyes flaming with 
malevolence, lowering arms winglike with the robes they stretched. 
With their lowering, the lights of 
the universe were dimming outside 
the windows of stained glass and 
Malori was being damned. 
Even with his heart pounding 
under damnation’s terror Malori 
retained sufficient consciousness to 
remember the real nature of himself and of his adversary and that 
he was not powerless against him. 
His dream-feet walked him timelessly toward the pulpit and its 
demon-priest while all around him 
the stained glass windows burst, 
showering him with fragments of 
sick fear. He walked a crooked 
path, avoiding the places in the 
smooth floor where, with quick gestures, the priest created snarling, 
snapping stone mouths full of 
teeth. ' Malori seemed to have 
unlimited time to decide where to 
put his feet. Weapon, he thought, a 
surgeon instructing some invisible 
aide. Here — in my right hand. 
From those who had survived 
similar battles he had heard how 
the inhuman enemy appeared to 
each in different form, how each 
human must live the combat 
through in terms of a unique nightmare. To some a berserker came as 
a ravening beast, to others as devil 
or god or man. To still others it was 
some essence of terror that could 
never be faced or even seen. The 
combat was a nightmare experienced while the subconscious ruled, 
while the waking mind was suppressed by careful electrical pres
sures on the brain. Eyes and ears 
were padded shut so that the conscious mind might be more easily 
suppressed, the mouth plugged to 
save the tongue from being bitten, 
the nude body held immobile by the 
defensive fields that kept it whole 
against the thousands of gravities 
that came with each movement of 
the one-man ship while in combat 
mode. It was a nightmare from 
which mere terror could never wake 
one; waking came only when the 
fight was over, came only with 
death or victory or disengagement. 
Into Malori’s dream-hand there 
now came a meat cleaver keen as a 
razor, massive as a guillotineblade. So huge it was that had it 
been what it seemed it would have 
been far too cumbersome to even 
lift. His uncle’s butcher shop on 
Yaty was gone, with all other 
human works of that planet. But 
the cleaver came back to him now, 
magnified, perfected to suit his 
need. 
He gripped it hard in both hands 
and advanced. As he drew near the 
pulpit towered higher. The carved 
dragon on its front, which should 
have been an angel, came alive, 
blasting him with rosy fire. With a 
shield that came from nowhere he 
parried the. splashing flames. 
Outside the remnants of the 
stained glass windows the lights of 
the universe were almost dead now. 
Standing at the base of the pulpit, 
Malori drew back his cleaver as if 
to strike overhand at the priest who 
towered above his reach. Then, 
without any forethought at all, he 
switched his aim at the top of his 
backswing and laid the blow crashing against the pulpit’s stem. It 
shook, but resisted stoutly. Damnation came. 
Before the devils reached him, 
though, the energy was draining 
from the dream. In less than a 
second of real time it was no more 
than a fading visual image, a few 
seconds after that a dying memory. 
Malori, coming back to consciousness with eyes and ears still sealed, 
floated in a soothing^limbo. Before 
post-combat fatigue and sensory. 
deprivation could combine to send 
him into psychosis, attachments on 
his scalp began to feed his brain 
with bursts of pins-and-needles 
noise. It was the safest signal to administer to a brain that might be on 
the verge of any of a dozen different 
kinds of madness. The noise made 
a whitish roaring scattering of light 
and sound that seemed to fill his 
head and at the same time somehow outlined for him the positions 
of his limbs. 
His first fully conscious thought: 
he had just fought a berserker and 
survived. He had won — or had at 
least achieved a stand-off — or he 
would not be here. It was no mean 
achievement. 
B erserkers were like no other 
foe that Earth-descended human beings had ever faced. They 
had cunning and intelligence and 
yet were not alive. Relics of some 
interstellar war over long ages 
since, automated machines, warships for the most part, they carried 
as their basic programming the 
command to destroy all life whereever it could be. found. Yaty was 
only the latest of many Earth-colonized planets to suffer a berserker 
attack, and it was among the 
luckiest; nearly all its people had 
been successfully evacuated. Malori 
and others now fought in deep 
space to protect the Hope, one of 
the enormous evacuation ships. 
The Hope was a sphere several kilometers in diameters, large enough 
to contain a good proportion of the 
planet’s population stored tier on 
tier in defense-field stasis. A 
trickle-relaxation of the fields allowed them to breathe and live with 
slowed metabolism. 
The voyage to a safe sector of the 
galaxy was going to take several 
months because most of it, in terms 
of time spent, was going to be occupied in traversing an outlying 
arm of the great Taynarus nebula. 
Here gas and dust were much too 
thick to let a ship duck out of 
normal space and travel faster than 
light. Here even the speeds attainable in normal space were greatly 
restricted. At thousands of kilometers per second, manned ship or 
berserker machine could alike be 
smashed flat against a wisp of gas 
far more tenuous than human 
breath. 
Taynarus was a wilderness of uncharted plumes and tendrils of dispersed matter, laced through by 
corridors of relatively empty space. 
Much of the wilderness was completely shaded by interstellar dust 
from the light of all the suns outside. Through dark shoals and 
swamps and tides of nebula the 
Hope and her escort Judith fled, 
and a berserker pack pursued. 
Some berserkers were even larger 
than the Hope, but those that had 
taken up this chase were much 
smaller. In regions of space so thick 
with matter, a race went to the 
small as well as to the swift; as the 
impact cross-section of a ship in
creased, its maximum practical 
speed went inexorably down. 
The Hope, ill-adapted for this 
chase (in the rush to evacuate, 
there had been no better choice 
available) could not expect to 
outrun the smaller and more 
maneuverable enemy. Hence the 
escort carrier Judith, trying always 
to keep herself between Hope and 
the pursuing pack. Judith mothered the little fighting ships, spawning them out whenever the enemy 
came too near, welcoming survivors 
back when the threat had once 
again been beaten off. There had 
been fifteen of the one-man ships 
when the chase began. Now there 
were nine. 
The noise injections from Malori’s life support equipment slowed 
down, then stopped. 'His conscious 
mind once more sat steady on its 
throne. The gradual relaxation of 
his defense fields he knew to be a 
certain sign that he would soon rejoin the world of waking men. 
As soon as his fighter, Number 
Four, had docked itself inside the 
Judith Malori hastened to disconnect himself from the tiny ship’s 
systems. He pulled on a loose coverall and let himself out of the 
cramped space. A thin man with 
knobby joints and an awkward 
step, he hurried along a catwalk 
through the echoing hangar-like 
chamber, noting that three or four 
fighters besides his had already returned and were resting in their 
cradles. The artificial gravity was 
WINGS OUT OF SHADOW 
quite steady, but Malori stumbled 
and almost fell in his haste to get 
down the short ladder to the operations deck. 
Petrovich, commander of the 
Judith, a bulky, iron-faced man of 
middle height, was on the deck apparently waiting for him. 
“Did — did I make my kill?” 
Malori stuttered eagerly as he came 
hurrying up. The forms of military 
address were little observed aboard 
the Judith, as a rule, and Malori 
was really a civilian anyway. That 
he had been allowed to take out a 
fighter at all was a mark of the 
commander’s desperation. 
Scowling, Petrovich answered 
bluntly. “Malori, you’re a disaster 
in one of these ships. Haven’t the 
mind for it at all.’’ 
The world turned a little gray in 
front of Malori. He hadn’t understood until this moment just how 
important to him certain dreams of 
glory were. He could find only weak 
and awkward words. “But ... I 
thought I did all right.” He tried to 
recall his combat-nightmare. Something about a church. 
“Two people had to divert their 
ships from their original combat 
objectives to rescue you. I’ve already seen their gun-camera tapes. 
You had Number Four just sparring around with that berserker as 
if you had no intention of doing it 
any damage at all.” Petrovich 
looked at him more closely, 
shrugged, and softened his voice 
somewhat. “I’m not trying to chew 
you out, you weren’t even aware of 
what was happening, of course. I’m 
just stating facts. Thank probability the Hope is twenty AU deep 
in a formaldehyde cloud up ahead. 
If she’d been in an exposed position 
just now they would have got her.” 
“But — ” Malori tried to begin an 
argument but the commander 
simply walked away. More fighters 
were coming in. Locks sighed and 
cradles clanged, and Petrovich had 
plenty of more important things to 
do than stand here arguing with 
him. Malori stood there alone for a 
few moments, feeling deflated and 
defeated and diminished. Involuntarily he cast a yearning glance 
back at Number Four. It was a 
short, windowless cylinder, not 
much more than a man’s height in 
diameter, resting in its metal cradle 
while technicians worked about it. 
The stubby main laser nozzle, still 
hot from firing, was sending up a 
wisp of smoke now that it was back 
in atmosphere. There was his twohanded cleaver. 
No man could direct a ship or a 
weapon with anything like the competence of a good machine. The 
creeping slowness of human nerve 
impulses and of conscious thought 
disqualified humans from maintaining direct control of their ships 
in any space fight against berserkers. But the human subconscious was not so limited. Certain 
of its processes could not be correlated with any specific synaptic 
activity within the brain, and some 
theorists held that these processes 
took place outside of time. Most 
physicists stood aghast at this 
view — but for space combat it 
made a useful working hypothesis. 
In combat, the berserker computers were coupled with sophisticated randoming devices, to provide the flair, the unpredictability 
that gained an advantage over an 
opponent who simply and consistently chose the maneuver statistically most likely to bring success. 
Men also used computers to drive 
their ships, but had now gained an 
edge over the best randomizers by 
relying once more on their own 
brains, parts of which were evidently freed of hurry and dwelt outside 
of time, where even speeding light 
must be as motionless as carved ice. 
There were drawbacks. Some 
people (including Malori, it now 
appeared) were simply not suitable 
for the job, their subconscious 
minds seemingly uninterested in 
such temporal matters as life or 
death. And even in suitable minds 
the subconscious was subject to 
great stress. Connection to external 
computers loaded the mind in some 
way not yet understood. One after 
another, human pilots returning 
from combat were removed from 
their ships in states of catatonia or 
hysterical excitement. Sanity might 
be restored, but the man or woman 
was worthless thereafter as a combat-computer’s teammate. The system was so new that the importance 
of these drawbacks was just coming 
to light aboard Judith now. The 
trained operators of the fighting 
ships had been used up, and so had 
their replacements. Thus it was 
that Ian Malori, historian, and 
others were sent out, untrained, to 
fight. But using their minds had 
bought a little extra time. 
F rom the operations deck Malori went to his small single 
cabin. He had not eaten for some 
time, but he was not hungry. He 
changed clothes and sat in a chair 
looking at his bunk, looking at his 
books and tapes and violin, but he 
did not try to rest or to occupy himself. He expected that he would 
promptly get a call from Petrovich. 
Because Petrovich now had nowhere 
else to turn. 
He almost smiled when the communicator chimed, bringing a summons to meet with the commander 
and other officers at once. Malori 
acknowledged and set out, taking 
with him a brown leather-like case 
about the size of a briefcase but differently shaped, which he selected 
from several hundred similar cases 
in a small room adjacent to his 
cabin. The case he carried was 
labeled: crazy horse. 
Petrovich looked up as Malori 
entered the small planning room in 
which the handful of ship’s officers 
were already gathered around a 
table. The commander glanced at 
the case Malori was carrying, and 
nodded. “It seems we have no 
choice, historian. We are running 
WINGS OUT OF SHADOW 
the moment Malori was not going 
to speak that name. 
“I want iteasy,” was all he said, 
and blinked his eyes and tried to 
rub his neck against the pain. 
The man looked him over in silence a little longer. “All right,” he 
said then. Turning back to the machine, he added in a different, 
humble voice: “I can easily dominate this injured badlife. There will 
be no problems if you leave us here 
alone.” 
T he machine turned one metalcased lens toward its servant. 
“Remember,” it vocalized, “the 
auxiliaries must be made ready. 
Time grows short. Failure will 
bring unpleasant stimuli.” 
“1 will remember, sir.” The man 
was humble and sincere. The 
machine looked at both of them a 
few moments longer and then departed, metal legs flowing suddenly 
into a precise and almost graceful 
walk. Shortly after, Malori heard 
the familiar sound of an airlock 
cycling. 
“We’re alone now,’’ the man 
said, looking down at him. “If you 
want a name for me you can call me 
Greenleaf. Want to try to fight me? 
If so, let’s get it over with.” He was 
not much bigger than Malori but 
his hands were huge and he looked 
hard and very capable despite his 
ragged filthiness. “All right, that’s 
a smart choice. You know, you’re 
actually a lucky man, though you 
don’t realize it yet. Berserkers 
aren’t like the other masters that 
men have — not like the governments and parties and corporations 
and causes that use you up and 
then just let you drop and drag 
away. No, when the machines run 
out of uses for you they’ll fmish you 
off quickly and cleanly — if you’ve 
serv^ well. I know. I’ve seen’em do 
it that way with other humans. No 
reason why they shouldn’t. All they 
want is for us to die, not suffer.” 
Malori said nothing. He thought 
perhaps he would be able tg stand 
up soon. 
Greenleaf (the name seemed so 
inappropriate that Malori thought 
it probably real) made some adjustment on a small device that he had 
taken from a pocket and was holding almost concealed in one large 
hand. He asked: “How many escort 
carriers besides this one are trying 
to protect the Hope?" 
“I don’t know,” Malori lied. 
There had been only the Judith, 
“What is your name?” The 
bigger man was still looking at the 
device in his hand. 
“Ian Malori.” 
Greenleaf nodded, and without 
showing any particular emotion in 
his face took two steps forward and 
kicked Malori in the belly, precisely 
and with brutal power. 
“That was for trying to lie to me, 
Ian Malori,” said his captor’s 
voice, heard dimly from somewhere 
above as Malori groveled on the 
deck, trying to breathe again. 
“Understand that I am infallibly 
able to tell when you are lying. 
Now, how many escort carriers are 
there?” 
In time Malori could sit up 
again, and choke out words. “Only 
this one.” Whether Greenleaf had 
a real lie detector, or was only trying to make it appear so by asking 
questions whose answers he already 
knew, Malori decided that from 
now on he would speak the literal 
truth as scrupulously as possible. A 
few more kicks like that and he 
would be helpless and useless and 
the machines would kill him. He 
discovered that he was by no means 
ready to abandon his life. 
“What was your position on the 
crew, Malori?” 
“Fm a civilian.” 
“What sort?” 
“An historian.” 
“And why are you here?” 
Malori started to try to get to his 
feet, then decided there was nothing 
to be gained by the struggle and 
stayed sitting on the deck. If he 
ever let himself dwell on his situation for a moment he would be too 
hideously afraid to think coherently. “There was a project . you 
see, I brought with me from Yaty a 
number of what we call historical 
models — blocks of programmed responses we use in historical research.” 
“I remember hearing about some 
such things. What was the project 
you mentioned?” 
“Trying to use the personae of 
military men as randomizers for the 
WINGS OUT OF SHADOW 
combat computers on the one-man 
ships.” 
“Aha.” Greenleaf squatted, 
supple and poised for all his 
raunchy look. “How do they work 
in combat? Better than a live pilot’s 
subconscious mind? The machines 
know all about that.'' 
“We never had a chance to try. 
Are the rest of the crew here all 
dead?” 
Greenleaf nodded casually. “It 
wasn’t a hard boarding. There 
must have been a failure in your 
automatic defenses. I’m glad to 
find one man alive and smart 
enough to cooperate. It’ll help me 
in my career.” He glanced at an expensive chronometer strapped to 
his dirty wrist. “Stand up, Ian 
Malori. There’s work to do.” 
Malori got up and followed the 
other toward the operations deck. 
“The machines and I have been 
looking around, Malori. These nine 
little fighting ships you still have on 
board are just too good to be 
wasted. The machines are sure of 
catching the Hope now, but she’ll 
have automatic defenses, probably 
a lot tougher than this tub’s were. 
The machines have taken a lot of 
casualties on this chase so they 
mean to use these nine little ships 
as auxiliary troops — no doubt you 
have some knowledge of military 
history?” 
“Some.” The answer was perhaps an understatement, but it 
seemed to pass as truth. The lie detector, if it was one, had been put 
away. But Malori would still take 
no more chances than he must. 
“Then you probably know how 
some of the generals on old Earth 
used their auxiliaries. Drove them 
on ahead of the main force of 
trusted troops, where they could be 
killed if they tried to retreat, and 
were also the first to be used up 
against the enemy.” 
Arriving on the operations deck, 
Malori saw few signs of damage. 
Nine tough little ships waited in 
their launching cradles, re-armed 
and returned and refueled for combat. All that would have been taken 
care of within minutes of their return from their last mission. 
“Malori, from looking at these 
ships’ controls while you were unconscious, I gather that there’s no 
fully automatic mode in which they 
can be operated.” 
“Right. There has to be some 
controlling mind, or randomizer, 
connected on board.” 
“You and I are going to get them 
out as berserker auxiliaries, Ian 
Malori.” Greenleaf glanced at his 
timepiece again. “We have less 
than an hour to think of a good way 
and only a few hours more to complete the job. The faster the better. 
If we delay we are going to be made 
to suffer for it.” He seemed almost 
to relish the thought. “What do you 
suggest we do?” 
Malori opened his mouth as if to 
speak, and then did not. 
Greenleaf said: “Installing any 
of your military personae is of 
course out of the question, as they 
might not submit well to being 
driven forward like mere cannonfodder. I assume they are leaders of 
some kind. But have you perhaps 
any of these personae from different fields, of a more docile nature?” 
Malori, sagging against the operations officer’s empty combat chair, 
forced himself to think very carefully before he spoke. “As it 
happens, there are some personae 
aboard in which I have a special 
personal interest. Come.” 
With the other following closely, 
Malori led the way to his small 
bachelor cabin. Somehow it was astonishing that nothing had been 
changed inside. There on the bunk 
was his violin, and on the table 
were his music tapes and a few 
books. And here, stacked neatly in 
their leather-like curved cases, were 
some of the personae that he liked 
best to study. 
Malori lifted the top case from 
the stack. “This man was a violinist, as I like to think I am. His 
name would probably mean nothing 
to you.” 
“Musicology was never my field. 
But tell me more.” 
“He was an Earthman, who lived 
in the twentieth century CE — quite 
a religious man, too, as I understand. We can plug the persona in 
and ask it what it thinks of fighting, if you are suspicious.” 
“We had better do that.” When 
Malori had shown him the proper 
receptacle beside the cabin’s small 
Olonllord 1973 
I Mkronite filter. 
I Mild, snnooth taste. 
I America’s qualify cigarette. 
I Kent 
I 
King Size 
or Deluxe 100’s. 
' Kings: 16 mg. "tar" 1.0 mg. nicotine; 100'S: 19 mg. "tar," 1.2 mg. nicotine; 
V Menthol: 18 mg."tar," 1.3 mg. nicotine; av. per cigarette, RC Report Sept. 73. 
Try the crisp, clean tastM 
of Kent Menthol 
The only Menthol with the fanwus Micronite filter. 
Warning: The Surgeon General Has Determined 
That Cigarette Smoking Is Dangerous to Your Health 
computer console, Greenleaf 
snapped the connections together 
himself. “How does one communicate with it?“ 
“Just talk.” 
Greenleaf spoke sharply toward 
the leather-like case. “Your 
name?” 
“Albert Ball.” The voice that 
answered from the console speaker 
sounded more human by far than 
the berserker’s had. 
“How does the thought of getting 
into a fight strike you, Albert?” 
“A detestable idea.” 
“Will you play the violin for us?” 
“Gladly.” But no miisic followed. 
Malori put in: “More connections are necessary if you want 
actual music.” 
“I don’t think we’ll need that.” 
Greenleaf unplugged the Albert 
Ball unit and began to look through 
the stack of others, frowning at 
unfamiliar names. There were 
twelve or fifteen cases in all. “Who 
are these?” 
“Albert Ball’s contemporaries. 
Performers who shared his profession.” Malori let himself sink 
down on the bunk for a few moments’ rest. He was not far from 
fainting. Then he went to stand 
with Greenleaf beside the stack of 
personae. “This is a model of Edward Mannock, who was blind in 
one eye and could never have 
passed the physical examination 
necessary to serve in any military 
force of his time.” He pointed to 
another. “This man served briefly 
in the cavalry, as I recall, but he 
kept getting thrown from his horse 
and was soon relegated to gathering 
supplies. And this one was a frail, 
tubercular youth who died at 
twenty-three standard years of 
age.” 
Greenleaf gave up looking at the 
cases and turned to size up Malori 
once again. Malori could feel his 
battered stomach muscles trying to 
contract, anticipating another violent impact. It would be too much, 
it was going to kill him if it came 
like that again . 
ALL right.” Greenleaf was 
/Vfrowning, checking his chronometer yet again. Then he looked 
up with a little smile. Oddly, the 
smile made him look like the hell of 
a good fellow. “All right! Musicians, Isuppose, are the antithesis 
of the military. If the machines approve, we’ll install them and get the 
ships sent out. Ian Malori, I may 
just raise your pay.” His pleasant 
smile broadened. “We may just 
have bought ourselves another 
standard year of life if this works 
out as well as I think it might.” 
When the machine came aboard 
again a few minutes later, Greenleaf bowing before it explained the 
essence of the plan, while Malori in 
the background, in an agony of 
terror, found himself bowing too. 
“Proceed, then,” the machine 
approved. “If you are not, the ship 
infected with life may find concealment in the storms that rise ahead 
WINQS OUT OF SHADOW 
of US.” Then it went away again 
quickly. Probably it had repairs 
and refitting to accomplish on its 
own robotic ship. 
With two men working, installation went very fast. It was only a 
matter of opening a fighting ship’s 
cabin, inserting an uncased persona in the installed adapter, 
snapping together standard connectors and clamps, and closing the 
cabin hatch again. Since haste was 
vital to the berserkers’ plans, testing was restricted to listening for a 
live response from each persona as 
it was activated inside a ship. Most 
of ^he responses were utter banalities about nonexistent weather or 
ancient food or drink, or curious 
phrases that Malori knew were only 
phatic social remarks. 
All seemed to be going well, but 
Greenleaf was having some last 
minute misgivings. “I hope these 
sensitive gentlemen will stand up 
under the strain of finding out their 
true situation. They will be able to 
grasp that, won’t they? The machines won’t expect them to fight 
well, but we don’t want them going 
catatonic, either.” 
Malori, close to exhaustion, was 
tugging at the hatch of Number 
Eight, and nearly fell off the curved 
hull when it came open suddenly. 
“They will apprehend their situation within a minute after launching, I should say. At least in a 
general way. I don’t suppose they’ll 
understand it’s interstellar space 
around them. You have been a 
military man, I suppose. If they 
should be reluctant to fight — I 
leave to you the question of how to 
deal with recalcitrant auxiliaries.” 
When they plugged the persona 
into ship Number Eight, its test response wasi “I wish my craft to be 
painted red.” 
“At once, sir,” said Malori 
quickly, and slammed down the 
ship’s hatch and started to move on 
to Number Nine. 
“What was that all about?” 
Greenleaf frowned, but looked at 
his timepiece and moved along. 
“I suppose the maestro is already 
aware that he is about to embark in 
some kind of a vehicle. As to why 
he might like it painted red . .” 
Malori grunted, trying to open up 
Number Nine, and let his answer 
trail away. 
At last all the ships were ready. 
With his finger on the launching 
switch, Greenleaf paused. For one 
last time his eyes probed Malori’s. 
“We’ve done very well, timewise. 
We’re in for a reward, as long as 
this idea works at least moderately 
well.” He was speaking now in a 
solemn near-whisper. “It had 
better work. Have you ever watched 
a man being skinned alive?” 
Malori was gripping a stanchion 
to keep erect. “I have done all I 
can.” 
Greenleaf operated the launching switch. There was a polyphonic 
whisper of airlocks. The nine ships 
were gone, and simultaneously a 
holographic display came alive 
above the operations officer’s console. In the center of the display the 
Judith showed as a fat green symbol, with nine smaller green dots 
moving slowly and uncertainly 
nearby. Farther off, a steady formation of red dots represented 
what was left of the berserker pack 
that had so long and so relentlessly 
pursued the Hope and her escort. 
There were at least fifteen red berserker dots, Malori noted gloomily. 
“The trick,” Greenleaf said as if 
to himself, “is to make them more 
afraid of their own leaders than 
they are of the enemy.” He keyed 
the panel switches that would send 
his voice out to the ships. “Attention, units One through Nine!” he 
barked. “You are under the guns of 
a vastly superior force, and any attempt at disobedience or escape 
will be severely punished ...” 
He went on browbeating them 
for a minute, while Malori observed 
in the screen that the dirty weather 
the berserker had mentioned was 
coming on. A sleet of atomic particles was driving through this 
section of the nebula, across the 
path of the Judith and the odd 
hybrid fleet that moved with her. 
The Hope, not in view on this range 
scale, might be able to take advantage of the storm to get away entirely unless the berserker pursuit 
was swift. 
Visibility on the operations display was failing fast and Greenleaf 
cut off his speech as it became apparent that contact was being lost. 
Orders in the berserkers’ unnatural 
voices, directed at auxiliary ships 
One through Nine, came in fragmentarily before the curtain of 
noise became an opaque white-out. 
The pursuit of the Hope had not yet 
been resumed. 
F or a while all was silent on the 
operations deck, except for an 
occasional crackle of noise from the 
display. All around them the empty 
launching cradles waited. 
“That’s that,” Greenleaf said at 
length. “Nothing to do now but 
worry.” He gave his little transforming smile again, and seemed to 
be almost enjoying the situation. 
Malori was looking at him curiously. “How do you — manage to 
cope so well?” 
“Why not?” Greenleaf stretched 
and got up from the now-useless 
console. “You know, once a man 
gives up his old ways, badlife ways, 
admits he’s really dead to them, the 
new ways aren’t so bad. There are 
even women available from time to 
time, when the machines take 
prisoners.” 
“Goodlife,” said Malori. Now he 
had spoken the obscene, provoking 
epithet. But at the moment he was 
not afraid. 
“Goodlife yourself, little man.” 
Greenleaf was still smiling. “You 
know, I think you still look down 
on me. You’re in as deep as I am 
now, remember?” 
“I think I pity you.” 
Greenleaf let out a little snort of 
WINGS OUT OF SHADOW 
laughter, and shook his own head 
pityingly. “You know, I may have 
ahead of me a longer and more 
pain-free life than most of humanity has even enjoyed — you said one 
of the models for the personae died 
at twenty-three. Was that a 
common age of death in those 
days?” 
Malori, still clinging to his stanchion, began to wear a strange, 
grim little smile. “Well, in his 
generation, in the continent of 
Europe, it was. The First World 
War was raging at the time.” 
“But he died of some disease, 
you jaid.” 
“No. I said he had a disease, 
tuberculosis. Doubtless it would 
have killed him eventually. But he 
died in battle, in 1917 CE, in a 
place called Belgium. His body was 
never found, as I recall, an artillery 
barrage having destroyed it and his 
aircraft entirely.” 
Greenleaf was standing very still. 
“Aircraft! What are you saying?” 
Malori pulled himself erect, 
somewhat painfully, and let go of 
his support. “I tell you now that 
Georges Guynemer — that was his 
name — shot down fifty-three enemy 
aircraft before he was killed. 
Wait!” Malori’s voice was suddenly 
loud and firm, and Greenleaf 
halted his menacing advance in 
sheer surprise. “Before you begin 
to do anything violent to me, you 
should perhaps consider whether 
your side or mine is likely to win the 
fight outside.” 
“The fight ...” 
“It will be nine ships against fifteen or moire machines, but I don’t 
feel too pessimistic. The personae 
we have sent out are not going to be 
meekly slaughtered.” 
G reenleaf stared at him a moment longer, then spun around 
and lunged for the operations console. The display was still blank 
white with noise and there was 
nothing to be done. He slowly sank 
into the padded chair. “What have 
you done to me?” he whispered. 
“That collection of invalid musicians — you couldn’t have been 
lying about them all.” 
“Oh, every word I spoke was 
true. Not all World War One 
fighter pilots were invalids, of 
course. Some were in perfect 
health, indeed fanatical about staying that way. And I did not say they 
were all musicians, though I certainly meant you to think so. Ball 
had the most musical ability among 
the aces, but was still only an amateur. He always said^ie loathed his 
real profession.” 
Greenleaf, slumped in the chair 
now, seemed to be aging visibly. 
“But one was blind ... it isn’t 
possible.” 
“So his enemies thought, when 
they released him from an internment camp early in the war. 
Edward Mannock, blind in one 
eye. He had to trick an examiner to 
get into the army. Of course the 
tragedy of these superb men is that 
they spent themselves killing one 
another. In those days they had no 
berserkers to fight, at least none 
that could be attacked dashingly, 
with an aircraft and a machine 
gun. I suppose men have always 
faced berserkers of some kind.” 
“Let me make sure I understand.” Greenleafs voice was almost pleading. “We have sent out 
the personae of nine fighter 
pilots?” 
“Nine of the best. I suppose their 
total of claimed aerial victories is 
more than five hundred. Such 
claims were usually exaggerated, 
but still ...” 
There was silence again. Greenleaf slowly turned his chair back to 
face the operations display. After a 
time the storm of atomic noise 
began to abate. Malori, who had 
sat down on the deck to rest, got up 
again, this time more quickly. In 
the hologram a single glowing symbol was emerging from the noise, 
fast approaching the position of the 
Judith, 
The approaching symbol was 
bright red. 
“So there we are,” said Greenleaf, getting to his feet. From a 
pocket he produced a stubby little 
handgun. At first he pointed it 
toward the shrinking Malori, but 
then he smiled his nice smile and 
shook his head. “No, let the machines have you. That will be much 
worse.” 
When they heard the airlock 
begin to cycle, Greenleaf raised the 
weapon to point at his own skull. 
Malori could not tear his eyes away. 
The inner door clicked and Greenleaf fired. 
Malori bounded across the intervening space and pulled the gun 
from Greenleafs dead hand almost 
before the body had completed its 
fall. He turned to aim the weapon 
at the airlock as its inner door 
sighed open. The berserker standing there was the one he had seen 
earlier, or the same type at least. 
But it had just been through violent 
alterations. One metal arm was cut 
short in a bright bubbly scar, from 
which the ends of truncated cables 
flapped. The whole metal body was 
riddled with small holes, and 
around its top there played a halo 
of electrical discharge. 
Malori fired, but the machine 
ignored the impact of the forcepacket. They would not have let 
Greenleaf keep a gun with which 
they could be hurt. The battered 
machine ignored Malori too, for 
the moment, and lurched forward 
to bend over Greenleafs nearly decapitated body. 
“Tra-tra-tra-treason,” the berserker squeaked. “Ultimate unpleasant ultimate unpleasant stumstum-stimuli. Badlife badlife 
bad — ” 
By then Malori had moved up 
close behind it and thrust the 
muzzle of the gun into one of the 
still-hot holes where Albert Ball or 
perhaps Frank Luke or Werner 
WINGS OUT OF SHADOW 
Voss or one of the others had 
already used a laser to good effect. 
Two forcepackets beneath its armor 
and the berserker went down, as 
still as the man who lay beneath it. 
The halo of electricity died. 
Malori backed off, looking at 
them both, then spun around to 
scan the operations display again. 
The red dot was drifting away from 
the Judith, the vessel it represented 
now evidently no more than inert 
machinery. 
Out of the receding atomic storm 
a single green dot was approaching. 
A minute later. Number Eight 
came in alone, bumping to a gentle 
stop against its cradle pads. The 
laser nozzle at once began smoking 
heavily in atmosphere. The craft 
was scarred in several places by 
enemy fire. 
“I claim four more victories,” 
the persona said as soon as Malori 
opened the hatch. “Today I was 
given fine support by my wingmen, 
who made great sacrifices for the 
Fatherland. Although the enemy 
outnumbered us by two to one, I 
think that not a single one of them 
escaped. But I must protest bitterly 
that my aircraft still has not been 
painted red.” 
‘T will see to it at once, 
meinherr, " murmured Malori, as 
he began to disconnect the persona 
from the fighting ship. He felt a 
little foolish for trying to reassure a 
piece of hardware. Still, he handled 
the persona gently as he carried it 
to where the little formation of 
empty cases were waiting on the 
operations deck, their labels showing plainly: 
ALBERT ball; 
WILLIAM AVERY BISHOP; 
RENE PAUL FONCK; 
GEORGES MARIE GUYNEMER; 
FRANK LUKE; 
EDWARD MANNOCK; 
CHARLES NUNGESSER; 
MANFRED VON RICHTHOFEN; 
WERNER VOSS. 
They were English, American, 
German, French. They were Jew, 
violinist, invalid, Prussian, rebel, 
hater, bon vivant, Christian. 
Among the nine of them they were 
many other things besides. Maybe 
there was only the one word — 
man — which could include them 
all. 
Right now the nearest living 
humans were many millions of kilometers away, but still Malori did 
not feel quite alone. He put the persona back into its case gently, even 
knowing that it would be undamaged by ten thousand more gravities than his hands Qould exert. 
Maybe it would fit into the cabin of 
Number Eight with him, when he 
made his try to reach the Hope. 
“Looks like if s just you and me 
now. Red Baron.” The human being from which it had been 
modeled had been not quite twentysix when he was killed over France, 
after less than eighteen months of 
success and fame. Before that, in 
the cavalry, his horse had thrown 
him again and again. •
SFGRAM_START_GARRETT
PRIDE 
AND 
PRIMACY 
Given that the machinery is not 
too complicated, 
iVs only fair that one of the 
gentler sex should make the 
first solo flight to the Moon! 
RANDALL GARRETT 
So YOU think you're tough, do
you? 
Doh-dooh’dit-dooh-duh~dooh-de 
dooh ... 
Arlys’s imagination transformed 
the seemingly random twitterings 
of the ship’s computer into words. 
As good as those who have gone 
before you — maybe better, eh? 
Dah-dooh-dah-dee-day’die-duh’ 
dooh- dah- daw- dee- daw- dooh- daydee-deh-deh-deh . 
The computer ranged up and 
down unpredictably over its three 
octaves with a strangely melodic 
tunelessness. 
Space Officer First Class Arlys 
was not afraid, merely tense and 
uncomfortable. The white, craterdented sphere of the Moon lay dead 
ahead; the white-mottled blue of 
Earth far astern. 
Dit-doh-doh-dooh-dah-doohduh-dat- day- dooh- day . 
First solo to the Moon, Does that 
make you great? 
“Great, no; famous, yes,” Arlys 
muttered, and forced himself to ignore the chittering computer. His 
gaze flicked over the various readout panels, the instruments which 
showed him what the ship was 
actually doing — regardless of what 
his own senses might tell him. 
The barely perceptible throbbing 
of the magnetogravitic-drive engines sending out their inertial 
pulses made a subliminal rhythm 
section for the symphonic tweetings 
of the computer. 
First solo flight to the Moon. As 
a matter of cold fact, the first solo 
flight anywhere except for a few 
minor Earth-orbit flights. The final 
perfection of the magnetogravitic 
engine had rendered obsolete the 
bulky, huge, ungainly monsters 
that had carried the first crews to 
the Moon sixty years before. 
This baby. Solo One, was as easy 
to handle as a helicopter and almost as maneuverable. 
Doh-doh'duh-do-do-duh-doohdooh-dee-dee — 
**Solo One, Solo One, Do you 
read me? This is Space Control, Do 
you read?'* 
Definitely not the computer. 
Arlys reached out a gloved hand 
and touched a switch. 
“Solo One here. I read you loud 
and clear. Space Control.” 
“Give us a readout check on your 
position, attitude, velocity and acceleration, Solo One. ” 
“Check readout. Check. Will 
do.” He began going through the 
routine, carefully, accurately, automatically, keeping his voice neutral. 
He did not like Space Commander 
Eldam, but had always taken pains 
not to let her know it. There was an 
irritating quality in her manner. 
Her voice gave him the feeling that 
someone was pouring little shards 
of crushed glass on his eardrums. 
He was all for equality of the 
sexes, very strongly so. But that one 
rubbed him the wrong, way. As a 
matter of fact, so did her assistant. 
Subcommander Brase, whose good 
looks were overshadowed by her 
arrogance. Oh yes, he believed in 
sexual equality, but Eldam and 
Brase did not exactly represent the 
epitome of egalitarianism. 
He finished the readout check. 
After a moment, Eldam’s voice, 
came. ''Readouts all check. Programs synch. Carry on. Mister 
Arlys. ” 
“Aye, aye, ma’am.” He cut off 
his mike. 
“Blah,” he said. 
Of course everything checked. 
This machine was simplicity itself. 
And at one gee all the way — acceleration and deceleration — he could 
get to the Moon in less time than it 
took to fly across the continent. No 
coasting except at “turnover” — although he hadn’t actually turned 
the ship over, merely reversed the 
engines. Of course, he’d been 
weightless all the way; he was being 
accelerated by the inertial pulses at 
the same rate the ship was. It was 
as though he were falling toward an 
Earth-mass a short distance in 
front of the ship — or behind it, 
when the engines were reversed. 
The ship’s sensors told him his 
velocity and acceleration relative to 
the surface of the Moon, and the 
distance to that surface. 
Anyone who could pilot a transcontinental aircraft could easily 
handle the Solo One, 
Doh'duh-day-doo-doh’day ... 
So what makes you so great? 
“Because I’m the first!” Arlys 
snapped. “So shut up!'' 
T he moon was rushing toward 
him, seemingly much too fast, 
but the instruments told him everything was under control. The altimeter should read one thousand 
when he came to a dead stop relative to the white surface of the 
broad plain of airless rock and dust 
toward which he sped. 
It did. He so reported to Space 
Control. 
The upward thrust of oh-pointone-seven gees exactly counterbalanced the pull of the Moon below. 
He eased back on the thrust control 
and began dropping again. The 
next phase had begun. 
“I am dropping from ten thousand to five hundred,” he told 
Space Control. 
"Acknowledged, " 
When he reached the altitude he 
wanted, he came to a coitiplete stop 
again, applied lateral thrust so that 
he could survey the area for just the 
landing area he wanted. All the 
while, he kept up the steady patter 
of reporting to Space Control. 
Then, suddenly, he saw it. His 
breath hissed involuntarily. 
"Solo One! What happened? 
What is it?" 
“I’m not sure. Hold it a minute.” 
He reversed his lateral thrust and 
backed up until he was directly over 
the thing. “I’m directly over it 
now,” he said, “but I don’t recognize it. It looks like a structure of 
some kind, the size of a small 
house. It sure as hell isn’t natural.” 
"Probably some geologic formation, " 
“It’s too damn regular to be 
natural. It’s a construct.” 
"But no one's ever been to that 
part of the Moon, " 
“No one from Earth,” Arlys corrected mildly. 
There was a long pause. Much 
longer than the transmission-time 
from Moon to Earth and back. 
Arlys made a decision at that 
moment. He knew what was going 
on in Space Commander Eldam’s 
mind as surely as if they were telepathically linked. She would get 
him away from there and later send 
up a team to investigate the thing. 
Like hell she would! 
Again applying lateral thrust, he 
moved away from the strange structure and set the Solo One on the 
surface of the Moon. He was 
putting on his spacesuit wh^ii 
Eldam’s voice came again. 
PRIDE AND PRIMACY 
“1 
**Solo One, can you get a camera 
on that thing and send us a picture?" 
Ah! She wasn’t sure yet! 
“I think so. Space Control. Take 
me a few minutes.” 
If she wanted an image, she’d get 
one. So far, he hadn’t disobeyed 
any orders. Eldam had assumed 
that he would not want to land, and 
therefore had failed to tell him not 
to. 
There had been a dozen spacefarers on the Moon before him but 
Arlys would be the first to go it 
alone. In their crude ships the previous teams had spent considerable 
time getting in and out of their vessels; Arlys was under no such restrictions. After making certain 
that all his communication lines 
were open, he picked up the 
battery-powered camera and a 
flashlight, and cycled himself 
through the airlock. At least, he 
couldn’t hear the damned tweetlings from the computer in his helmet earphones. 
He looked across the barren, 
rock-strewn plain at the strange 
structure which stood against the 
space-black sky. 
“If that thing is a geological formation,” he muttered to himself, 
“then I am a quadratic equation.” 
H e started walking toward the 
thing, leaving footprints behind in the gritty lunar soil. 
Solo One, aren 't you ready with 
that camera yet?"
SFGRAM_STOP_GARRETT
YOU 
ARE GOD! 
With appropriate Spiritual 
development, you can come 
to know this as the absolute 
Truth, which it is, and really 
knowing this Truth will set 
you free from every form of 
I limitation. 
Only $3.00. If not completely 
satisfied, return material 
within one week for full refund. 
MAN-IS-GOD 
BOX1214G Miami, FI. 33133 
! ^
SFGRAM_START_GARRETT
“Just about,” he replied truthfully. “I’m setting it up now. I’ll 
have it in operation very shortly.” 
"Very well. Is your ship stabil’ 
ized so that we can get a clear 
image?" 
“I’m sure the image will come in 
quite clearly.” 
Arlys found a fairly flat-topped 
boulder about chest high, and decided it was just what he wanted. 
Carefully, he set the portable 
camera on it, aimed and focused it 
on the strange structure, set the remote control relay to “ready”, and 
went on toward the whatever- it- was. 
He had been moving on sheer determination. He had found something strange, something never 
before seen by anyone on Earth, 
and he was certainly not going to let 
Space Commander Eldam cheat 
him out of the credit — and maybe 
glory — of investigating it. 
It was not until he saw the track’s 
that he realized shatteringly that 
his determination had blind^ him 
to what might be deadly danger. 
He stopped and stared at the 
prints in the soil between himself 
and the structure, his mind almost 
numb. Somehow, it had never occurred to him that whoever or 
whatever had built the thing might 
still be inside it. Or around somewhere. 
Fear. 
He got behind a boulder so fast 
that he was never afterward sure of 
how he had done it. Anything to get 
a shield between himself and the 
alien artifact. He crouched with his 
back to the boulder, staring at his 
own footprints and those of the 
alien— aliens? — while perspiration 
oozed from his pores. 
“iSo/o One, this is Space Control 
We're waiting for your transmission. " 
His mind was comparing the two 
sets of prints. The alien prints were 
very like his own. Only the sole pattern was different. 
"Solo One! Please report! Solo 
One! Please report!" 
It was then that he saw the essential difference between his own 
prints and those of the — others. 
He swallowed, then pitched his 
voice very carefully. It wouldn’t do 
to show Commander Eldam that he 
had momentarily funked. 
“Solo One here,’’ he said briskly. 
“Space Control, if you want a man 
to get his work done, don’t get all 
hysterical and start yammering in 
his ears. Transmission of image will 
begin very shortly.’’ 
He sto^ up confidently, walked 
around the boulder,' and headed 
directly toward the alien structure. 
Space Control did not reply. 
When he was within ten paces of 
the structure he stopped, looked at 
it carefully for a time, then, satisfied, thumbed the relay that activated the remote camera, 
“Space Control, you should be 
getting your image now. Is it 
clear?’’ 
A long pause. 
"Space Control here. Picture 
clear. What angle are you taking it 
from?" 
Arlys grinned. The old bat was 
confused. 
Before he could answer — "Solo 
One! There's something in what 
looks like a spacesuit standing near 
the thing!" 
“That’s me, Commander.’’ Carefully concealing his joy, he went on 
to report what he had done. 
“You landed? But you had 
no — ” 
“I have my orders. Commander,’’ Arlys interrupted. “Quote: 
‘Upon finding a suitable landing 
site near the target zone, the pilot 
shall land and survey the nearby 
area as hereinafter directed.’ Close 
quote. The ‘hereinafter directed’ 
PRIDE AND PRIMACY 
part says — and I quote — ” 
Commander Eldam cut him 
short. ‘7 know your orders, Arlys, 
You obeyed them. Drop it. But 
isn't it a little headstrong for you to 
walk up to the thing like that? 
What if there's an alien inside, 
waiting for you?" 
“Commander, I looked at those 
footprints. Now I’ve looked at the 
structure.’’ He paused. “Commander, they have weathered. The footprints are blurred. The surface of 
the structure looks as if it had been 
lightly sandblasted. Except, of 
course, for the underside, where 
micrometeors couldn’t hit it. But 
the thing is old — old! Do you have 
any idea how long it takes to 
weather something on the surface 
of the Moon?’’ 
He looked up at the thing. “It’s 
about twice my height, as you can 
see. It’s an octagonal box — not a 
regular octagon; it has four long 
sides and four shorter ones, like a 
square with, the corners cut off. 
You can’t see it from there but 
that’s what it looks like from above. 
There are four braces, as you can 
see, attached to the shorter sides. 
They hold that bedroom-sized box 
up off the ground so that the 
bottom is a little higher than my 
head.’’ 
He walked partway around the 
thing and stepped into its shadow. 
“There’s an entrance on this side 
with a ladder going up to it.” 
"Arlys, don't go into that thing 
until we've checked it over more. I 
don't krtow how well a fifty- thousand-year-old booby trap might 
work but I don't want you to find 
out just yet. " 
“I don’t either, believe me. Wait 
a minute; there’s some sort of metal 
plaque here, at just about eye level. 
Looks like some sort of inscription 
on it.” He directed his flashlight 
obliquely across the curious glyphs. 
HERE MEN FROM THE PLANET 
EARTH FIRST SET FOOT 
UPON THE MOON. 
JULY 1%9 A.D. 
WE CAME IN PEACE 
FOR ALL MANKIND. 
“I’d say it was definitely writing 
of some kind,” Arlys said, “but 
God only knows what it means.” 
"Get a still camera and photograph it," Eldam said. "Continue 
your investigation. And congratulations, Arlys: you've done well. " 
Arlys looked up at the strange 
artifact. What was it? Who or what 
had put it here? Aliens from 
another planet? From another 
star? No way of knowing yet. 
But scientists would eventually 
figure it out. And the credit as 
discoverer would go to Space Officer Arlys. 
Another First. He chuckled to 
himself. First Solo. First finder of 
an alien artifact. 
And another step toward equality. In spite of the teams of women 
who had come here before him, he 
was the first man on the Moon.
SFGRAM_STOP_GARRETT
For ten years she slept, 
and then awoke-^ 
to a nightmare! 
LYNDA ISAACS 
Dr. Markowitz noticed a 
rise in blood pressure and 
checked over all the instruments he had used. 
“I can’t figure it out,” he 
said to the nurse. “Fve done 
just about every type of test. 
Perhaps we’d better try a 
complete GYN. Bring me the 
rubber gloves.” 
He washed his hands and 
put on the gloves. She handed 
him a spectroscope. 
“Thank you,” he said. The 
patient remained unconscious. 
^^rwioM, Tm pregnant! Can you 
X believe it? I just got back 
from the Lab Center and the test 
was affirmative,” She sat down 
happily and the chair came on 
automatically. 
Tom sat down beside her and 
turned off the mech. “Let’s celebrate. We can have a party!” 
“A baby party when I’m one 
month pregnant? No, let’s go to the 
Airship for dinner. I’ll have all 
those outworld confections — ^you 
know I’m supposed to have cravings.” 
“I can’t believe it!” Dr. 
Markowitz exploded. He 
pushed the intercom and yelled to Nurse Oren. “Madeline, get in here, now!” 
Madeline Oren opened the 
door in time to see Samuel 
Markowitz ripping off his 
rubber gloves and starting a 
urine test. “What is it. 
Doctor?” She could see that 
his face was red and he was 
trembling. 
Markowitz yelled savagely, 
“When was this patient’s last 
GYN; wasn’t it a month or 
two ago?” 
Madeline Oren ran to the 
cabinet and searched through 
the files. At last she drew out 
the most recent file on trelLiNG, ANN. She read the last 
sheet carefully. 
“The last one was June 
third — a month and a half 
ago.” She looked anxiously at 
Markowitz. “Why, Doctor? 
“What is wrong?” She 
put down the papers and 
went to the lab table. He 
worked the test tube and then 
spoke. 
“I’ve just completed a 
urine test and a physical. 
Ann Trelling is one month 
pregnant.” 
^^fTiHis food is fantastic, Tom.” 
X He patted her hand lovingly 
and dialed another selection. It 
arrived immediately and they ate 
some of each kind. 
“You know, Arlin is going to be 
jealous. She’s been trying to get 
pregnant for months.” 
Tom smiled reprovingly, “Now, 
Ann—” 
Both of them worked on 
the last test and when it was 
completed they could only 
stare at the results in shock. 
“How,” Markowitz asked 
in a small voice, “how could 
she be pregnant? She’s been 
out the whole time, hasn’t 
she?” 
“Of course,” Nurse Oren 
replied defensively. “But 
what I can’t figure out is — 
who? Who. would rape an unconscious patient? I can personally affirm that no man 
has been alone with her, except you, since I’ve been on 
the case.” 
“Well, wipe that look off 
your face, Madeline. It wasn’t 
me.” He looked at the face of 
Ann Trelling. It was a placid 
face, as expressionless as it 
had been since he had taken 
charge of her ten years earlier. 
“Her mother will have to 
be notified. Damn. How will 
I face her? She could sue me 
for malpractice, for letting 
this happen.” 
T ihey grounded from the “Airship” and then took a helicab 
home. The apartment was dark 
and silent when Tom flicked on the 
illuminator. 
Ann danced into the room, then 
lay down on the lounger, contemplating the dimly glowing walls. 
“You know, right now is one of the 
times I wish I knew where my 
parents were. I don’t remember her 
that well — but I’d like to tell my 
mother and see the look on her 
face.” 
“Now don’t start that again.” 
Tom was lying on the couch. He 
turned on the telebank with his foot 
and pushed his head down into the 
cushions. “You hardly remember 
her and you don’t even remember 
what happened when you were 
fourteen that made you forget.” 
“Still, I remember that I loved 
her,” Ann said slowly. “You’ve got 
to admit that it’s scary to wake up 
one day when you’re fourteen and 
not know where you are and where 
anybody else is.” 
Tom smiled condescendingly, 
“That psychiatrist told you that 
some bad experience must have 
blocked it out. Now, if you can’t 
recall it, you shouldn’t make yourself miserable about it.” 
Ann nodded. “I only wish I could 
tell them — ” 
Mrs. Doreen Trelling was a 
big woman with tremendous 
legs. Her bosom comprised 
the front half of her body, a 
fact she had ceased trying to 
conceal. She was a widow and 
had worn black since the day 
of her husband’s funeral five 
years before. Now her face 
was troubled. 
Dr. Markowitz rose and 
shook her hand. “Sit down, 
Mrs. Trelling. I want to 
discuss Ann’s condition with 
you.” He motioned to an 
overstuffed chair and then sat 
down himself, mopping his 
face with a handkerchief. 
“I don’t understand. Doctor. She isn’t deteriorating, is 
she?” Mrs. Trelling took out 
a dainty square of cloth and 
held it to her nose. The past 
ten years had been a considerable trial to her, especially 
since the death of her husband. 
Dr. Markowitz was aware 
of the delicacy of his mission 
and tried a more circumspect 
approach. He folded his 
hands on the polished mahogany desk and began in his 
most clinical manner. 
“Mrs. Trelling, the machines have been keeping 
Ann in fine condition — have 
been since the onset of her 
disease in 1970. She has been 
under constant surveillance 
by either myself or my staff 
headed by Nurse Oren.” He 
looked up into Mrs. Trelling’s 
expectant face. 
“She’s in excellent shape, 
Mrs. Trelling. We were quite 
fortunate to be able to procure and pay for the special 
equipment that maintains 
Ann’s body.” 
Doreen Trelling knew that 
Dr. Markowitz had something more than routine information to give her. She 
licked her lips and studied the 
assorted clutter on his desk. 
‘T thoroughly examined 
Ann this morning. It didn’t 
seem necessary to give a 
thorough gynocological examination so soon. You know 
we’ve monitored to detect 
cancer or malignancy and in 
the past month we never had 
reason, never thought it 
necessary to — ” 
TRANSIT 
He broke off, searching for 
some safe way to tell her, 
some way he could save 
himself. 
“A vaginal examination 
shows that the hymen has 
been broken, in fact that — 
and I’m not sure how — intercourse has taken place.” 
Mrs. Trelling started. 
Horror spread over her face. 
“My Ann? My Ann has 
been raped?” She began to 
choke and fumbled in her 
purse for a small brown 
bottle. 
“Please, Mrs. Trelling. 
Please, get a grip on yourself. 
Ann could not, according to 
our records and observations, 
have had anything of the kind 
happen to her. However . .” 
ANN DEFOREST awoke feeling 
happy. The sheets, the kind 
that come coated with miracrepe, 
were cool and crisp, Tom was still 
asleep because the day was Saturday. The morning sun twinkled 
through the mosaic-glass of the 
window. 
She crept out of bed and walked 
barefoot into the kitchen where she 
dialed some coffee. The dispenser 
spilled a little — she’d have to get a 
repairman. 
Today she would call Moila and 
Arneen. They had all been so close 
at college — they should be told 
right away. It was good to savor the 
polished cleanliness of the kitchen 
while she drank her coffee — then, 
putting down her cup she piroutted 
into the living room. 
“However — ” Dr. Markowitz took a deep breath — “although I’m not sure how this 
could medically be so, she is 
pregnant.” He watched Doreen Trelling closely. 
She didn’t understand at 
first. Or maybe she just didn’t 
believe it. “Pregnant? Is this 
some kind of joke — pregnant?** 
Dr. Markowitz stood up 
and turned to the wall behind 
the desk which was covered 
with his framed medical certificates. He did not want to 
look at Mrs. Trelling. 
“We gave her every test 
possible and even though the 
condition is only one month 
in progress, it is definite.” 
Mrs. Trelling began to cry. 
know what I bought? A 
X crib and some diapers — 
and you’ll never believe the toys. I 
had a wonderful time buying all 
this stuff.” Her eyes shone and 
Tom took the packages from the 
floater. 
“You bought enough,” he said 
emphatically, “for a whole room 
full of babies.” He saw the bandage 
on her hand. 
“What happened to your hand?” 
“Oh that,” she said unwinding 
the makeshift bandage. “You know 
what a klutz I am sometimes. The 
helicab plate was bent a little and I 
slashed myself good.” 
When she finished unwinding, 
Tom could see the ugly gash, 
diagonal across the palm. 
When Madeline Oren came 
into the office Dr. Markowitz 
was sitting at his desk, but 
still staring at the wall with all 
his certificates. He had turned off the light and twilight 
was in the room. 
“Doctor — Sam. Please. 
You’ve been in here for 
hours. I’ve been going crazy 
rescheduling your appointments.” She stepped in and 
closed the door quietly. 
“There’s something else, 
Sam — it’s happened again. 
You know — this time it’s on 
the hand. Ann Trelling has 
slashed her palm — or someone has done it for her.’’ 
Madeline strode to the window and opened the blinds. 
Outside the sun had washed 
the buildings with pink and 
the trees looked like dark 
shadows. 
“What are we going to do? 
Have you ever told her about 
the bruises and cuts?” She 
turned back to him — he looked older than his fifty years. 
“You were afraid she 
wouldn’t believe you, like the 
others, weren’t you?” Made
line sighed and sat on the sill. 
She was a dedicated nurse 
and after all the years on this 
case, she would not question 
Markowitz. She had always 
hoped that her dedication 
had meant more to him than 
the raises she had received 
through the years. Now she 
wanted to comfort him, and 
he would not allow it. 
Markowitz stood up and 
gathered his charts from a 
drawer. “Let’s go,” he said 
simply. 
They went to examine the 
strange cut. One for which 
there was no explanation. 
jet’ll take care of it, honey,” 
XTom said. He went to the 
bathroom and hunted around in 
the cabinet. He came back with a 
spray jar of Sutural. 
She held her hand over some 
newspapers so as not to mess up the 
table and he sprayed the cut 
thoroughly. 
“Does that feel better?” he asked 
kissing her. They had been married 
for two years and he still cherished 
each moment with her. 
“You silly, it’ll be healed in an 
hour.” 
They ate dinner and dialed away 
the dishes. There was nothing on 
the teletank so they read. Ann 
began thinking of the time when 
she was fourteen years old and had 
suddenly found herself in another 
world. She had not been feeling 
TRANSIT 
well that day. The blackness had 
closed in suddenly; spinning flashes 
of blue fire had seemed to surround 
her, lift her higher, higher. And 
higher still, she had seen a bright 
hole in the darkness — a place 
through which she must pass. 
“It'S happening again. 
Look.” Madeline Oren held 
the hand of Ann Trelling 
under the microscope. 
Through the glass she could 
see the knitting of flesh — an 
almost magical mending of 
human cells, as if in a time 
lapse picture. 
Markowitz was always fascinated when this happened. 
The bruises that faded were 
interesting, it was true. But 
the superfast healing of cuts 
was fantastic. He would have 
taken a film of the process, 
but he knew Harvard would 
never believe it. To them he 
was a glory seeker. 
Not only did Markowitz 
have the strange healing of 
cuts to deal with but also the 
inexplicable racing of the 
nervous system. At times Ann 
Trelling would breathe 
heavily as if she had just run a 
great distance, sometimes irregularly as if she were talking. And her eyes, although 
they were always closed, 
moved not only as was normal 
in sleep, but also during the 
day as if watching, looking. 
At last Markowitz took his 
eyes from the microscope. 
“Madeline, I’m going to try 
to wake her up. The Harvard 
studies will be conclusive 
soon.” He took up his charts 
and started for the office. 
“A lot of study has gone 
into this thing since nineteenseventy and we may be able to 
bring her to consciousness. 
The trick is keeping her 
there.” Markowitz had reached the door of his office and 
he turned to Madeline as he 
put his hand on the knob. 
“Ifll be in a few months. 
It’s dangerous and she may 
only wake for a few minutes. 
And now there’s the other 
consideration. Should we terminate the baby?” 
He shut her out with a final 
click of the door. 
T ihree months later as Ann DeForest lay in her bed, her hands 
on her stomach trying to feel the 
new life, everything blurred. Suddenly she was falling through a 
blind tunnel down, down. Blue fire 
flashed and swirled. She thought it 
was a nightmare, that she must be 
dreaming, for down in the distance 
she could see a faroff bed and on 
the bed she could see herself asleep. 
And just as suddenly, with the 
same flickering spiral, she began to 
float upward. Far below a sleeping 
girl, a mirror image of herself, 
vanished. 
Ann DeForest woke up drenched 
with sweat and her heart was 
beating loudly in her chest. She 
shook Tom awake. 
Madeline Oren looked up 
in awe. “Sam, she responded. 
She almost woke up.” 
Markowitz smiled. It was 
the third time they had dosed 
Ann Trelling with Titral 12 
i.v. Now at last there was a response — there was hope. But 
he couldn’t know the end result of his efforts. Would Ann 
Trelling wake up a fourteenyear-old in her twenty-fouryear-old body? Would her 
brain be damaged? What 
would Ann Trelling be after 
all those lost years? 
The Trelling case had started out as a^ news spectacular 
with Markowitz’s name in the 
headlines of half a dozen 
newspapers. And it had made 
him rich — he was in sole 
charge of Ann Trelling, the 
sleeping beauty. His collaboration with researchers had 
not brought back the fading 
glamor. 
Now all those ten years 
were summed up. If he could 
wake her, save her, he would 
be famous again — the disbelief would vanish and the 
money would flow. If only it 
weren’t for the pregnancy; 
that was a real embarrass
ment. He would have to get 
Doreen Trelling to sign a release. 
WAS just a nightmare, honey. 
J[Now calm down. Don’t excite 
yourself in your condition.” He 
turned the room on dim. 
“It was so real, Tom. I could 
swear I wasn’t asleep when it happened.” Ann got up and put on a 
dry gown. “Maybe I’ll go see the 
doctor tomorrow and make sure 
everything is all right in there.” She 
patted her stomach. 
“Sure, you do that. Now you 
rest. You’ll feel better in the morning.” 
He turned off the room. 
“Shall we give her another 
dose, Sam? One more really 
ought to bring her around.” 
Nurse Oren handed him the 
needle. 
“Yes. I think we will.” But 
he waited another fifteen 
minutes before injecting. He 
watched anxiously, gripping 
the table hard with his hands. 
Five other men sat in chairs 
around the bed and watched, 
too. They noted the condition 
of the patient and each 
thought his private thoughts. 
They were graying men, 
anxious to see the results of 
lengthy and unsung research. 
This could be a great moment 
for medicine — and for them. 
Ann Trelling moaned. She 
TRANSIT 
stirred slightly and then, for 
the first time in ten years, 
opened her eyes. Markowitz 
bent over her, looking down 
into her eyes — and she 
screamed. It was a long piercing scream of fright. 
She sat up slowly and saw a 
short blond woman in a white 
uniform backing toward the 
door. An older man in white, 
obviously a doctor, stood 
looking at her silently, amazed. His mouth hung open as if 
she were the strangest sight in 
the world. And five gray men 
sat like statues in their chairs. 
“Who are you?” Ann Trelling screamed. “I know I’m 
not asleep this time.” She 
stared around the room, 
searching for one point of reference, one familiar thing 
that would explain any of 
this. 
Markowitz spoke. “Ann, 
you’ve been unconscious for 
ten years in this building. I’m 
Samuel Markowitz, I’ve been 
in charge of you all these 
years and these machines 
have kept your body well.” 
Ann glanced down at the 
gadgetry and then looked at 
Markowitz, “Do you mean to 
tell me I’ve been here since 
I was — fourteen? That I have 
never left this room the whole 
time?” 
Markowitz nodded. “Did 
you dream you were some
where else?” 
Ann suddenly looked down 
at her swollen stomach, then 
to Markowitz. “Doctor, did I 
dream myself pregnant? I’m 
twenty-four years old. I graduated from Mohelen State 
College and have a masters in 
English Lit. Arlin Dreyer is 
my best friend and I’m 
married to Tom DeForest.” 
Markowitz did not think he 
was talking to a fourteenyear-old girl. 
“How can that be?” 
He had spoken mostly to 
himself, but if anyone had an 
answer it was too late for one. 
Ann Trelling began to drowse 
and then lay down once 
more — so still that it was as if 
she had never woken at all. 
Markowitz turned to Madeline Oren, who stood at the 
door gripping the knob until 
her hand was white, and then 
to the five gray men. 
“Next time,” he said forcefully, “we’ll bring her around 
for good.” 
T he psychiatrist’s office was 
ultramodern and designed for 
distraction. Electric paintings 
covered the walls of the outer 
office. A green sparklex carpet 
shimmered under the expensive 
furniture and there were several 
transistor teletanks for individual 
use. By contrast the inner office 
was a retreat. The doctor’s room 
was dark and filled with overstaffed 
chairs. Ann DeForest relaxed in 
one and tried to cooperate with Dr. 
Sacra. 
“The mind,” he said “is a powerful instrument. Your dream hks 
taken you back to a turning point 
in your life, one we have discussed 
previously. You said you were fourteen when you became — lost?” He 
kept his face calm and noncommittal. 
“Well, I wasn’t really lost — I just 
forgot some things. I knew who I 
was, where I was born, where I 
lived. It’s just that when the police 
took me back home it wasn’t the 
same. The place is what I’m talking 
about — it was gone. None of the 
buildings were the same. The house 
I grew up in was gone — there was a 
park there. 
“At first I was scared to death. 
Then I just started to make my life 
over as best I could. By the time I 
got to college things were fine. Now 
I’m married and happy, especially 
about the baby. It’s only now and 
then that I think about my mother 
and father — but if I try to remember any specific thing it’s like trying 
to see through a dark fog.” 
“Mrs. DeForest, as we have discussed, something traumatic must 
have happened to you to make you 
forget your past. Something happened that you can’t remember. 
We can try to dig it out again — but 
for now remember this. If you 
should have this dream again before our next session, try to find out 
what really happened to you. After 
all, you can’t really be asleep on a 
bed for all these years if you are 
here. And when you want to return 
from there, remember, you have a 
strong personality and your mind is 
a powerful instrument, more 
powerful than dreams, reality or 
solid matter. So don’t be afraid — 
you can always wake yourself up.” 
When Ann left she was still 
troubled. Her “dream” had not 
seemed like a dream at all. 
Mrs. Trelling, dressed in 
her best black dress sat 
anxiously, watching her 
daughter. She was embarrassed to notice the girl’s 
figure, but still she had been 
led to hope that she could 
speak with her daughter — if 
only for a few minutes — alone. 
She did not want the researchers there. 
Dr. Markowitz, assisted by 
Nurse Oren, was about to administer the needle. “When 
she comes around, Mrs. 
Trelling, don’t upset her with 
a lot of questions. Just tell her 
you love her and want her to 
stay with you.” 
Mrs. Trelling nodded and 
suppressed her tears. She had 
hoped for this moment for ten 
long years. The death of her 
husband had left her almost 
in despair and now, in an ins^tant, she was expecting a 
pinnacle of happiness. 
TRANSIT 
Markowitz injected and 
then stepped back, waiting. A 
few seconds went by before 
Ann Trelling stirred. She 
opened her eyes and looked 
around. Her expression suggested she might be experiencing vertigo. For a moment 
no one spoke. 
Suddenly Doreen Trelling 
jumped up. “Ann, Ann. I’m 
your mother. Do you remember me, honey?” She ran to 
the bed and took Ann’s hand. 
Ann DeForest looked at 
them all. She naw seemed 
calm. She looked at Doreen 
Trelling especially and a 
flicker of recognition stirred 
in her. She smiled, “You’re 
my mother? I’ve found you? 
Where are we?” 
“We’re in Dr. Markowitz’s 
offices, darling. You’ve been 
asleep for a long time and 
now I’m going to take you 
home.” She stroked the girl’s 
hand tentatively. “Of course 
we’ll have to be discreet about 
your pregnancy — perhaps an 
abortion.” 
“What are you talking 
about? I’m married and this 
is my own baby.” Ann considered whether they were all 
crazy. Or was losing her 
mind? 
“Now, Ann,” Doreen Trelling said sweetly, “don’t be 
difficult. You’ve been here for 
ten years and there is no hus
band. You dreamed it. Now 
I’m going to make arrangements to take you home. 
“If you like I’ll take you to 
a home and after the baby’s 
born — it can be given up. 
Now, sweetheart, I have a lot 
to catch you up on — yoiir 
father’s death, your cousins’ 
getting married ...” 
Ann did not remember her 
father or cousins. She was 
aware only of fear. She had to 
get back. 
I must wake up, I must get 
back, Tom! Tom! I am more 
powerful than dreams. 
Dr. Markowitz was much 
more real than any dream. He 
was reaching for a hypodermic. 
I am more powerful than 
reality, I choose my reality. 
Markowitz saw the monitors fluctuating down to zero. 
He looked at Ann and he 
could not believe what he 
saw. The girl who sat on the 
bed was fading — no, flickering — like a candle. Through 
her body he could see the 
frame of the door and the 
shelves of bottles. 
Doreen Trelling screamed 
and stepped back. Madeline 
Oren hid behind the doctor. 
At last Ann Trelling could 
not be seen at all. The only 
evidence that she had ever 
been there was the bank of 
gleaming instruments. 
THE GINGER STAR 
Conclusion 
LEIGH BRACKETT 
Our story opens with ERIC 
JOHN STARK on his way from the 
administrative hub of the Known 
Universe, the planet- city Pax, to 
Skaith, a recently discovered neoprimitive planet which orbits a dying star *‘out beyond the OrionSpur, ” Stark, a mercenary warrior, 
has learned that his foster-father. 
SIMON ASHTON, the Galactic 
Union administrator who had saved 
him from a life of savagery, has disappeared on Skaith, 
Within a short time after his 
arrival at Skeg, only spaceport city 
on Skaith, Stark learns that the 
Union s Consular Offices have been 
burned and that no trace of 
Ashton, alive or dead, is to be 
found. 
Ashton has, however, left a 
legacy, a Report which states in 
part: 
The Lords Protector, reputed 
to be ‘‘undying and unchanging, ” were apparently established long ago by the then ruling 
powers, as a sort of super- benevolence. The Great Migrations 
were beginning, the civilizations 
of the north were breaking up as 
the people moved away from the 
increasing cold, and there was 
certain to be a time of chaos with 
various groups competing for 
new lands. Then and later, when 
some stability was reestablished, 
the Lords Protector were to prevent total trampling of the weak 
by the strong. Their law was 
simple: succor the weak, feed 
the hungry, shelter the homeless, strive always for the greatest good o f the greatest number. 
It appears that through the 
centuries that law was carried 
far beyond its original intent. 
The Farers and the many smaller 
non-productive fragments of this 
thoroughly fragmented culture 
are now the greater number, 
with the result that the Wandsmen, in the name of the Lords 
Protector, hold a third or more 
of the population in virtual 
slavery to supply the rest . 
He also learns that GELMAR, 
leader of the Wandsmen and the 
Farers, is the man responsible for 
the arson — and by implication, for 
the disappearance and possible 
death of Ashton. By asking openly 
about the whereabouts of Ashton, 
Stark sets himself up as bait for 
Gelmar. He meets a Farer-girl who 
entices him to a lonely cliff overlooking the sea, where he finds 
Gelmar waiting. Gelmar questions 
Stark, attempts to enroll him in the 
ranks of the Farers. Failing in this 
Gelmar signals, and seemingly 
from nowhere a mob of Farers 
appears. But before they can reach 
him. Stark seizes Gelmar and leaps 
into the sea. 
It is now Stark's turn to question 
Gelmar. He learns that Ashton is 
indeed alive, held prisoner in the 
far-North in the Citadel of the 
Lords Protector — the final mysterious masters of Skaith. He also 
learns that Gerrith, wise-woman of 
Iman, has prophesied that an off
worlder will destroy the Lords Protector for the sake of Ashton, 
A fter a desperate but victorious 
battle with a mutated, sub-human 
sea-creature. Stark manages to 
reach shore some distance away 
from the mob of Farers, A little 
ways inland he falls in with a group 
from Irnan, They are on their way 
to Skeg where they hope to make 
contact with the Galactic Union. 
[The Irnanese want to emigrate — 
anywhere, as long as it is off 
Skaith, ] When Stark tells them the 
consulate has been burned they decide to escort him to Iman, so that 
Gerrith may examine him. Since Irnan lies in the North, Stark agrees 
to accompany them — but all are 
captured by Wandsmen just outside 
Iman. Once again Stark confronts 
Gelmar, who orders that he and his 
companions be taken inside the city 
for a festival- execution. Also to be 
included in the festivities is Gerrithdaughter-of-Gerrith [her mother is 
already dead] — a seer in her own 
right. However, Gelmar's plans 
once again go awry as the hatred of 
the Irnanese for the Wandsmen 
and the Farers explodes into open 
revolt at the prospect of the atrocity 
before them. The Farers and most 
of the Wandsmen are killed. The 
burghers of Iman, now in open 
revolt against the power of the 
Lords Protector, aid Stark and 
Gerrith [who has decided to accom
pany him for her own arcane reasons] by assigning them a picked 
group of Irnanese warriors to escort 
them across the Barrens on their 
way to Worldheart, Citadel of the 
Lords. A fter many adventures ... 
VIII 
S TARK walked halfway down the 
slope so that Hargoth was 
obliged to follow. Then he stopped. 
“I will lead you,” he said, “after 
we have taken the Citadel. Not before.” 
The wind moaned against the 
ridge, sending a frozen spindrift 
of white crystals across it that 
drifted down on Stark and the Irnanese, on Hargoth and his lesser 
priests. There was an instinctive 
movement, each group gathering 
apart from the other. After that 
they stood very still. 
Hargoth said, “The ships are in 
the south.” 
Stark nodded. “Unfortunately 
that gate is shut. There is war in the 
south. Others besides yourselves 
wish to follow those star-roads, and 
the Wandsmen are saying they cannot. They kill in the name of the 
Lords Protector. The only way to 
open that gate is to take the Citadel, destroy the Lords Protector 
and the Wandsmen along with 
them. Otherwise you go south only 
to die.” 
THE GINGER STAR 
The wind moaned. 
Hargoth turned to Gerrith. “Sun 
Woman, is all this true?” 
“It is true,” she answered. 
“Besides,” said Stark, suddenly 
weary of trying to cope with people 
who stubbornly insisted on getting 
in his way, “if Skaith were an open 
world certain kinds of ships could 
land anywhere on the planet instead of being confined to the enclave at Skeg. There would be no 
need for your people to go south. It 
would be much easier for ships to 
come to you.” 
Hargoth did not answer this. 
Stark had no idea what he might be 
thinking. He was only certain of 
one thing. He would die fighting 
rather than be taken captive 
again — ^by anyone. He shifted his 
weight slightly, willing life into 
muscles stiff with cold. 
Hargoth spoke at last. “What 
shall I call you?” 
“Stark.” 
“You are wise in your knowledge, 
Stark, but I am wise in mine. And I 
tell you that between us and the 
Citadel lies Thyra.” 
“Is there no way around? The 
land seems broad enough.” 
“It narrows. Thyra bestrides that 
narrowness. Thyra is strong and 
populous. And greedy.” He paused, then added harshly, “They have 
dealings with the Wandsmen. The 
same word that came to us would 
have come even sooner to them.” 
Stark nodded. He stared at the 
ground, scowling. 
“South,” said Hargoth. “That is 
the only way.” 
His voice held an inflexible note 
of triumph. Stark kept his peace, 
answered with a shrug Hargoth 
could read any way that pleased 
him. 
Apparently satisfied, he turned 
and started down the slope. “The 
fires are warm, the shelters ready. 
Let us enjoy them. Tomorrow at his 
rising we will ask a blessing of Old 
Sun.” 
Stark perforce followed Hargoth 
this time. There was nothing of 
menace in what the man had said 
yet Stark felt a twinge of unease. 
He looked at Gerrith walking beside him, her long braid swinging. 
Sun-colored braid beneath the 
frost. Sun-colored woman. What 
did Hargoth want of her? 
He started to speak but she gave 
him a warning look as Hargoth 
glanced over his shoulder at them 
with a sharp-edged smile. Blankfaced, they followed him down. 
The camp held only young men. 
Women, children and elderly men, 
they were told, were already making preparations for the migration, 
packing the belongings, dismantling the homes in the broken 
towers, drying meat and making 
journey-bread, choosing out the 
beasts that would be saved from the 
present slaughter to support them 
later on. 
They were singing, said Hargoth, 
the ancient hymn preserved from 
times beyond remembrance, taught 
once in each lifetime but never sung 
in earnest until now — The Hymn of 
Deliverance. 
The Promised One shall lead us 
Down the long roads o f the stars. 
Toward a new beginning . 
The men sang it around the fires 
as Stark and the others came in. 
Their faces were flushed, their eyes 
brilliant, fixed upon this stranger 
from the far places of heaven. Stark 
felt embarrassed and more than a 
little annoyed. Ever since he had 
landed on Skaith people had been 
forcing shackles on him, shackles 
of duty that he had not chosen and 
did not want. Damn these people 
and their prophecies and legends! 
“Our forefathers were men of 
knowledge,” said Hargoth. “They 
dreamed of star-flight. While the 
world died around them they continued to dream and to work, but it 
was too late. They left us the promise that though all could not go, one 
day you would come for us.” 
Stark was glad when the hymn 
ended. 
Gerrith refused food and asked 
to be shown to her shelter. Her face 
had that remote prophetess look on 
it. Stark saw the skin flaps of the 
tent fall shut behind her with a feeling of chill between his shoulderblades. 
He ate the food that was given 
him, not because he was especially 
hungry but because the hunting 
artimal never knows how long it 
may be until the next meal. They 
also gave him a strong drink that 
seemed to be made of fermented 
milk. The Irnanese sat near him in 
a close group. He sensed that they 
wanted to talk but were inhabited 
by Hargoth and his people, who 
crouched or moved among the fires 
like slender ghosts with their high, 
stooping shoulders and their graymasked faces, all alike and without 
expression. Despite the fact that 
the People of the Towers had rescued them from Amnir’s shackles 
Stark did not like them. There was 
a touch of madness in them, bom 
of the long dark and the too-longheld faith. It made him feel no 
easier that their madness was 
centered on him. 
T he flaps of her tent opened and 
Gerrith stood in the firelight. 
She had thrown off her outer garments and her head was bare. She 
held the small ivory skull, still 
speckled from the slaughter at 
Irnan, over the campfire. 
Hargoth had risen. Gerrith faced 
him, her eyes meeting his like 
copper sunrays meeting ice. 
THE GINGER STAR 
She spoke, her voice ringing 
4sweet and clear, as it had that day 
when Mordach tried to shame her 
and died for it. 
“Hargoth,” she said. “You intend to give me to Old Sun to buy 
his blessing.” 
Hargoth did not look aside 
though he must have heard Stark 
and the Irnanese getting to their 
feet, clapping hands to weapons. 
“Yes,” he said to Gerrith, “you 
are a chosen sacrifice, sent to me 
for that purpose.” 
Gerrith shook her head. “It is 
not iny fate to die here — if you try 
to kill me your people wil never 
walk the star-roads nor see a 
brighter sun.” 
Her voice carried such conviction 
that Hargoth hesitated over whatever words he had been about to 
say. 
“My place is with the Promised 
One,” said Gerrith. “My path lies 
northward. And I tell you there will 
be enough blood to feed Old Sun 
before this is finished.” 
She held the skull higher over the 
fire and the flames turned a sullen 
red, staining them all with the color 
of death. 
Hargoth looked uncertain. But 
he was proud and obstinate. “I am 
king,” he said. “And high-priest. I 
know what must be done for my 
people.” 
“Do you?” asked Stark quietly. 
“Can you be sure? You know only 
the dream. I am reality. How do 
you know that I am truly the 
Promised One?” 
“You come from the stars,” said 
Hargoth. 
“Yes. But so does the stranger 
who was brought to the Citadel, 
and he is the one who tells the ships 
to come, not I.” 
Hargoth stared at him for a long 
moment in the red glare of the fire. 
“He has that power?” 
“He has,” said Stark. “How can 
you be sure that he is not the 
Promised One?” 
Gerrith lowered her hands and 
stepped back from the fire. The 
flames returned to their normal 
color. She said calmly, 
“You stand at the crossroads, 
Hargoth. The path you choose now 
will determine the fate of your 
people.” 
A heavy and sententious statement, Stark thought, but he felt no 
desire to smile at it. It was the 
simple truth and involved his own 
and Ashton’s fate as well as that of 
Hargoth’s people. 
His hand closed over the hilt of 
the sword taken from one of Amnir’s men. He waited for Hargoth’s 
answer. If the old man persisted in 
his plan Old Sun was going to have 
some victims here and now. 
Hargoth’s eyes flicked uncertainly between Stark and Gerrith with 
the chill, flat, shining gaze of madness, of fanatic conviction. The 
lesser priests who had assisted him 
at Amnir’s camp were gathered 
nearby, their masked faces immobile, watching. Suddenly Hargoth 
turned on his heel and joined them. 
They went apart. Their backs 
formed a wall that hid whatever 
they might be doing but the movement of their shoulders indicated 
that some sort of ritual was being 
performed. They chanted, a low 
sonorous murmuring. 
“Lacking a live victim,” Gerrith 
said, “They’re consulting some 
other augury.” 
“It had better be favorable,” 
said Halk as he drew his swordblade hissing from its sheath. 
The silence lengthened. The 
guttering fire hissed as snow and 
frost fell into it. The People of the 
Towers stood in the howling darkness beyond and waited. 
The priests gave a long moaning 
sigh. They bowed to some invisible 
Presence. Then they returned to the 
fire. 
“Three times we have cast the 
sacred finger-bones of the Spring 
Child,” said Hargoth. “Three times 
they pointed north.” His eyes 
showed a desperate, thwarted rage. 
“Very well. We will go up against 
the Thyrans. And if we win past 
them, do you know what waits beyond to keep us from the Citadel?” 
“Yes,” said Stark. “The Northhounds.” 
“A shadow crossed Gerrith’s 
face. She shivered. 
“What is it?” asked Stark. 
“I don’t know. It seemed . that 
when you spoke that name, one 
heard it.” 
Across the desolate miles to the 
north a great white shape had 
paused in its measured padding 
through blowing snow. It turned 
and swung a huge, fanged muzzle 
southward, questing across the 
wind. 
AS HARGOTH had Said, the broad 
land narrowed. It began to rise 
sharply toward a series of ridges. 
On either hand were rough hills 
and deep gullies choked with 
tumbled ice. The track of Amnir’s 
wagons still followed the ancient 
road, but the summer thaw was 
strong enough to cut that road in 
many places. It had been remade 
across the beds of wider channels, 
the narrower ones filled in with 
stones, ,a tribute to the hard work 
and enterprise of Amnir’s men. 
Much good it had done them in the 
end. 
With Hargoth’s people the party 
now numbered thirty-six — two-tens 
of fighting men and their captain, 
all armed with slings and javelins, 
the Corn King and eight priests 
armed with magic, and the original 
THE GINGER STAR 
six who had come from Irnan. 
Stark would just as soon have 
dispensed with his new allies. The 
force was too large to move easily in 
secret and too small to be an effective attack unit. Still, he thought, 
the Corn King and his priests might 
be useful in one way. When they 
came to meet the Northhounds the 
Breath of the Goddess might at 
least slow down those legendary 
demons. In any case he had had no 
choice. 
The narrow men in gray proved 
to be nearly tireless. TKeir marching gait was a sort of springy trot 
that was difficult at first for Stark 
and the others to match after their 
long days of captivity. But they fell 
into the pace, gradually feeling 
strength and elasticity returning. 
Halk, who had suffered the worst 
confinement, stumbled along at the 
rear, sweating and cursing. He was 
so vile-tempered that Breca gave up 
trying to help him and rejoined the 
others. 
“How far to Thyra?” asked 
Stark. 
“Three long marches.” Hargoth 
had not been to Thyra but Kintoth, 
captain of the fighting men, had. 
He wore lightning-strokes on the 
cheeks of his mask and carried an 
iron sword. 
“We go there sometimes to trade 
for tools and weapons,” Kintoth 
said, slapping his sword-hilt. “The 
Thyrans are great smiths. We always go in force. We trade them 
dried meat as well as hides and 
cloth. In the old days, before the 
trader^ we were afraid of being 
added to their foodstocks ourselves. 
Now that Amnir is dead we shall 
have to start worrying again. The 
Thyrans keep beasts and trade 
knives to the lichen-gatherers for 
fodder. But there’s never enough in 
the starving times.” 
“We trade women, too,” said 
Hargoth. “A matter of necessity, 
though neither we nor the Thyrans 
like it. Both peoples must have 
fresh blood to survive. There was a 
third city once that neighbored us, 
but its inhabitants kept too fiercely 
to themselves and finally they 
died.” 
He trotted on for some time in silence. Then he added, “Sometimes 
the Wandsmen bring us women 
from the south. They don’t live long 
here. Usually we give them to Old 
Sun.” He looked at Gerrith. 
“What about the Citadel?” asked Stark, not missing the look. 
“We’ve never seen it. No one 
has. Not even the Harsenyi. There 
are the Northhounds to guard 
against strangers. And there is the 
mist.” 
“Mist?” 
“Thick mist that boils like steam 
above a cauldron and never lifts. It 
is a strong magic. The Citadel is 
always protected and hidden.” 
“But you know the way there?” 
“1 know what the Harsenyi have 
said. Some of their people serve the 
Wandsmen.” 
“But you don’t really know. Do 
the Thyrans?” 
“I have told you. The way is 
known — and not known.” 
“What about the women from 
the south?” 
“The ones they give us are never 
taken to the Citadel, but brought 
straight on.” Hargoth’s mouth was 
a thin line. “The gifts of the 
Wandsmen! They bring us more 
than women. Small phials with 
pretty powders, joy and dreams for 
all, and perpetual slavery. They 
tempt our young ones to go south 
and join the Farers. We are not 
fond of the Wandsmen.” 
Hargoth studied the strangers. 
Old Sun was above the horizon 
now, and the old man’s gaze moved 
from one face to another, not 
hurrying, seeking in the rusty daylight what he had not seen by starlight or the flickering gleam of the 
fires. 
“You have come a long way to 
destroy them. Why?” 
They told him. 
Hargoth listened. When they had 
finished he said, “You Southrons 
must be soft indeed to let yourselves 
be so badly ruled.” 
Gerrith held up a hand to fore
stall Halk’s angry outburst. She 
stared coldly at Hargoth and said. 
“You’ve heard of the Farers. 
You’ve never seen them. You’ve 
never seen a mob in action. Perhaps you will before you’re 
through. Tell me your opinion 
then.” 
Hargoth inclined his head. 
“The Lords Protector,’’ Stark 
said. “What do you know of 
them?” 
“I think they’re a lie the Wandsmen tell to stay in power. Or if they 
ever lived, they’ve been dead a 
thousand years. That’s why I would 
call this a fool’s errand, except that 
I know the Wandsmen are real. 
And if, as you say, they intend to 
keep us from the stars . .” 
Apparently he was still not quite 
convinced. He continued to glance 
sidelong at Gerrith from time to 
time in a manner that Stark did not 
care for. 
“My lord Darkness, my lady 
Cold, their daughter Hunger,” he 
said. “You worship the Goddess 
and she sends her power through 
you. Yet you also worship Old 
Sun?” 
“We need him to keep the darker 
gods at bay. Otherwise we would 
die. Besides, the Sun Woman was 
to be a parting-gift.” 
Long after Old Sun’s setting they 
left the road and found a secure 
hollow in the hills. The warriors 
THE GINGER STAR 
built tiny fires of what dead mosses 
and lichens they could find among 
the wind-scoured stones. They had 
not expected to be so long away 
from the Towers and rations were 
short. No one complained. Hunger 
was an expected part of their lives. 
When it was time for sleep, Stark 
took Gerrith aside and said, “You’ll 
shelter with me. I think Hargoth 
still has notions.’’ 
She accepted without protest. 
Stark saw Halk watching, wise and 
sneering, as he followed Gerrith 
into the tent. 
T heir two bodies crowded the 
small space, and Stark realized 
that this was the first time since 
that bloody day in the square of 
Irnan that he had been alone with 
Gerrith. On the way to Izvand there 
had been the Irnanese, the troop of 
mercenaries and not a moment’s 
privacy. Halk and Breca pleasured 
themselves as the fancy took them, 
without embarrassment, but theirs 
was an old relationship. Stark and 
Gerrith had had no relationship beyond their roles as Wise Woman 
and Dark Man — one hardly conducive to intimacy. He was not at 
all sure that she wanted any other. 
Her status as prophetess set her 
apart, surrounding her with a certain aura of untouchability. Besides, it had been most hellishly 
cold. 
Afterward, as Amnir’s captives, 
there had been no opportunity even 
for conversation, let alone anything 
else. 
Now, with a minuscule lamp for 
light and themselves for warmth, 
he felt something totally new. He 
was conscious that they touched, at 
thigh and hip and shoulder. Their 
breath mingled in faint clouds of 
vapor, animal heat rose from their 
living flesh. Lying close, he felt her 
shivering stop. He put his hand on 
hers. 
“Has your gift yet told you why it 
was you had to journey all this 
weary way?’’ 
“Let’s not talk about it now.” 
She turned her head and looked at 
him. “Let’s not talk about anything 
now.” 
He drew her to hin;i. She smiled 
and did not resist. His fingertips 
traced the outline of her cheek and 
jaw; thin, he noticed, with the 
beautiful structure of the bones 
clear beneath the wind-browned 
skin. Her eyes were enormous, her 
mouth soft and sweet, welcoming. 
He kissed her, a tentative touching of lips, and her arms clasped 
him fiercely. After that nothing was 
tentative. She was strong and 
hungry, full of warm life in that 
place of cold and death, giving and 
taking without stint. 
Stark had known that this was 
fated from the beginning — from 
the moment when Mordach ripped 
away her robe, left her clothed in 
nothing but her magnificent and 
indestructible pride. 
Neither of them spoke of love. 
Love is for those with a future. 
They slept in each other’s arms and 
were content. 
I N THE black morning they broke 
camp once again, following the 
green star. They halted briefly for 
the ritual greeting of Old Sun at his 
rising. Hargoth looked regretfully 
at Gerrith, who was surrounded by 
Stark and the Irnanese. At noon 
they halted a second time to rest 
and chew their journey rations, 
hard chunks of edible lichens 
pressed into cakes, and a strongflavored mixture of fat and meat 
fibres pounded together with bitter 
herbs. 
Stark discussed strategy with 
Kintoth. 
“Here,” said the captain, marking out a rough map in the snow 
with his finger. “This is the road 
we’re on now. It winds about so, 
and here is Thyra, sitting on a 
dozen hills. The old city, that is. 
The new one is dug in and 
around.” His finger made y^igue 
marks on the perimeter. 
“How old is the new city?” asked 
Stark. 
“Not as old as ours, only a thousand years or so. The People of the 
Hammer came out of nowhere, the 
bards tell us, and took up these 
ancient cities ...” 
“More than one?” 
“There are several tribes. The 
Thyrans are the only ones we deal 
with, but it is said that there are 
more in other places, and that they 
all have the same god, whom they 
call Strayer of the Forges.” 
“They all have the same madness 
as well,” said Hargoth, “and that 
madness is for iron and the working 
of it. They mine the bones of the 
cities, and the metal is more than 
wealth to them. It is life.” 
“All right.-’ Stark looked at the 
map. “The road. Thyra, old and 
new. What else?” 
Kintoth sketched stylized mountains on the far side of Thyra. 
“These arejcalled the Witchfires, 
for a reason you will understand 
when you see them. They mark the 
boundary between the darklands 
and the high north. Here is the pass 
that we must take to cross them, if 
we ever reach it.” 
Thyra stood like a wall before the 
mouth of the pass. 
“Is there no other way across the 
mountains?” 
Kintoth shrugged. “There may 
be a hundred but this is the one we 
know. The Citadel lies somewhere 
beyond it. Now, on the road, 
here ...” He drew fortifications 
across the approach to Thyra. 
THE GINGER STAR 
“This post is strongly held. And all 
around the city are sentry posts.” 
His finger poked random little 
holes in the snow. “I don’t know 
the exact locations. The Thyrans 
live in and around the edges of the 
ruins so they’re more vulnerable 
than we of the Towers. They take 
care to guard their wealth and their 
precious flesh lest both be devoured.” 
The land seemed totally deserted. 
Stark asked, “What enemies have 
they here?” 
“This is the northern edge of the 
darklands,” said Hargoth. “We 
live all our lives in a state of siege. 
Anyone, anything, may come. 
Sometimes it’s the great snowdragons, with frost on their wings 
and their hungry teeth showing. 
Sometimes a band of Outdwellers 
run demented across the world 
and take whatever they can lay 
claws on. And there are creatures 
^ho wait, hidden just out of sight, 
smelling the warm food that walks, 
hoping they can snatch it.” 
“It doesn’t do to show weakness 
or inattention,” said Kintoth. “The 
Harsenyi, for instance, might be 
tempted to attack if they thought 
they could gain by it. The other 
tribes of the Hammer might become 
greedy. And of course the Thyrans 
have a bigger worry than most.” 
He stabbed his finger at the 
sketched-in range of the Witch
fires. “They have neighbors here 
among the mountains. The Children of Skaith-Our-Mother.” 
Stark stared at him in the brassy 
twilight of the hollow. The wind 
blew snow in vagrant clouds. 
Halk laughed, a harsh and 
jarring sound. 
“Perhaps you will be lucky a 
second time. Dark Man!” he said, 
and laughed again. 
IX 
S hadows lay long across the 
road, pointing north. Soft-shod, 
the party moved quietly. Wind 
scoured their tracks away almost as 
soon as they were made. 
“What are they like, these Children?” Stark asked. 
Hargoth shook his narrow head. 
“The Thyrans say they’re monsters. 
They have many tales of them, all 
horrible.” 
“Are they true?” 
“Who can say?” 
“You have no knowledge yourself? Haven’t any of your people 
gone into the mountains? Through 
the pass?” 
“In the darklands,” said Hargoth, “it is difficult enough to hold 
where one is. One does not travel 
for any lesser reason than survival.” 
“The Harsenyi seem to manage 
it.” 
“They’re nomads, it’s their way 
of life. They’re strong enough to 
fight off the brainless attackers, the 
hungry mouths, and the rest of us 
welcome them. They’re the only 
link we have with the outer world. 
They bring things we haven’t got 
and can’t make — and most of all 
they bring news. Being nomads by 
choice they don’t threaten our holdings. Besides, we’re used to them.’’ 
“And they cross the Witchfires.” 
“More. It is even said that they 
trade with the Hooded Men on the 
far side of the Bleak Mountains.” 
He paused, considering. “It is said 
that they trade with the Children of 
Skaith.” 
Stark kept his voice free of irritation, though with an effort. “And 
what do the Harsenyi say of the 
Children?” 
“That they are monsters and 
greater magicians than we. That 
they have power over stones and all 
things belonging to the ground, 
which they can cause to shake 
whenever they wish. They say . .” 
“They say,” Stark interrupted 
impatiently. “The Harsenyi are 
doubtless the fount of all wisdom, 
except that traders have been 
known to lie before now in order to 
keep their markets secret. Does 
anybody know?*' 
“If you mean, can I give you any 
firm knowledge of the Children — 
no, I cannot.” 
“You’re trying to talk them 
away. Dark Man,” Halk spoke up. 
“They will not go so easily.” 
Stark glanced at him, but did not 
bother to reply. He wondered if he 
looked as trail-worn and holloweyed as did Halk and the others. 
The sturdy furs bought at Izvand 
had turned mangy with use, showing bare spots where the thongs had 
rubbed. The men had stopped 
shaving, perforce, since Amnir had 
allowed them nothing in the way ofknives or razors and since their release they had contented themselves 
with merely hacking hair and beard 
short enough for comfort. The 
women covered their faces with 
wrappings to ward off the cold. 
Breca walked steadily beside Halk 
as Gerrith, now, walked beside 
Stark, her eyes smiling. Gerrith 
alone seemed alive. The rest walked 
like automata. 
Even Stark felt that. Land and 
sky lay upon him like a burden. 
Cold, empty, without promise. 
And no one knew what was happening in the south. 
The shadows lengthened, the 
wind skirled down from the high 
north, with its burden of whirling 
dry snow. 
They came to a turning and Kintoth caught Stark’s arm. “There! 
There! In the sky. Stark. Look up!” 
Stark looked and saw a glitter of 
pale gold. 
THE GINGER STAR 
“The Witchfires.” 
The peaks disappeared again as 
the road bent once more. 
Two of Kintoth’s men who walked ahead as scouts came racing 
back down the road. 
“A party, coming from Thyra!” 
one of them panted. 
“How many?” asked Kintoth. 
“Many. We saw them only from 
a distance.” 
In a few moments they were off 
the road, settling themselves among 
the rocks and hollows. Stark left it 
to Kintoth to make sure there were 
no betraying marks while he found 
a vantage point overlooking the 
road. Halk lay down beside him. A 
short distance away Hargoth 
watched. Presently Kintoth joined 
them. 
The Thyrans were audible a long 
way off. Drums beat a steady 
marching pace, accompanied by 
the intermittent squealing of some 
shrill-voiced instrument and the 
clashing of metal on metal. After a 
while the party came around a bend 
in the road. 
Stark estimated the Thyrans at 
half a hundred men, including 
pipers and drummers and cymbaldashers, All were armed with iron 
weapons. All wore iron caps and 
iron-studded back-and-breasts over 
their furs. Iron-bound targets were 
slung behind the left shoulder. 
Banners and pennons lashed in the 
wind above them, barred scarlet 
and black, with the device of a 
hammer. They were short, broad 
men with a look of power about 
them. They marched with a driving 
purposefulness that had in it something chilling, like the march of 
army ants. They were not, one felt, 
accustomed to defeat. 
Behind the soldiers came a party 
of unarmed men hauling iron framed carts loaded with supplies. 
“They’ll be going to meet the 
trader,” said Halk, low-voiced. “I 
wish them joy when they find him.” 
Stark waited until the last clanking cart had vanished along the 
road, then went to Hargoth. 
“Do the Thyrans send out an escort every year for the trader?” 
“No. We keep watch for large 
parties of armed men.” 
‘•‘That is so,” said Kintoth. 
“Once or twice we’ve watched the 
trader almost to the gates of Thyra 
and they’ve had no more than the 
usual lookouts. There’s no way of 
telling just when the wagons may 
come, and anyway, Amnir had a 
force sufficient for his safety.” 
“Nevertheless,” said Stark, 
“Halk thinks that’s where they’re 
going.” He pondered. “Could they 
rather be going to attack, say, the 
Towers?” 
“Not with fifty men. I’d say 
Halk’s right.” 
“Yet, as you say, Amnir had a 
force sufficient for his safety. This 
force is large enough to overcome, 
or at least overawe, Amnir’s party. 
It looks like they have a special interest in the trader this year — perhaps they think he might have 
something that they consider es* 
pecially desirable. Something of 
unusual value. I wonder if the Thyrans have had some tardy word 
from the Citadel about us.” 
“We were undoubtedly followed 
to Izvand,” said Gerrith. “Fast 
messengers could have taken word 
up the Wandsman’s road that Amnir left there in pursuit of us.” 
“Fast or slow, it makes no difference,” said Halk. “We’ll never get 
past Thyra unless we can make a 
new road.” 
“We start on that right now,” 
said Stark. The old road had suddenly become menacing. There 
might be any number of patrols 
and lookout posts. Stark tried to 
calculate how long it would take the 
armed escort to find whatever was 
left of Amnir and his wagon-train, 
then get word of the disaster back 
to Thyra. Presumably they would 
send a runner. And then? Would 
the Thyrans start scouring the 
hills? 
He reckoned they had better get 
through the Witchfires as quickly 
as possible. 
They struck away from the old 
track. It was not difficult to keep 
direction. Old Sun smeared the 
southwestern sky with dull redochre, and when that faded the 
green star shone hugely, bright as a 
moon in the northeast. Stark depended on Kintoth to tell them 
where Thyra ought to be. The going 
was by turns fairly easy and very 
rough. Often the way was barred 
completely by a sheer cliff or an impassable gorge, which made for 
weary back-tracking. Progress was 
heartbreakingly slow. 
T here was no love-making that 
night. They did not stop at all 
except when weariness forced them, 
and then only long enough for 
strength to return to let them go on 
again. There was no complaint, 
even from Halk. They all seemed to 
feel that the hills were too dangerous for peaceful rest and they were 
anxious to be out of them. 
The Lamp of the North climbed 
higher. The aurora flared white 
and rose-pink and ice-green. And 
there was a new presence in the 
night. 
The peaks of the Witchfires 
stood tall in the north. They caught 
these delicate colors on their icesheathed flanks and sent them 
gleaming and glimmering back in 
flashes of many-faceted light, a 
wonder of cold and purity and 
death. 
“They are sacred to the God
THE GINGER STAR 
dess,” said Hargoth, “though we 
see them seldom.” 
Along toward midnight Stark 
found a trail. 
I T WAS a furtive, cunning sort of 
trail, a trail such as animals 
make. It was only because Stark 
had lived his life in the wild places 
that he saw it at all. But it led the 
way he wanted to go and he decided 
to follow it for the time being. It 
was very narrow, sliding up and 
down the slopes, twisting cleverly to 
avoid the cliffs and canyons. After 
a while he realized that it was not a 
single trail but one of a network of 
footways through the hills. 
He asked who might have made 
them, and Hargoth said, “Outdwellers, probably, though other 
things may use it. Cities attract 
them, as I told you. There is always 
the hope of food.” 
It was impossible to tell whether 
the trail had been recently used. 
The bare ground was frozen hard 
and where snow lay there was no 
sign of prints. If there had been any 
the wind or some other agency had 
wiped them out. 
Stark went ahead of the party, 
trusting to no one but himself. 
He caught a taint of smoke in the 
clean air. Going more cautiously, 
he saw a ridge ahead. Sounds came 
from beyond the ridge. Unbelievable sounds. 
He went back to warn the others, 
then crept on his belly to the top of 
the ridge. 
He looked down into a shallow 
bowl between the hills. A fire of 
dead lichens burned small at one 
side within a ring of blackened 
stones. The tiny flickering it made 
was little more than a pinpoint. 
The bowl brimmed with the light of 
the aurora and the green star. The 
Witchfires sparkled against the 
north. Snow covering the slopes of 
the bowl sparkled more faintly, and 
in that shadowless gleaming a score 
of figures danced to the wild, thin 
music of a reedy pipe. 
They danced in a wide circle, 
moving widdershins round the 
slopes. They leaped and whirled, 
they laughed and their tatters flew, 
and they seemed almost to take 
wing upon outstretched arms. This 
was because of the height and the 
lightness of their leaping, the grace 
and the swift rushing joy of it. Joyousness, Stark thought, was a rare 
thing anywhere and rarer still on 
Skaith. But this was a curious place 
to find it. 
There was no set pattern to their 
dancing except that they kept the 
circle. Now and again two or more 
would join together and go skittering hand in hand, with the laughter 
spilling out of them in long trills 
like birdsong, to caper about the 
piper, who leaped and whirled by 
himself in the center of the dance. 
Sometimes he would do a contra 
step with them and sometimes he 
would dance clockwise against the 
circle’s turning. 
After a while it seemed to Stark 
that there was something other 
than joy to their frolicking, A 
certain quality. What was the word 
Hargoth had used? Demented. 
He turned as someone slid softly 
up beside him. He could see the 
twin lightning strokes on the mask 
as Kintoth peered over the ridge 
and then drew back. 
“Outdwellers,” he said. 
Stark nodded. “They seem to 
know every inch of these hills. 
Perhaps they know of a way around 
Thyra.” 
“It’s worth a try,’’ said Kintoth, 
“but they’re a chancy lot. Don’t 
turn your back on them, even for a 
moment.” He added, “And remember, the Wandsmen may have 
spoken to them about you.” 
“That had occurred to me,” 
Stark said. “Tell the others to come 
up and stand along here where they 
can be seen. Weapons ready.” 
Kintoth hurried away. Stark 
waited a moment or two, then rose 
and began to walk down the slope. 
He could not say who saw him 
first. But the piping wavered away, 
the dancing stilled. The dark 
figures stood quiet, outlined against 
the shimmering sky. They watched 
him in ghostly silence as their 
tatters rustled in the wind. 
Stark gave them the formal 
greeting. “May Old Sun bring you 
warmth and life.” 
of the Outdwellers came forward. A woman. They were 
thin, he saw, with wild locks hanging under curious little caps. But 
their coverings revealed little else. 
The coverings, he saw now, were 
made of many small skins sewed together, the tatters were the legs and 
tails flapping free. The woman’s 
face was narrow and pale, with a 
pointed chin and enormous eyes 
that slanted upward. There were no 
whites to the eyes, only irises of 
lambent green with hugely expanded pupils that seemed to reflect the 
night entire. 
“Old Sun is well enough,” she 
said carelessly. Her accent was 
strange, difficult to follow. Her 
mouth was strange too, filled with 
sharp, strangely protruding teeth. 
“We worship the Dark Goddess. 
May the night bring you joy.” 
Stark hoped that it would. He 
did not count on it. “Who is your 
leader here?” 
“Leader?” She cocked her head 
on one side. “We have all sorts. 
What’s your fancy? A leader for 
singing the clouds and stars? A 
leader for catching the wind? One 
for setting it free again?” 
THE GINGER STAR 
“One for the searching out of 
trails,” said Stark. “I wish to pass 
by Thyra unseen.” 
“Ah,” she said, and looked past 
him over his shoulder, to the rim of 
the bowl. “You alone? Or with 
these others I see. Gray Warlocks 
of the Towers and five others unknown.” 
“All of us.” 
“Unseen?” 
“Yes.” 
“And unheard?” 
“Of course.” 
“But you are not as fleet as we, 
nor as light of foot. We can go 
where a snowflake would be heard 
as it fell.” 
“Nonetheless,” said Stark, “we 
must try.” 
She turned to her people. “The 
strangers and the Gray Ones would 
pass by Thyra in secret. Slaifed?” 
She sang the name. 
A man came to her, laughing,, 
kicking the dry snow. “I will lead 
them.” They were a small people, 
these night-dancers, the tallest of 
them reaching no higher than 
Stark’s shoulders. Slaifed looked 
him up and down and across and 
made a rude sound. “I can do that, 
but I can’t make your great hoofs 
be silent. That is up to you.” 
“And their weapons,” said the 
woman. “Don’t forget their weapons.” 
“No one forgets weapons,” said 
Slaifed, and laughed again, a peculiar, lilting sound that sent a 
shiver across Stark’s nerves. Slaifed 
himself bore no weapons — at least 
none that Stark could see — except 
for a knife such as everyone carried 
for the necessities of daily life. 
“Follow me,” said the Outdweller, “if you can.” 
He went gusting away across the 
snow, seeming to ride the wind. 
The others of his tribe returned to 
their dancing, all but the woman, 
who came with Stark. The thin 
voice of the pipe was audible for 
some time, fading slowly with 
distance. 
Hargoth’s people and the Irnanese went very quickly in spite of 
Slaifed’s doubting. And as they 
traveled their hands never left their 
weapons nor did their eyes cease 
their searching. 
The scarecrow figure of the Outdweller flitted ever ahead while the 
Witchfires gleamed and glittered 
under the quivering aurora. 
The woman looked sidelong at 
Stark. “You are from the south.” 
“Yes.” 
“From the south and not from 
the south.” She circled him, her 
small nose lifted. She walked backward, studying the Irnanese. ''They 
are from the south. They smell of 
Skaith.” She turned to Stark 
again. “Not you. You smell of the 
dust of heaven and the sacred 
night/’ 
Stark was not aware that he 
smelled of anything except a lack of 
soap and water. But he did not miss 
the significance of the remark . 
unless the Outdwellers were clairvoyant. He said, “You’re given to 
fancies, little sister.” His gaze 
roved constantly, Slaifed, the trail, 
the ever-shifting hills. The piping 
had ceased now, or perhaps was 
now too distant to be heard. “How 
are you called?’’ 
“Slee,” she said. “Slee-e-e-e . 
like the wind running over a hill.’’ 
“Were you always wanderers, 
Slee?” 
“Since the beginning. Our people 
have never had roofs to prison 
them. All this is ours.” Her wide 
arms touched everything: hills and 
sky, the Witchfires, the darklands 
behind them. “In the time of the 
Great Wandering we were the free 
plunderers who fed on the roofdwellers.” 
Stark thought that probably she 
meant that quite literally. She was 
proud of it. She danced with pride, 
going a little ahead of him. Slaifed 
was even farther ahead. This part 
of the trail was fairly straight, with 
a steep hillside on the right and a 
sharp drop-off to the left then tumbled into a ravine with a frozen 
stream at the bottom. The hillside 
could be climbed, but not easily. 
A hundred feet or so further on 
the trail bent around a jutting 
shoulder of rock. Suddenly Slaifed 
began to run. 
So did Slee. 
So did Stark. 
S lee’s hands were at her breast 
when he caught her and flung 
her aside with a swinging slash of 
his hand, never breaking stride. 
Slaifed looked back, not believing 
that anyone but an Outdweller 
could move so swiftly. He reached 
into the breast of his tunic, still 
running like the wind. 
Stark caught him halfway around 
the rock. It was like catching a 
bird. He sank his fingers into the 
long thin neck that was all cord and 
muscle, and set his feet, and did a 
thing that made Slaifed’s body 
snap upward as one snaps a whip. 
Stark saw the Outdweller’s absolutely incredulous face, saw a 
double set of iron talons, only half 
drawn on over thin fingers, drop to 
the ground. Then he had flung the 
body against Slee, turning as she 
came at his back. 
Her iron claws were in place and 
slashing. He felt the metal, still 
warm from her flesh. Then she fell 
under Slaifed’s dead weight and 
Stark killed her with a blow. She 
stared up at him from the white 
ground, her great dark pupils still 
reflecting the night, though not so 
brightly. 
THE GINGER STAR 
The column, headed by the Irnanese, had come to a halt. 
Weapons were rattling along the 
line. Stark touched the angle of his 
jaw where Slee’s claws had cut two 
shallow grooves just above the 
neck. The blood was already beginning to freeze. He drew his 
sword and went on around the 
rock. 
The trail led straight on, straight 
to the walls of a Thyran guardpost. 
Streaks of light glinted from slitted 
windows. Armed men strode the 
walls and the squat watchtower. 
The small fortress filled the space 
between hills and ravine. 
Stark turned back. 
Tattered shadows came streaking down the hillside to leap with 
outstretched talons onto the 
marchers. The Outdwellers had decided not to spend the night dancing joyously in. the hollow. 
The eruption of noise and violence was almost at once joined by 
the harsh bellowing of iron horns 
sounding from the guardpost. 
X 
T he Outdwellers, inferior in 
numbers and armament, were 
relying on their speed and agility. 
They skittered back and forth and 
up the hillside out of reach. Kintbth’s slingers and javelin-throwers 
were hampered by the close quar
130 
ters; forced to use their javelins as 
stabbing weapons, they formed a 
bristling circle around Hargoth and 
the priests. Kintoth rallied his rearguard. The Irnanese closed ranks, 
more dangerous with their swords 
and spears. The attackers avoided 
them. 
Some few of the Outdwellers fell 
or were wounded in 1:hat first rush, 
some few of the gray men of the 
Towers were slashed or forced over 
the edge. That was all. The Outdwellers were fighting a nuisance 
action to disrupt the column and 
hold them for the Thyrans. 
Stark joined the Irnanese. 
“What’s ahead?’’ asked Halk. 
Stark told him. 
“How many?’’ 
“I don’t know. But we’re in a 
trap here. We’ve got to run one way 
or the other.’’ 
“What’s behind us but more 
traps?’’ said Halk. 
“Forward, then,’’ said Stark, 
and ran back along the line, shouting to Kintoth. The men began to 
move, slowly at first, then more and 
more rapidly. By the time Stark got 
back to the head of the column they 
were going at a run. 
They swept around the shoulder 
of rock and charged headlong into 
the Thyran soldiers coming from 
the guardpost. 
The impact scattered the Thyrans, a dozen or so squat thick
IF 
armed warriors. Stark and the tall 
Irnanese hewed with the strength of 
desperation, blades ringing on 
iron. Ki'ntoth’s light-armed troop 
had a bit more room to work in 
here and javelins were finding unprotected legs and throats. If this 
dozen, ten soldiers and their officers, had been the whole of it, the 
guard post would have fallen. 
Stark and the Irnanese were almost at the gate when the second 
ten came through, a solid wedge of 
leather and metal. This would be 
the off shift, the delay just long 
enough for them to turn out and get 
their gear on. 
Weight of shield and armored 
bodies bore the swordsmen back. 
Short blades stabbed, cutting 
through thick furs. The first lot of 
Thyrans rallied, the seven or eight 
who could still fight. They concentrated on the tall Southrons, 
beating them back into the lines of 
the gray men. 
The brothers fell, almost in the 
same moment. Halk went to one 
knee, his hand clutching at his side 
where blood poured out through a 
rent in his tunic. Heavy boots 
kicked him down and trampled 
over him. Breca screamed like an 
eagle. Her long blade took the head 
clean from a Thyran's shoulders 
and then she went down beneath a 
wall of shields. 
Stark had lost sight of Gerrith. 
He was trapped among the gray 
warriors now, the ones who had 
formed as a guard around the Corn 
King and his priests. These were 
pressed back against the cliff, 
standing quietly with folded arms. 
Stark, sweat and blood running 
down his face, beating aside the 
short stabbing swords that forced 
him ever backward, shouted furiously to Hargoth, “Where is your 
magic. Corn King?” 
Hargoth answered, “Where are 
your stars?” And his eyes shone 
like bitter ice through the holes of 
his mask. 
The gray men fell, or were driven 
into the claws of the Outdwellers, 
who slashed them from behind, or 
flung them over the edge of the ravine. Their slings were useless, 
their javelins spent or broken 
against the Thyran armor. Stark 
caught a glimpse of the twin lightning strokes being separated by a 
blow that split Kintoth’s narrow 
skull to the jawbone. He felt rock 
against his back. The wall of 
shields came in against him. He 
struck up and under, felt the blade 
go home, lost it as the man fell. The 
shield -wall battered him with iron 
bosses, drove the breath from his 
lungs. He snarled and clawed and 
bit, all humanity lost in pain and a 
growing dark. The Thyrans came 
on, as merciless as time. At last, 
the darkness was all. 
THE QINQER STAR 
W HEN light returned to him it 
was the light of Old Sun, running rusty on the stones of a square 
courtyard enclosed by thick walls. 
He was inside the guardpost. He 
was cold and he hurt, and he had 
bled somewhat onto the stones 
where he lay. He was not dead, and 
he thought after a while that he was 
not dying. A name came into his 
head. 
Gerrith. 
A stab of fear contracted his 
belly. He tried to sit up, and found 
that this hands were bound. 
He could not sit up but managed 
to achieve a wider view. 
Halk leaned against the wall 
nearby. His eyes were shut and he 
breathed through his mouth in 
shallow, careful breaths. His face 
had a gray pallor; it seemed to have 
fallen in around the bones. His 
tunic was open, showing a rough 
wad of bandage. Beyond him, 
Hargoth and his priests sat in a 
group. They appeared soiled and 
bruised but not wounded, and their 
masks had been left to them. A 
guard stood over them, watchful 
against sorceries. In another place 
were such of their warriors as had 
survived, only seven and most of 
them wounded. All were bound. 
He did not see Gerrith. 
He called her name, she spoke 
from behind him. “I’m here. 
Stark.” He floundered about, push
ing his back up against the wall. 
She tried to help him but her 
hands, too, were tied. She did not 
seem to be hurt, except for bruises, 
and her hair hung loose around her 
face. 
“Why,” he asked her, “in the 
name of all the starry hells of space 
did you insist on coming?” 
He was furious with her. 
There was much activity in the 
courtyard, almost a holiday air. 
Thyran soldiers went about various 
sorts of business. Their dead and 
wounded were laid out on litters. A 
cluster of Outdwellers, like ragged 
crows, stood by a doorway and 
grabbed for bundles of provisions 
being handed out to them. Payment, no doubt, for their betrayal. 
One of them saw that Stark was 
conscious. He walked over and 
stared down with malevolent pleasure. The piper. Stark could see the 
instrument peeping out from his 
untidy wrappings. 
“Why?” asked Stark. 
“They told us to watch for you. 
They told us how you looked. They 
promised to pay us. But we would 
have done it for nothing.” 
The pupils of his eyes had contracted. They reflected nothing now 
but hate. 
Again Stark asked, “Why?” 
“The stars are sacred,” said the 
piper. “They are the eyes of the 
Goddess. When our souls take 
flight the bright eyes see them and 
the arms of the Goddess reach out 
to gather them in. You wish to defile the stars and rob us of all 
bliss.” 
Stark said wearily, “I don’t think 
you understand.” Normally he was 
tolerant of tribal fancies, but he felt 
no great tenderness for the Outdwellers. “The stars are already 
defiled. They’re only suns, like that 
one over your head. They have 
worlds around them, like this one 
under your feet. People live on 
those worlds, people who never 
heard of Outdwellers or their 
footling goddess. And the starships 
ply between them. It’s all going on 
out there this second as you stand 
here and nothing you can do will 
stop it.” 
The piper carried his peculiar 
weapons as well as his pipe. He 
thrust one hand in and out of his 
garments so swiftly that Stark 
could barely follow the motion. 
Claws flashed upward in the deathstroke and Stark had just time 
enough to consider the wisdom of 
his remarks. Then a hairy fist 
closed on the piper’s broomstick 
arm and a Thyran officer with an 
iron torque around his neck said 
cheerfully, 
“Do you drop it or do I break 
your wrist?” 
The piper wriggled his fingers 
and let the claws go clacking noisily 
THE GINGER STAR 
onto the stone floor. 
“This one’s worth more alive,” 
said the Thyran, and let go. He 
wiped his hand on his breeches. 
“Go along with you, filth.” 
The piper gathered up his armament and moved away. The Outdwellers began to file out through 
the gate, glancing back with hateful 
leers at the captives. Stark suddenly 
sat up straighter and again looked 
around the courtyard. 
“I see your dead,” he said to the 
Thyran. “I do not see ours.” 
“Don’t worry, friend. The Outdwellers will give them useful 
burial.” The Thyran examined him 
with interest. “You put us to some 
pains to keep from killing you.” 
“Why did you?” 
“That was the order. Dead if 
necessary, alive if possible and 
double the reward. Same for the 
woman and for this man. The 
others . .” He shrugged. “Dead 
was good enough.” 
Halk’s eyes had opened. “Breca 
was my shield-mate. The men were 
my comrades. You killed them. 
That was fair enough, since we 
came against you. But to give them 
to those vermin for . .” He could 
not finish the sentence. Rage 
choked him. Incredibly, he came to 
his feet and was reaching for the 
Thyran’s throat with his bound 
hands. His wound betrayed him 
and he fell again, to stare half
133 
blind at Stark with such hatred as 
might kill a man where he sat. 
“Prophecies!” Halk cried, and 
sobbed once, a racking sound that 
shook his whole body. Then he 
fainted. 
Stark wished that he had left 
Halk and the others in Amnir’s 
wagons, sleeping the sleep of the 
Goddess. 
Hargoth and the priests were 
watching him and he could not 
bear their gaze either, even though 
he had never asked for their faith. 
He asked the Thyran, “Who are 
‘they’ who gave you the orders, and 
what are we waiting for?” 
The Thyran smiled. “As to who 
‘they’ are, you’ll meet them soon 
enough. And we’re waiting for men 
to come from the city to take over 
the post while we go down with you 
and our wounded. You left us 
short-handed.” 
There was a second gate, set in 
the wall opposite the one through 
which the Outdwellers had gone. A 
couple of soldiers were up above, 
keeping an eye out over whatever 
country lay beyond. The Thyran 
glanced at them, laughed. 
“You wanted the Outdwellers to 
show you a way around Thyra. 
There isn’t any way around. We 
guard every trail, every approach. 
Not a puff of wind can get past us. 
Otherwise, anyone could creep in 
and nibble away our wealth.” 
He kicked Stark experimentally, 
studied the dried blood that showed 
on him, cocking his head from side 
to side. He stepped back, turning 
to Hargoth. 
4 4 Tr don’t believe he’s from the 
X stars at all. He’s just meat like 
the rest of us. And none too bright 
either, to take up with the Gray 
Maggots. A fine lot altogether to 
make big talk about flying up to 
heaven!” 
His broad face beamed with the 
scornful smugness of sublime stupidity. Stark hated him. 
“Aren’t you even curious?” he 
asked. “A million worlds out there 
with more wonders than I could tell 
you in a million years and you don’t 
even want to ask a question?” 
The Thyran shrugged, heaving 
his weight of iron bosses up and 
down. “Why should I care what’s 
out there? What more could I find 
anywhere than I already have here 
in Thyra?” 
He walked away. “Well,” said 
Stark, “and there’s no answer to 
that.” He leaned back against the 
wall, infinitely tired. “What do you 
say now, wise woman?” 
Hargoth gave her no chance to 
speak. “The only way was south. 
South! South where the ships are.” 
“The Spring Child told you 
otherwise,” said Stark. 
“A false augury. A punishment. 
Because of your lust for that 
woman, you cheated Old Sun of his 
gift. He sent us a curse instead of a 
blessing.” 
The eight heads of the priests 
nodded solemnly. Nine pairs of eyes 
pierced him with malevolence. 
“You are not the Promised 
One.” 
‘T never claimed to be,” said 
Stark. “Was if because of your 
anger that you didn’t use your 
magic to help us?” 
“The Goddess does not send us 
power like a lightning bolt. It is a 
slow magic. We had no time.” 
“You have time now.” 
Impatiently Hargoth said, “How 
can we perform the ritual? How 
stand as we must, think as we 
must? You know little of sorcery.” 
Stark knew enough of it not to 
depend on it. He gave up the conversation. 
“Have faith,” said Gerrith softly. 
“Faith?” said Stark. “Will it 
give us another miracle that leads 
nowhere?” 
The guards above the gate sang 
out and soon Stark heard a drumbeat in the distance. Presently the 
gate was opened and the replacements tramped in. There was a 
period of ordered chaos as the 
change-over was made. The outgoing force formed ranks, the 
litters were picked up, the captives 
THE GINGER STAR 
forced to stand on weak legs. 
Halk was conscious again and 
trying to get to his feet. He fell 
twice, with a Thy ran boot to help 
him. Stark swung his hands in a 
short vicious arc and knocked the 
soldier clanging against the wall. 
“He needs a litter,” said' Stark, 
“and don’t draw that blade. I’m 
worth double alive and your officers 
won’t thank you for robbing them.” 
The sword hesitated, halfway out 
of the sheath. The officer with the 
iron torque came up. 
“Put that away,” he said to the 
soldier, and then he hit Stark backhanded across the face. “You trade 
overmuch on your value.” 
“He needs a litter,” Stark said. 
Halk swore that he did not and 
tried once more to rise. He fell a 
third time. The officer shouted for 
litter-bearers. 
“Now, then,” he said, “move!” 
He shoved Stark into line. 
The drummers began to thump 
out a steady beat and the company 
marched through the gate. 
The path on the only side of the 
guardpost that Stark had yet seen 
ran for a time under the flank of a 
ridge that shut off any view of what 
lay beyond. Then it swung around a 
curve and the prospect opened up, 
suddenly and with spectacular effect. 
The Witchfires thrust sharply 
into the sky, throwing back Old 
13St 
Sun’s sullen glower. At their feet, 
covering a portion of the foothills 
and spreading out across a broad 
valley, was the ruin of a city. 
It had probably begun. Stark 
thought, as a strong fortress in the 
days when fighting men and caravans moved back and forth through 
the pass of the Witchfires, which 
was like a wide notch between the 
peaks. Later it had become a city, 
and then a metropolis, and then a 
dead and silent corpse, sinking in 
upon itself with the weight of wind 
and frost and endless time, until all 
its original form was lost and it was 
only a great dark many-humped 
mound beneath the mountains. 
Then from somewhere the Thyrans had come, Strayer’s men, the 
People of the Hammer, and the city 
had taken on a strange new life. 
Now, in the dim coppery glare of 
day, the guardian of the pass appeared more like a doorkeeper at 
the gate of hell. All around the base 
of the city and into its ugly flanks 
gaped fumaroles from which came 
plumes of smoke and red glarings 
that pulsed and shook. 
“The forges are never cold,” said 
the Thyran officer. “We are all 
smiths, even as we are all soldiers. 
We work and we guard. This is how 
Strayer taught us.” 
It sounded a dull life, but Stark 
forebore to say so. His mouth was 
still bleeding. 
Some two hours of marching 
brought them into the new city. 
It lacked beauty. Some of the 
dwellings were underground, some 
protruded partly. Others, built of 
stone from the hills and debris 
quarried from the old city, were 
above-ground but squat and low, 
with few windows to let in the cold. 
A vast straggle of frozen lanes 
ran between the dwellings. There 
were places for pens and livestock. 
A band of hairy folk leading a 
string of animals made way for the 
soldiers while staring out from filthencrusted faces at the prisoners. 
The animals bore great stacks of 
dried lichens. 
There was a constant billowing of 
smoke and a steady muffled sound 
of hammering that beat like giant 
heartbeats. Huge piles of rusty 
scrap metal bulked here and there, 
and over all was the old city, a 
tangled mountain blotting out part 
of the Witchfires. Over the centuries the Thyrans had chewed and 
tunneled the mountain ragged. 
Cave-like dwellings were dug into 
this raggedness and dark mouths 
opened into the deeper bowels of 
the ruin. Stark thought of a community of rats living in the biggest 
junkyard in all the worlds. If the 
Thyrans were able to reclaim even a 
small fraction of the countless tons 
of metal buried in that junkyard 
they would keep themselves busy 
for another two thousand years. 
The company swung into what 
was evidently the street that led up 
from the main gate. It was much 
wider than the lanes and ran almost 
straight. 
The thudding of the drums became sharper, the pace of the men 
smarter. People were swarming out 
to watch them go by. These were 
chiefly of the same heavy build as 
the soldiers, though occasionally 
there were individuals of a different 
shape and coloring to attest to 
outside blood. The women were as 
ugly as the men. Stark had no idea 
what the women of the Towers 
looked like but he was sure they 
could only be an improvement on 
these travesties. 
Men and women both shouted to 
the soldiers, crowded in to stare 
and push at the captives. The furclad children threw insults and 
more tangible evidences of their 
malevolence. 
The soldiers shoved the people 
back with bone-breaking good nature; while the crisp beat of the 
drums never faltered. The company 
marched up the straight street, 
straight to the Iron House. 
1 1HE dark walls of the Iron House 
. were burnished like a shield, 
the metal sheathing of the roof 
gleaming with a dull and sullen 
lustre in the light of the ginger star. 
A guard of twelve men was drawn 
up before massive iron doors which 
bore the hammer device. The 
House was rectangular. It stretched 
some eighty feet from north to 
south, half that east to west. The 
doors were in the southern front. At 
the northern end, close against the 
ruins, there were crumbled wings of 
stone and rubble. 
The drums sounded a long roll. 
The heavy doors swung open. The 
company marched into a great hall. 
Flaming pits, giving out as much 
smoke as heat, were set at intervals 
in the walls. At the far end of the 
hall was a dais with a high ^eat and 
several places of honor. The high 
seat was made of iron — strong, 
square, without grace or ornamentation. A man wearing an iron 
collar and pectoral sat in it; he, too, 
was strong, square, without grace. 
The pectoral on his barrel chest was 
in the form of a hammer. 
The seats of honor were also occupied, and Stark saw without surprise that the man at the right hand 
of the high seat was Gelmar of 
Skeg. 
agreat crowd pressed into the 
hall behind the soldiers. The 
chief men beat and shouldered 
their way through the mob to crowd 
up onto the dais or take their places 
below it, according to their rank 
while lesser men filled the body of 
THE GINGER STAR 
the hall. Women remained outside 
and the small boys who darted in 
were pitched out bodily. The iron 
doors clanged shut. As though that 
were a signal the men began shouting, “Strayer! Strayer and the 
forges!” They stamped their feet 
and slapped their weapons. 
“Strayer!” 
After that ritual shout the hall 
settled gradually to a breathy silence, undertoned with rustlings 
and coughings. The smoky air became charged with a smell of heat 
and sweat, wool and fur and 
leather. 
A clear space had been left 
around the soldiers. The officer 
drew his sword and lifted the hilt in 
salute. 
“These are the captives, Ironmaster.” 
The Ironmaster wore a fine 
purple robe whose cloth must have 
come from the south in Amnir’s 
wagons; the local weave was coarse 
and undyed. He nodded his grizzled 
head and the officer put away his 
sword. 
The Ironmaster turned to Gelmar. “Are these the ones you 
wanted?” 
Gelmar rose and stepped down 
from the dais. He wore a tunic of 
the somber red Stark remembered 
from Skeg and he carried his wand 
of office. He walked without haste, 
around Stark and studied him with 
cool deliberation. 
On the dais were three other 
green-clad Wandsmen. One of 
them had a face deep-scarred and 
half blinded by a sword-cut that 
had left an ugly groove from forehead to jaw. The wound had healed 
but still showed an angry red. This 
man leaned forward in his chair 
with the hunched quiver of an 
animal about to spring. 
Gelmar looked into Stark’s eyes. 
His own were dark and veiled, 
lacking the fire of triumph Stark 
had expected. Yet they contained a 
cold ferocity that was frightening. 
“I know this man,” said Gelmar. 
“Yes. Concerning the others ...” 
He beckoned to the scarred man. 
“Vasth?” 
VaSth came quickly to peer into 
Gerrith’s face. 
“There were two women,” said 
the Thyran officer. “One of them 
fought like a man. A shield-bearer. 
These Southrons defy all morality, 
allowing women to handle swords. 
We were forced to kill her.” 
“No matter,” said Vasth. “This 
one is Gerrith, daughter of Gerrith. 
And this — ” He turned to Halk on 
his litter. “This one is Halk, a ringleader, a killer of Wandsmen. I 
have cause to remember him.” He 
traced the groove of the scar. “He 
gave me this.” 
“A pity my hand was weak in 
that moment,” said Halk weakly. 
He had not stood the journey well. 
He looked past the lesser Wandsmen to Gelmar. “What has happened at Irnan?” 
“Irnan has fallen,” said Gelmar, 
and his mouth was cruel. “So much 
for all your trouble.” 
“And Ashton?” asked Stark. 
“Ashton,” said Gelmar, and 
smiled, a small twisting of the lips 
as one might twist a knife-blade in 
the yielding flesh. “The Lords 
Protector were discussing what 
should be done with him when I left 
the Citadel. That decision will have 
been made by now. Perhaps he 
lives, perhaps he is already dead. I 
can’t tell you. But you’ll know soon 
enough.” He turned from Stark to 
face the Corn King and his priests. 
Stark gave a violent jerk and was 
instantly quelled. 
Gelmar took no notice of him. 
“You were with these rebels, 
Hargoth, coming to attack us at the 
Citadel. Why did you do this 
folly?” 
“For freedom. The freedom of 
the stars.” 
Hargoth still had his pride. His 
narrow head was as erect as ever, 
his eyes met Gelmar’s defiantly. 
“Stark and the Sun Woman told us 
that you Wandsmen forbade this 
and so must be destroyed. We believed them but they were false prophets, they would not go south 
where the ships are. They cheated 
Old Sun because of the lust of their 
bodies. And because we believed 
them we have been punished.” 
Gelmar nodded. He said, “The 
ships are gone from the south, Hargoth. Do you understand that?” 
“I understand.” 
“The ships are gone. The starmen and their foreign ways are 
gone with them. The star-roads are 
closed. Our way lies as it always 
has, with Skaith and Old Sun. Do 
you understand that?” 
Hargoth said, “I understand.” 
His voice carried the deadness of 
that understanding. 
“Then go tell your people, Hargoth.” 
Hargoth bent his head. 
Gelmar spoke to the man in 
purple who watched smiling from 
the high-seat, pleased by the humbling of the gray men of the 
Towers. 
“Open your doors, Ironmaster. 
Let them go.” 
“I had rather seen them slain,” 
said the Ironmaster. “But — ” He 
shrugged and ordered the doors to 
be opened. 
The priests and warriors formed 
their meager ranks; beaten men, 
acquiescing not with patience but 
with anger — anger for their erstwhile allies. 
And Hargoth said, “Wait.” 
He faced Gerrith. “You prophesied for me. Sun Woman. Now 
THE GINGER STAR 
I prophesy for you. Your body will 
yet feed Old Sun, though not as a 
parting- gift.” 
Gerrith’s expression had changed. All the way from the guardpost 
she had looked tired to exhaustion, 
merely enduring. Now she seemed 
to be listening intently to some inner voice. Yet she heard Hargoth 
and answered him. 
“That may be. But your people 
must find themselves a new Corn 
King, for you lead them badly. You 
cast the finger-bones and you prophesy, but you do not know truth 
from falsehood.” 
Her head came erect and her 
voice rang out strongly. 
“Irnan has not fallen. The ships 
remain at Skaith. The star-roads 
are open. Times change and the 
Wandsmen are afraid. In the 
end . .” 
Vasth struck her viciously. Blood 
sprang from her mouth and she fell 
past Stark’s bound hands into the 
arms of a Thyran soldier, who 
caught her roughly. 
“We have had enough of wise 
women,” said Vasth. 
T ihe hall had become suddenly 
still. In that stillness Gelmar 
spoke softly to Hargoth. 
“Will you go?” 
Hargoth turned and stumbled 
out, his priests and the remnant of 
his warriors following after. 
Gelmar clapped his hands. 
Men came in through a leathercurtained doorway at the side of the 
hall. They wore saffron-colored 
tunics and richly-ornamented collars of some bright metal. They 
were of a breed that Stark had not 
seen before; beautiful men, with 
beautifully proportioned bodies and 
aquiline faces almost too perfect — 
and so much alike that it was difficult to tell one from another except 
for the color of the hair. This 
ranged from black to a reddish 
blond. But all had copper-colored 
eyes. The eyes were too wide apart 
and there was something else odd 
about them. As they came closer 
Stark saw what it was. They were 
like the inlaid eyes of statues, startlingly lifelike but without life, 
showing brilliance but no depth. 
As though they understood without orders two of them picked up 
Halk’s litter and another helped 
Gerrith to her feet. Two more replaced the Thyran soldiers beside 
Stark. All had daggers at their belts 
and smooth muscles showed powerfully beneath their tunics. A sixth 
man stood by and it was to him that 
Gelmar spoke. 
“Take them away. Guard them.” 
Stark saw Gelmar’s face clearly, 
very clearly. The lines, the tautness, the weariness. Some of that 
proud high confidence that he 
remembered from their first meet
ing had been left forever in the sea 
where Stark had taken him. 
Stark said, “Gerrith is right. 
You are afraid.” 
Gelmar’s men had them moving 
almost before the words were said 
and Gelmar ignored him. No one 
beyond their small group had even 
heard his words. But Stark knew 
that they were true. 
New things had come, things the 
Wandsmen could neither control 
nor comprehend and they felt their 
ancient power slipping away from 
them. They must grasp it now and 
hold it firmly, regardless of the 
cost, else it would be gone. 
And grasp it they would, with all 
their strength, in whatever ways 
seemed best to them. The fear and 
the uncertainty would only make 
them more dangerous, might already have cost Ashton his life. 
The captives were taken into one 
of the adjoining wings to a room 
rudely furnished with sleeping mats 
and a few random articles. The 
Thyrans seemed not to indulge in 
luxury, but the mats offered at least 
some comfort. 
All six stayed to guard them, a 
woman and two men, and one of 
those wounded. It was a measure of 
the prisoner’s importance. 
Gerrith was making a dazed and 
fumbling attempt to wipe some of 
the blood from her face. 
Halk said, “Gerrith, what you 
said about Irnan — was it true?” 
Answering for her. Stark said 
harshly, “Of course it’s true. Why 
else would they want us alive? If the 
revolt were really over dead would 
be good enough.” 
In a curiously gentle voice one of 
the bright-eyed men said, “Do not 
talk.” 
Halk ignored him. He seemed to 
have recovered a measure of 
strength, even of eagerness. “Yes, I 
see. If Irnan still stands, and perhaps other city-states have joined 
her . .” 
He broke off with a gasp of pain 
as the guard nearest him kicked the 
frame of his litter. 
If that were so, thought Stark, it 
would not be enough for the 
Wandsmen to tell it in the streets 
that the wise woman and the Dark 
Man and the ringleaders of the revolt were all dead, the prophecy 
came to nothing. They would have 
to produce real evidence and present it to people who could attest to 
its authenticity. Gerrith alive, the 
Dark Man alive, one undoubted 
ringleader alive, all captives of the 
Wandsmen — proof enough that the 
prophecy lied and the power of the 
Lords Protector remained unshaken. Gelmar and his aides 
might keep the three of them in 
cages for the rest of their lives, 
dragging them up and down the 
roads of Skaith. Or a fitting end 
THE GINGER STAR 
could be devised for them, a public 
end, with recantings and repentance; an end to remain vivid for 
generations in the minds of the 
people. 
If hope of the fulfillment of the 
prophecy kept the revolt alive, then 
that revolt would collapse very 
quickly. Irnan would fall, and that 
would be the end of it. For the 
present, at least. 
The Wandsmen obviously believed that that hope was all that was 
keeping the revolt alive. Stark believed it too. Not because the Irnanese were childishly superstitious, but because if the Citadel 
and the Lords Protector were not 
destroyed the folk of Irnan could 
not hold out alone against the mobs 
of Farers and the mercenary troops 
the Wandsmen would send against 
them and their present or potential 
allies among the other city-states 
would fall away. Jerann himself 
had said that the others would wait 
to see Irnan’s fate. 
The Citadel and the Lords Protector. It all came back to them. 
They were the symbol of permanence. The unchanging, holy, the 
unseen and forever inviolate power. 
The power that would by now 
have pronounced judgment on Ashton. 
Was it, after ail, a power that a 
man could fight? Even if he were 
free? 
Stark looked at his bound wrists. 
The thongs were wet with his blood. 
The six men crowded the small 
room, watching. That they had orders not to kill him he didn’t 
doubt — but there are worse things 
to do to a man than killing him. 
Six men between him and the 
door. Beyond the door, the Iron 
House. Beyond that, Thyra, with 
every gate and every path guarded. 
Not a puff of wind could get 
through. 
Halk had had second thoughts. 
“Why would Gelmar lie to Hargoth?’’ 
Again the litter was kicked. 
Again Stark answered, speaking 
rapidly, eye on the nearest guard. 
“Does he want the People of the 
Towers marching south ...” 
He dodged the first blow, stiffened fingers aimed at his throat. 
“. singing the Hymn of Deliverance?’’ 
The second blow he could not 
dodge and he didn’t try. Instead he 
caught the vicious fingers between 
his teeth. 
H e learned one thing. These tooperfect creatures were not 
automatons. They bled. 
So did he. 
After a time a healer came, a 
Thyran in a tunic both undyed and 
unwashed. He wore a chain of 
office around his neck and was 
followed by two boys bearing pots 
of ointment and bundles of rags. 
The healer tended their hurts, 
spending long minutes over Halk, 
grumbling at wasting his time and 
talents on a non-Thyran who would 
probably die anyway. When he was 
finished servants came and fed him 
and they were told to rest in preparation for a journey. Gelmar 
seemed in great haste. 
The room was stiflingly close. 
The powerful bodies of the men in 
the saffron tunics were oppressive 
in the confined space, the smell of 
them repulsive. To Stark they 
smelled like snakes. Nevertheless, 
he managed to sleep until men 
came in with new manacles, fresh 
from Strayer’s forges. Gelmar’s 
man with the bitten hand held his 
sword-point against Stark’s groin 
while the irons were fastened on; 
his face had still shown no expression, not even pain. 
Gerrith seemed to have awakened from a dream, and not a pleasant one. She was careful not to look 
at Stark. 
When the Lamp of the North was 
above the peaks they were taken 
out of the room and marched along 
a corridor to a yard beside the Iron 
House where men and beasts were 
waiting. The beasts were small with 
shaggy hair that swept the ground, 
their sharp horns tipped with metal 
balls to prevent them hooking. The 
men who led them wore bulky skin 
garments with the fur inside. Only 
their eyes showed between heavy 
caps and thick tangled beards. The 
beards were flocked with white as 
though the snow had got into them; 
it did not Seem to be a sign of age. 
Stark guessed that these were Harsenyi iti the service of the Wandsmen. 
For a moment the prisoners were 
close together and Gerrith managed to touch Stark’s hand and smile 
at him. A strange smile. 
It was as if she said goodbye. 
XI 
T he beasts shuffled and blew, 
breath puffing white on the icy 
air. Stark and Gerrith were made 
to mount, with a guard on either 
side, afoot. Halk was transferred to 
a traveling litter slung between two 
of the animals. He appeared to be 
unconscious or asleep most of the 
time. Even so, he had been 
manacled like the others and a 
guard stood at the head of his litter. 
Gelmar, cloaked and hooded for 
the journey, came and bent over 
him, feeling Halk’s throat where 
the life beat in it. 
“Cover him well,’’ he said to 
Halk’s guard. “If he reaches the 
Citadel alive, we can heal him.’’ 
THE GINGER STAR 
The beautiful man, sword and 
dagger now belted over rich outer 
tunic, covered Halk carefully with 
furs. 
Gelmar and the lesser Wandsmen mounted. The twelve retainers 
portioned themselves out along the 
line, walking with the Harsenyi but 
obviously disdainful of them. 
An escort of Thyran troops 
traniped up, banging the inevitable 
drum. The cavalcade started. 
They passed through the gate 
and turned north toward the nightsparkle of the Witchfires. The Thyrans escorted them past the outer 
guardpost, saluted and drummed 
and clanked their way back into the 
city. 
The path lay ahead, climbing a 
long gradient to the summit. Somewhere on the other side of the 
mountains was the Citadel. In a 
way, Stark thought, getting there 
was going to be easier than he had 
thought. At least he would not have 
to worry about the Northhounds. 
No wagons had come this way in 
centuries and the track was narrow. 
The hard little hoofs of the beasts 
clattered steadily on the frozen 
ground. The sky was a glory of 
shifting color. 
It was bright enough to see quite 
clearly the shapes that thronged the 
pass. 
For geological ages the forces of 
wind and water, thaw and freeze, 
had worked at the rock walls, 
scouring, carving, polishing, wearing away. Sheathed in ice, the 
sculptures seemed almost alive in 
the shaking light of the aurora. 
Great faces watched with deepgouged eyes. Towering pinnacles 
soared and tottered, gargoyle wings 
spread out to shadow the little 
humans passing beneath. In the 
wider places where softer strata had 
been carried off whole crowds of 
cowled and hooded forms seemed 
to whisper together. Thejwind from 
the high north blew down the pass, 
chuckling, singing, talking to the 
shining creatures it had helped to 
create. 
Stark’s human reason told him 
that these monsters were no more 
than lumps of eroded stone. His 
mind knew that. His primitive gut 
said otherwise. And his animal 
senses told him that other beings 
not of stone were close by. 
The Children of Skaith-OurMother? 
He could not see anything, but a 
regiment might have hidden itself 
in the eccentricities of the rock. 
Still, the Wandsmen and their retainers moved on confidently. If 
there was something here, they 
were accustomed to it and not 
afraid. Even their beasts seemed 
unconcerned. 
The manacles weighed heavily on 
Stark’s wrists. The sky flared a 
white as pure as the veils of angels. 
Pale green, delicate as shoal water. 
Red like fire, like roses. From time 
to time the shimmering, eldritch 
curtains drew apart to show the velvet darkness beyond, the green star 
glowing. 
Gerrith rode ahead of him sitting 
her little beast quietly, her head 
bowed. He wished he knew what 
she had dreamed. 
At length, just below the summit, at the right-hand side of the 
pass, he saw a tall pinnacle that 
canted forward so that it seemed 
that it must fall of its own weight. It 
had the form of an elongated man 
in an attitude of prayer. About its 
base irregular groups and lines of 
hooded figures stood as though 
they listened. 
In the shifting light and shadow 
of the aurora, three of the figures 
moved, detached themselves from 
the stone, came into the ^center of 
the pass and stood barring the way. 
And now the little beasts snorted 
and danced. The cavalcade came to 
a halt beneath the leaning, looming 
figure. 
Gelmar rode forward. “Kell a 
Marg,” he said. “Skaith-Daughter.” His voice had a flat quality, as 
though he were holding it in rigid 
check. “Fenn. Ferdic.” 
The figures were cloaked against 
the wind but their heads were bare 
except for diadems of wrought 
gold. The diadem of the foremost 
figure was set with a great smoky 
jewel. There was something peculiar about the three faces, pale in 
the aurora-light. 
Kell a Marg said, “Gelmar. “ 
The voice was like chiming bells. It 
was a woman’s voice, imperious in 
spite of its music, with the arrogance of unquestioned power. A 
match for Gelmar, Stark thought. 
He had made out the peculiarity of 
the faces. They were covered in fine 
white fur, and the features, while 
not unpleasing, were distorted 
subtly from the human, the noses 
blunted, the jaws prominent. The 
woman had eyes as huge and dark 
and glowing as the jewel she wore. 
Night-creature’s eyes. 
S HE said to Gelmar: “Did you 
think to pass through our 
mountains without pause?’’ 
“Skaith-Daughter,” said Gelmar, and now there was just the 
faintest edge of irritation in his 
voice, “we have an urgent mission 
and time is short. I thank you for 
this honor, but — ’’ 
“No honor,’’ said Kell a Marg. 
She looked past him at the captives. “These are the wicked ones 
you were seeking?’’ 
“Kell a Marg—’’ 
“You’ve been setting the whole 
of the north by its ears, it’s small 
wonder we know of you. Even in 
THEQINQER STAR 
our deep caverns we’re not deaf/’ 
The edge of irritation had sharpened. “Kell a Marg, I told you — ’’ 
“You told me that there was a 
threat to Skaith, something new 
and strange, something that only 
you of the Citadel could deal with. 
You told me only because I asked 
you — because the Harsenyi had 
brought us tales we could not 
understand.” 
“There was no need to concern 
yourself—” 
“You take too much on your 
shoulders, Gelmar. You intend to 
settle the entire future of SkaithOur-Mother without consulting her 
Children.” 
“There is no time, Kell a Margi 
I must take these people south as 
soon as possible.” 
“You will make time,” said Kell 
a M<**rg. 
A silence. The wind from the 
high north whined and chuckled. 
The hooded figures listened dutifully to the endless prayer of the 
leaning man. The cloaks of the 
Children fluttered. 
Gelmar said, “I beg you not to 
interfere.” Irritation had become 
desperation. He knew this woman, 
Stark thought. Knew her and 
feared her, disliked her intensely. 
“I understand these people. I’ve 
dealt with them. I know what must 
be done. Please, let us pass.” 
The ground shook, ever so 
slightly. Above their heads the 
leaning man seemed to sway. 
“Kell a Marg!” 
“Yes, Wandsman?” 
A second small quivering. 
Pebbles rattled down. The leaning 
man bowed. The Harsenyi began 
hastily to move themselves and 
their beasts out from under these 
tons of rock. 
“Very well!” said Gelmar furiously. “I will make time.” 
Kell a Marg said briskly, “The 
Harsenyi may enter and wait in the 
usual place.” 
She turned and walked with a 
lithe, undulant stride toward the 
cliff. There was a sort of lane between the stone figures. She went 
along it with Fenn and Ferdic, the 
cavalcade following meekly. Gelmar’s stiff back was eloquent of 
stifled rage. 
Gerrith had straightened up. Her 
head was high. High and proud. 
Stark felt a qualm of alarm not connected with the Children or the 
threatening quality of the cliff-face 
about to swallow them. This was a 
different kind of alarm. He wondered again what Kell a Marg knew 
and damned all prophetic visions 
for the thousandth time. 
Halk’s voice came from the litter, 
weak but still jeering. “I told you 
you could not talk the Children 
away.” 
A great slab of stone opened in 
the cliff face, moving easily on its 
pivots. The cavalcade passed 
through. 
The door swung shut. Kell a 
Marg flung back her cloak. *T do 
so hate the wind!** she said, and 
looked at Gelmar, smiling. 
They were in a large cavern, evidently the place where the Harsenyi 
customarily came to trade with the 
Children. Lamps burned dimly in 
the quiet air, giving off a scent of 
sweet oil. The walls were rough, the 
floor uneven. At its inner side there 
was a second door. 
“The lesser Wandsmen are not 
needed,** said Kell a Marg. “I 
think we*ll get little good from the 
wounded one so he will stay here as 
well. Those two — ’* She pointed to 
Stark and Gerrith. “The wisewoman, and the one called, I believe, the Dark Man. I want them. 
And, of course, Gelmar, I shall require your counsel.’’ 
The green Wandsmen accepted 
their dismissal with bad grace; 
Vasth looked poisonous but held 
his tongue. Gelmar’s jaw was 
tightly set. He could barely control 
his rage. 
“I shall need guards,” he said, 
cutting the words very short. “This 
man is dangerous.” 
“Even in irons?” 
“Even in irons.” 
“Four of your creatures, then. 
Though I fail to see how he could 
hope to escape from the House of 
the Mother.” 
There was a shuffle of dismounting. Kell a Marg stood easily, waiting with her courtiers. Stark knew 
without being told that she did not 
often stand in this outer cavern 
with nomads. This was a special 
occasion, one of sufficient urgency 
to make her break precedent. She 
was looking at him with frank curiosity. 
He looked at her. The cloak 
tossed back over slender shoulders 
revealed a lean body as arrogant as 
her voice, clad in its own sleek 
white fur and ornamented with a 
light harness of the same wrought 
gold as the diadem. A beautiful 
animal, a voluptuous woman. A 
great royal ermine with wicked 
eyes. Stark felt no stirrings of excitement. 
She lifted a shoulder daintily. 
“This one may or may not be as 
dangerous as you say but it’s bold 
enough.” She turned and led the 
way to the inner door. It swung silently open. 
Kell a Marg strode through. Gelmar, his two captives, and his 
guards followed after, the wiry 
white-furred courtiers bringing up 
the rear. 
Attendants who had opened the 
door swung it shut behind them 
and they were closed into a strange 
and beautiful world. 
THE GINGER STAR 
Stark shivered, a shallow animal 
rippling of the skin. 
The House of the Mother smelled 
of sweet oil, of dust and deep 
caverns. 
It smelled of death. 
T hey were in a corridor, wide 
and high, lit only by flickering 
lamps. A group of people with the 
pale fur, the close-set ears and 
golden diadems that varied in size 
and splendor according to rank 
were waiting there with bowed 
heads. A murmur of voices repeated reverently, “Skaith-Daughter. 
You have returned.” 
Stark thought they looked as if 
they had been waiting a long time 
and were tired of standing. At one 
side he noticed four of the Children 
gathered together apart from the 
others, bearing themselves with 
disdainful pride. They were clad in 
skull-caps and tabards of some 
black material, close-belted with 
golden chains. They did not bow. 
Their collective gaze went immediately to the strangers. 
Courtiers and officials, when 
they straightened up, also fixed 
Stark and Gerrith with cold and 
hostile eyes. Wandsmen they were 
apparently used to for they spared 
Gelmar only a single unwelcoming 
glance. But the strangers seemed to 
disturb them deeply. 
“I will speak with the Diviners,” 
said Kell a Marg and gestured the 
courtiers out of the way. 
The four black-clad ones gathered around her and the five walked 
ahead, speaking in low voices. The 
courtiers and officials had now to 
be content with their less favored 
places in the procession. 
They walked for what seemed 
like a long while in a corridor whose 
walls and roof were covered with 
carvings, some in high relief, others 
almost in the round. All were done 
with .great artistry and appeared to 
have something to do with the history or the religion of the Children. 
Some of that history, Stark judged, 
might have been stormy. There 
were places where the xiarvings had 
been damaged and repaired. He 
counted six doors in the first stretch 
that could be closed against invaders. 
Chambers with magnificently 
carved doorways opened off the corridor and what he could see of the 
interiors gave an impression of astonishing richness. Lamps of pierced silver picked out gleams of color, 
of inlays and mosaics, touched the 
outer shapes of things that Stark 
could only guess at. One thing was 
certain; these Children of SkaithOur-Mother had little in common 
with their cousins of the Sea. Far 
from being animals, they had an 
obviously complex and highly-developed society working away here 
beneath the glittering peaks of the 
Witchfires. 
Or ought he to say “had once 
had?” 
Some of the chambers were unlighted. Others had only one lamp, 
or two, to fill their large darkness. 
There was that subtle odor of dust 
and death, a feeling that the comings and goings glimpsed in the 
branching cbrridors and the work, 
whatever it might be, that was going on, were all less than was called 
for by the size and elaborateness of 
the Home of the Mother. 
The corridor ended in an enormous cavern, a natural one where 
the fantastic rock formations had 
been left untouched. There were 
lamps enough here and a royal path 
of marble blocks set into the floor. 
Beyond was a series of jewel-box 
anterooms, and then the vaulted 
chamber that must belong to Kell a 
Marg, Skaith-Daughter. 
It was perfectly plain. Walls and 
floor were faced with some luminous white stone, without carving 
or ornamentation, completely bare. 
Nothing was allowed to distract the 
eye from the focal-point of the 
room — ^the high seat. 
Kell a Marg climbed the broad 
steps to the dais, seated herself. 
The high seat was carved from 
rich brown rock the color of soil, in 
the shape of a robed woman seated 
to hold SkaithrDaughter on her 
knees, arms curved around protectively, head bent forward in an attitude of affection. Kell a Marg sat 
with her hands on the hands of 
Skaith-Mother. Her slim arrogant 
white body gleamed against the 
dark stone. 
The Diviners stood in a little 
group at her right. Fenn and Ferdic 
at her left. The others were scattered around the spacious emptiness. 
Gelmar, Stark, Gerrith and the 
guards were clustered at the foot of 
the steps. 
“Now,” said Kell a Marg, “tell 
me again of this danger that has 
come to Skaith.” 
Gelmar had taken firm hold of 
himself. His voice was almost 
pleasant. 
“Certainly. But I would prefer to 
do it more privately, Skaith-Daughter.” 
“These, Gelmar, are the Keepers 
of the House, the Clan Mothers; 
the men and women who are responsible for the well-being of my 
people. 1 wish them to hear.” 
Gelmar nodded. He looked at 
Stark and Gerrith. “Only let these 
two be taken out.” 
“Ah,” said Kell a Marg. “The 
captives. No, Gelmar. They stay.” 
Gelmar began an angry protest, 
smothered it, inclined his head and 
began to tell the story of the ships. 
Kell a Marg listened attentively. 
So did Fenn and Ferdic, the Clan 
THE QINQER STAR 
Mothers and the counselors. Under 
the attentiveness was fear. And 
something else — anger, hate, the 
instinctive rejection of an intolerable truth. 
“Let me be clear about what you 
say,” said Kell a Marg. “These 
ships. They come from outside, 
from far away?” 
66T? ROM the stars.” 
Jr “The stars. We had almost 
forgotten them. And the men who 
fly in these ships, they also come 
from outside? They are not born of 
Skaiwh-Mother?” 
The glowing eyes of the Clan 
Mothers and the counselors looked 
at Stark, looked at blasphemy incarnate. 
“That is so,” said Gelmar. 
“They are utterly alien to us. We let 
them stay becauscsthey brought us 
things we need, such as metals. But 
they brought us other and worse 
things — off-world ways, foreign 
ideas that have corrupted some of 
our people.” 
“They corrupted us with hope,” 
said Gerrith. “Skaith-Daughter, let 
me tell you how we live under the 
rule of the Lords Protector and 
their Wandsmen.” 
Gelmar would have liked to stop 
her but Kell a Marg silenced him. 
She listened while Gerrith spoke. 
When she had finished, Kell a 
Marg said. 
“You and your people wished to 
get into these ships and fly to another world, away from Skaith? 
You wished to live on alien soil 
which never gave you breath?” 
“Yes, Skaith-Daughter. It may 
be difficult for you to understand. 
We looked upon it as salvation.” 
It was the wrong thing to say. 
She knew it. Stark knew it. Yet it 
had to be said. 
“We found a different salvation,” said Kell a Marg. “We returned to the womb of the Mother, 
and while your people starved and 
clawed and died under Old Sun, we 
lived warm and fed and comfortable, secure in the Mother’s love. 
Do not expect me to weep for you, 
nor to care about what the Wandsmen do in their own place. I have a 
larger concern than that.” 
She turned to Gelmar. “The revolt continues?” 
Reluctantly, he said, “It does.” 
“Well,” said Stark, “and we 
knew that.” 
Kell a Marg continued. “You intend to take these people south. 
Why?” 
“There was a prophecy — ” 
“Yes,” said Kell a Marg. “The 
Harsenyi brought us some gossip 
about that. It concerned this man, 
did it not?” She looked at Stark. 
Gelmar appeared anxious tx> 
hurry by this point. “It sparked the 
revolt. If I prove to them that the 
prophecy was false — 
Kell a Marg interrupted him, 
speaking to Gerrith. “Was this 
your prophecy, wise woman?” 
“My mother’s.” 
”And what did it say about this 
man?” 
“That he would come from the 
stars,” said Gerrith, “to destroy the 
Lords Protector.” 
Kell a Marg laughed, silvery 
spiteful laughter that touched Gelmar’s cheekbones with a dull flush. 
“I can see your concern, Gelmar! 
Too bad if he destroyed them before you had your turn.” 
“Skaith-Daughter!” 
“But surely they know?’’ She 
turned to the strangers, wicked eyes 
alight. “Surely you know by now? 
The Lords Protector are only 
Wandsmen grown older.” 
Stark’s heart gave a great leap. 
“They’re human?” 
“As Gelmar. That’s the great 
reason they must remain invisible, 
here in the hidden north, behind 
their mists and their myths and 
their demon Northhounds. Invisibility is a condition of godhead. If 
folk could see them, they would 
know the truth, and the Lords Protector would cease to be divine. Or 
immortal. They would be only 
Wandsmen, clever enough and ambitious enough to put on white 
robes and spend their declining 
years at the Citadel, wrapped in all 
the rewards that faithful service to 
their God of Goodness can bring. 
And they are many.” 
Stark laughed. “Human,’’ he 
said, and looked at Gelmar. 
Gelmar’s expression was filled 
with veiled venom. “You need not 
mock, Skaith-Daughter. We serve 
the needy, which is more than the 
Children do, who serve only themselves. In the time of the Great 
Wandering you were asked repeatedly to give sanctuary here in the 
House of the Mother to folk who 
were dying for the lack of it, and 
you turned them all away.” 
“And so we have survived,” said 
Kell a Marg. “Tell me, how many 
sufferers were taken past the Northhounds into the Citadel, to save 
their precious lives?” 
“The Citadel is sacred — ” 
“So is the House of the Mother. 
The Children were here before the 
Citadel was built — ” 
“That is only your tradition.” 
“ — and we intend to be here still 
when it is gone. Let us return to the 
subject in hand. There is surely a 
simple way to end your revolution. 
Send the ships away.” 
Gelmar said between his teeth, 
“Give me credit for some wisdom, 
Skaith-Daughter. Sending the ships 
away would solve nothing, because — ” 
“Because,” said Stark, overriding him, “he could not make 
THE QINQER STAR 
them stay away. Isn’t that so, Gelmar? Isn’t that why, as the wise 
woman said, the ships are still 
there, in the south?” 
Again Kell a Marg held up her 
hand to silence Gelmar. Her hand 
was slender, with curving nails. 
There were no rings on it. The palm 
was pink and naked. The hand 
beckoned Stark up the steps. The 
guards came with him. 
“You are truly from another 
world?” 
“Yes, Skaith-Daughter.” 
She reached out and touched his 
cheek. Her whole body seemed to 
recoil from that touch. She shivered 
and said, “Tell me why Gelmar 
could not keep the ships away.” 
“He has not the power. The ships 
come into Skeg because that is 
where the first ones landed, that is 
where the port is, and the foreign 
enclave, and the market where 
trading is done. It’s easier and 
more convenient. And the Wandsmen have the appearance of control 
there. At least they can see what’s 
going on.” 
She seemed to understand. She 
nodded, and said sharply to Gelmar, “Let him speak.” 
“If Skeg is closed the ships will 
go elsewhere — anywhere else their 
captains think they might pick up a 
profit. All but the largest vessels 
can land where they will. The 
Wandsmen couldn’t keep track of 
them, they couldn’t have their mob 
of Farers everywhere.” 
“They might land even here?” 
“Not in the mountains, SkaithDaughter. But close enough.” 
“And they would do this for profit. For money.” 
“You know about these things?” 
“We are students of the past,” 
she said. “Historians. We know. It 
is only one of the things we left behind us, that need for money.”. 
“It’s still a powerful need among 
men, no matter where they come 
from. I think what Gelmar fears 
most is that these ships will provide 
a means of escape for those who 
wish to leave Skaith and can pay for 
it.” 
Stark was watching Gelmar’s 
face. It was closed — closed tight — 
and he thought that his guess was 
close to the truth. 
“They couldn’t evacuate whole 
populations, as the Galactic Union 
could, but it would be a start. Gelmar’s got his fist in the dam and 
he’s trying to hold it there, hoping 
that the first little drop never gets 
through. That’s why he’s so desperate to put down the uprising at Irnan before it sparks a wider revolution. If the whole south falls into 
civil war it will be the off-woHders 
who gain, not the Wandsmen.” 
Or the Lords Protector, who were 
only Wandsmen grown older, 
thought Stark. An unbroken chain 
since the first founders, renewing 
themselves with each generation. In 
that sense they were eternal and unchanging, just as Baya had said. As 
eternal and unchanging as the 
human race. 
And as vulnerable. 
The room was like the inside of 
a great pearl, glowing softly, white. 
Kell a Marg sat at the center of it, 
on the brown knees of SkaithMother, between the encircling 
arms. Her eyes were on Stark, 
huge, sweating, uncouth in his 
chains and heavy furs. The man 
was not born of Skaith-Mother. 
He said brutally, “The thing is 
done, Kell a Marg. Your world has 
been discovered, it cannot be undiscovered. New things are here and 
will not go away. The Wandsmen 
will lose this battle in the end. Why 
should you help them fight it?” 
Kell a Marg turned to her diviners. “Let us ask help from the 
Mother.” 
XII 
T he Hall of the Diviners lay at 
the end of a long corridor in a 
section of the Mother’s House given 
over to their exclusive- use. The 
chambers Stark could see as they 
passed were austere and dim, occupied by students and acolytes and 
lesser Diviners. The chambers had 
been designed for much larger 
numbers. Branching corridors led 
only to silence. 
The Hall itself was round, with a 
vaulted roof from which a single 
great lamp hung, gleaming silver, 
intricately pierced. Beneath the 
lamp was a circular object, waisthigh and about three feet across, 
covered with a finely- worked cloth. 
The walls, instead of being carved 
or faced, were covered by tapestries, 
apparently of a great age and holiness. A woman’s face, benign and 
gigantic, looked out of them, many 
times repeated, made wraithlike by 
the fading of time but disturbing 
nonetheless, with eyes that seemed 
to follow every movement of the 
people in the Hall. The great lamp 
was not lighted. Smaller ones on 
pedestals bairned feebly around the 
circumference of the room. 
No one spoke. 
Acolytes entered. Reverently they 
lighted the silver lamp and removed 
the worked cloth from the object 
beneath it, chanting all the while. 
“The Eye of the Mother,” murmured the Diviners, “sees only 
truth.” 
The Eye of the Mother was an 
enormous crystal set in a massive 
golden frame. It was clear and 
lucid as a raindrop, and the light 
from the lamp went sparkling down 
into it. The Diviners ranged themselves beside it, heads bowed. 
There was no high seat here. 
THE GINGER STAR 
Even Kell a Marg stood. Fenn and 
Ferdic stood behind her. Gelmar, 
Stark and Gerrith and the four 
guards formed a separate group, 
close inside the door. 
Kell a Marg spoke. The hatred in 
her voice was distributed equally 
among the outsiders. 
“You are all strangers in this 
House. I trust one no more than another. All of you speak of things I 
do not understand and cannot 
judge since they are not within my 
experience.” 
“I would not lie to you, SkaithDaughter.” Gelmar assented. 
“When did the Wandsman ever 
live who would not lie if it suited 
him?” Her gaze went to Gerrith, 
then settled on Stark. “Gelmar I 
know. The woman does not pretend 
to be other than Skaith-born, nor 
does she claim to have seen these 
ships. The man does both. Search 
his mind for me. Diviners.” 
The imperious hahd gestured to 
Fenn and Ferdic, who approached 
Stark. The two guards who flanked 
him did not move. Ferdic glanced 
at Gelmar, who snapped something 
to the guards. They moved aside 
but followed as Stark was led to 
stand beside the crystal. 
“Look,” said the Diviners, “into 
the Eye of the Mother.” 
Light from the pierced lamp 
came and went within those lucid 
depths, now shallow, now deep. 
ever shifting, drawing the gaze 
down and down. “The crystal is 
like water,” Feric intoned, “let the 
mind float upon it, let the mind 
float free . .” 
Stark smiled and shook his head. 
“I can’t be caught that easily.” 
The Diviners stared at him, startled, angry. 
“Do you want my memories, the 
things that cannot lie?” he asked 
them. “You may have them, 
freely.” 
Every world had its methods. He 
had seen many techniques of mindtouch and had mastered a few; he 
knew a little. Telepathy and mindtouch he had encountered often 
and did not fear. The important 
thing was never to lose control. 
He shared his memories with 
them, the ones that were impersonal enough for sharing. 
They stood with their heads bent, 
but they were only pretending to 
look into the crystal now. That was 
for later. Now they were absorbed 
in listening to what his mind had to 
tell them. The truth, for Kell a 
Marg. Remembering. 
Remembering, briefly, the worlds 
of his youth, and Sol, his parent 
star, a warm burst of brilliant gold. 
Stark’s mind sifted swiftly through 
its past. 
Remembering space as it had 
first burst upon him through the 
simulators in the passenger quar
ters of a starship outbound for 
Altair. The stunning magnificence 
of myriad suns ablaze in the black 
sea of infinity where they swam forever on their appointed ways. The 
clusters, cosmic hives of burning 
bees. Bright nebulae sprawled 
across the parsecs, piled in clouds 
of glorious fire. Dark nebulae, 
where smothered suns glimmered 
pale as candles. The island universes, unthinkably distant. The 
deep, wide universe with no rock 
roof to close it ini 
Remembering finally that incredible world-city. Pax, and her incredible moon, symbols of the 
power of the Union. 
The Diviners cried out, between 
agony and terror. “He has seen! He 
has seen, Skaith-Daughter! Black 
gulfs and burning suns, the skies of 
foreign worlds.” They looked at 
Stark as at a demon. 
Kell a Marg nodded, very slightly. “So much we are sure of, then. 
Now I wish to know why this man 
came here.” 
“To search for a friend, SkaithDaughter. Someone he loved. The 
Wandsmen took him, the Wandsmen may have killed him. He has a 
great hatred for the Wandsmen 
and the Lords Protector.” 
“I see. And the prophecy. Where 
is the truth of that?” 
“He does not know.” 
“That prophecy,” said Stark, 
“and all the other trappings of a 
fated man were put upon me 
through no will of my own.” 
“Yet they were put upon you. 
Why you alone of all the 
strangers?” 
“I don’t know. But I mean you 
no harm, Skaith-Daughter. Neither 
does Gerrith. The Wandsmen are a 
danger to you and the whole planet 
because they don’t understand at 
all what they’re dealing with.” 
Gelmar said, “He lies. There is 
no danger to you if you will only let 
us go!” 
Kell a Marg stood for a long 
time, silent, brooding. The great 
royal ermine pondered over its 
prey. At last she said, 
“You mistake me, Gelmar. I am 
not afraid. I am not interested in 
your Southrons and their revolt. I 
care nothing for your assurances. 
This man is part of a new force in 
the world. He may, or he may not, 
be important to the future of the 
Children, and that is all I care 
about. When I know, then I shall 
decide who goes and who does 
not.” 
She turned to the Diviners. 
“What does the Eye of the Mother 
see?” 
N ow they looked in earnest, 
deep into the heart of the crystal. 
The hall became silent, so still 
THE QINQER STAR 
that Stark could hear every breath 
that was drawn. A great uneasiness 
took him. This mad she-thing had 
complete power here, and that was 
not a pleasant thought. 
Nor did the many faces of SkaithMother watching dimly from 
around the walls comfort him. 
The waiting had become intolerable yet no one moved. The Diviners might have been carved from 
wood. The weight of the mountain 
pressed down on Stark. He was hot, 
his manacles heavy. He turned his 
head but could not see Gerrith, still 
behind him, somewhere near the 
door. 
One of the Diviners drew in a 
sudden breath and let it out again. 
Something was happening to the 
Eye of the Mother. 
Stark thought at first that it was 
the lamp but that glowed as brightly as ever. It was the crystal out of 
which the light was draining its 
lustre dimming, dulling, darkening, going from pellucid clarity to 
an ugly curdled red. Stark remembered another time, another cave; 
Gerrith’s Water of Vision. 
“Bloo(^,” said the Diviners to 
Kell a Marg. “Much blood will be 
spilled if this man lives. Death will 
come to the House of the Mother.” 
“Then,” said Kell a Marg quietly, “he must die.” 
Stark began gathering the chain 
into his hands, carefully^ so that it 
might not make even a sound. 
Gelmar stepped forward. “And 
he shall die. I shall see to it myself, 
Skaith- Daughter . ” 
“I shall see to it,” said Kell a 
Marg. “Fenn! Ferdic!” 
Both had jewelled daggers at 
their belts. They drew them and 
went light-footed to Gelmar. Kell a 
Marg said, 
“Tell your creatures to kill him, 
Wandsman.” 
Desperately, furiously, Gelmar 
cried, “No, wait — ” 
For a moment, the beautiful men 
of the Citadel did not know what to 
do. They all watched Gelmar and 
waited. 
Stark did not wait. 
He spun around, swinging his 
clenched hands with the iron 
weight of the manacles and the 
chain into the body of the guard 
who was a little behind him to his 
right. He felt the flesh break. The 
man's breath went out in a harsh 
scream. He dropped and Stark 
hurdled him, charging for the door. 
There were sudden shputs behind 
him. 
The two guards who were with 
Gerrith ran forward to intercept 
him. Gerrith, forgotten for the moment, moved swiftly, snatched one 
of the small lamps from its pedestal 
and flung it at the wall. 
Flaming oil splashed, spread, 
caught. The hangings, centuries 
dry, exploded into smoke and 
flame. 
One of the guards turned back 
and struck Gerrith aside, much too 
late. Stark saw her fall, then lost 
her. Smoke choked, blinded him. 
Voices were rising in terror and urgent cries. The many faces of the 
Mother twisted, blackened, vanished. Two of the Diviners threw 
themselves upon the crystal, shielding it with their bodies. Others ran 
to beat futilely at the flames. One 
of the beautiful men had caught 
fire. Another, rushing to Gelmar’s 
voice, blundered into Stark and 
went on without pausing. 
Stark called Gerrith’s name, 
there was no answer. Then he 
stumbled over her. He caught her 
tunic and dragged her through the 
doorway into the hall. A great gout 
of smoke came with them. 
He thought for a moment she 
was dead. But she coughed and 
then said distinctly, “If you don’t 
go now, this will be the end of it.’’ 
The tumult in the Hall grew 
louder as those inside fought their 
way toward the door. Students and 
acolytes came out of their chambers 
along the corridor. Stark bent over 
Gerrith. 
She struck at him. “Go, damn 
you! I gave you this chance — will 
you throw it away?’’ 
Stark hesitated. Alone he might 
make it. Burdened with Gerrith, he 
could not. He touched her briefly, 
helplessly. “If I live — !’’ he said. He 
ran. 
He went down the corridor, huge, 
murderous, his iron shackles swinging. White-furred bodies scattered 
before him or were swept aside. 
They were young, these student Diviners, and their teachers were old. 
All were unused to combat. Stark 
went through them like a gale. 
Behind him he^ heard fresh 
shouts and cries. Gelmar and Kell 
a Marg, at least, were free of the 
burning Hall. Looking back, he 
saw two of the guards running after 
him. Those he could not fight — 
their swords against his irons. 
He plunged into a branching corridor, running hard. A flight of 
rock-cut steps led him downward 
into another corridor, one dustier, 
more dimly lighted. He followed it 
into a maze of rooms, tunnels and 
stairways. The rooms were crowded 
with objects, the passages deserted, 
lighted by fewer and fewer lamps. 
He stopped at last and listened. 
All he could hear now was the hammering of his own heart. For the 
moment he had lost them. He took 
one of the lamps from a wall niche 
and went on, deeper and deeper 
into the House of the Mother. 
T he children must have spent 
innumerable generations gnawing away here in the bowels of the 
THE GINGER STAR 
Witchfires. They must have once 
been vastly more numerous than 
now. Stark remembered Hargoth’s 
comments on the necessity of fresh 
breeding stock. The Children would 
have cut themselves off from that — 
by choice certainly and probably by 
the alteration of their genes as well. 
Artificial mutants, they might be 
unable to cross-breed with humans. 
Perhaps the Children of the SeaOur-Mother had undergone the 
same deprivation. He had no way of 
judging that. 
The silence of centuries hung 
here, thick as dust. Yet the air was 
breathable. The Children had seen 
to it that ventilation was adequate. 
Their engineering instincts had 
been sound, probably bred into 
them. They seemed to have a feeling for stone and how to use it. 
Their warren of caverns and passages looked capable of enduring as 
long as the Witchfires. 
Outside the pale circle of light 
from his lamp it was now totally 
dark. Stark moved on with no idea 
of where he was going, fighting 
down a growing panic. The House 
of the Mother would make a handsome tomb. Probably they would 
never even find his body. 
In spite of that, curiosity as well 
as necessity compelled him to stop 
and examine some of the vast proliferation of objects that crammed 
these forgotten chambers. 
He was in a museum. 
What had Kell a Marg said? We 
are students of the past Historians, 
They must have looted the dead 
and dying cities of the north, perhaps even before they were abandoned in the Great Wandering the 
Children had begun their collecting. Art objects, statuary, paintings, jewelry, musical instruments, 
fabrics, pots and pans, machines, 
toys, tools, books, constructions of 
wood and metal and plastic, anything of a size to be handled 
through the corridors, whole or 
piecemeal, and stored away in the 
caverns. The history and technplogy, art and ideas, of a dead 
civilization survived here in these 
buried vaults, the pleasure and 
mania of a dying race. 
Stark thought that whether he 
himself lived or died, the Children 
of Skaith-Our-Mother were going 
to have much trouble as time went 
by trying to guard their incredible 
hoard. 
He was looking for two things: a 
weapon and some tools to get the 
shackles off. There were plenty of 
weapons, most of them useless, 
lacking the technology that had 
made them deadly. Constant temperature and humidity had preserved 
most things remarkably well, but 
there was inevitable deterioration. 
He finally found a knife that did 
not come apart at the tang^ and 
thrust that into his belt* 
The tools were easier. Mallet and 
chisel could endure a bit of punishment. But there was no way that he 
could use them by himself. He 
stuck the chisel in his belt beside 
the knife and carried the mallet. It 
made a serviceable weapon. 
There was no one to use it on. 
Nor was there water or food. 
Thirst began to be a problem, with 
hunger lurking not far behind. He 
was used to both and knew his potential. It would take him some 
time to die. He ceased to reproach 
himself about Gerrith. 
He had hoped to find another 
lamp, but they had all been neglected too long and the oil had 
dried away. The level of the one he 
carried went slowly, steadily down. 
He did not stop longer than he had 
to. He wanted to keep going as long 
as he had light* 
Suddenly as he passed the mouth 
of a narrow tunnel a strong draught 
of air blew it out. 
The air was fresh and cold. Stark 
felt his way into the tunnel and, 
after a little time, saw light ahead — 
daylight! 
It came through an arched opening at the end of the tunnel. A wild 
surge of hope sent Stark running 
toward it. 
Once lookouts might have been 
stationed here, keeping watch over 
the turbulent north. Or the Chil
dren might have taken the air, after 
their work in the museum rooms, to 
see again the sun and the stars they 
had left behind. Now there was nothing but a high solitude. The tiny 
balcony was no more than a niche 
in the northern face of the Witchfires. Far too high, and that 
northern face too sheer, for any 
thought of climbing down it. 
Stark saw an immense white 
landscape, infinitely forbidding. 
From the feet of the Witchfires a 
naked plain tilted upward, gashed 
with the scars of old erosions. The 
wind blew fiercely across it, raising 
snow-devils that danced and whirled. Some of them had a peculiar 
look; these were not snow-devils at 
all, but pillars of steam rising out of 
the ground, to be shredded and 
torn away. 
A thermal area. Stark became 
excited, remembering Hargoth’s 
words about the magic mists that 
hid the Citadel. He looked up 
across the plain, to a distant range 
of mountains much higher and 
more cruel than the Witchfires. 
And he saw, to the northeast, low 
against the mountain’s flank, a 
great boiling of white cloud. 
He stood on his high lonely 
perch, and looked, and swore. 
And saw, when he turned his 
head, a string of tiny figures 
moving across the vast whiteness of 
the plain. 
THE GINGER STAR 
Gelmar, going to the Citadel. 
A driven man, Stark left the 
small niche, turned his back on the 
light, went again into the darkness 
of the corridors. 
Now he prayed for steps to lead 
him down. He had been trying from 
the first to work his way back to 
ground level and he was appalled to 
find himself still so high. The devil 
of it was that, feeling his way along 
in the pitch blackness, he might be 
passing any number of steps to one 
side or the other without knowing 
it. 
Hunger and thirst became more 
insistent. He was forced to stop now 
and again to sleep — as an animal 
sleeps, briefly but totally relaxed. 
Then he would get up and go on 
again, every nerve and every sense 
stretched fine to catch the slightest 
hint of anything that might guide 
him back to life. 
He had slid and stumbled along 
what seemed like miles of passages, 
blundered through crowded rooms 
that tried to swallow him in a tangle 
of relics, stumbled down infinite 
numbers of steps, when the faintest 
of faint sounds touched his ears. 
H e thought at first that it was 
only weariness or the whisper 
of his own blood in his veins. Then 
it went away and he knew its reality 
by its absence. He had just come 
down a flight of steps that was now 
at his back. He could feel the carvings of a wall on both sides, so the 
corridor went ahead. That must be 
where the sound had come from. 
He began padding along it, stopping frequently to hold his breath 
and listen. 
The sound came again, unmistakable. It was music. Someone in 
this catacomb of dust and age and 
darkness was making music. Very 
peculiar music, atonal, twanging, 
quavering — the most beautiful 
sound Stark had ever heard. 
Twice more it stopped, as though 
whoever was playing the instrument 
had halted in annoyance over a 
wrong note. Then it would begin 
again. Stark saw a gleam of light 
just ahead and approached on 
silent feet. 
There was a carved doorway. Beyond it was a small chamber well 
lighted by several lamps. One of the 
Children, an old man with slack 
skin and prominent bones, bent 
over an oddly-shaped instrument 
with numerous strings. Beside him 
was an antique table strewn with 
ancient books and parchments. 
There was also an untouched plate 
of food and a stone jug. The old 
man’s fingers caressed the strings 
as though they were stroking a 
child. 
Stark went in. 
The old man looked up. Stark 
watched the slow advance of shock 
across his face. 
“The Outside has come into the 
House of the Mother,” he said. “It 
is the end of the world.” And he set 
the instrument carefully aside. 
“Not quite,” said Stark. “All I 
want of the House of the Mother is 
to leave it. Is there a northern 
gate?” 
He waited while the old man 
stared at him, great luminous eyes 
in a motheaten face, the fur of his 
crown rubbed up untidily, his 
whole being wrenched cruelly away 
from where it had been. Finally 
Stark made a threatening movement. 
“Is there a northern gate?” 
“Yes. But I can’t take you 
there.” 
“Why not?” 
“Because I remember now. I was 
told — we were all told — an enemy, 
an outsider, was in the Mother’s 
House and we were to watch. We 
were to give the alarm if we should 
see him.” 
“Old man,” said Stark, “you will 
not give the alarm and you will take 
me to the northern gate.’’ He 
placed his powerful hands on the 
frail instrument. 
The old man stood up. In a soft 
and very desperate voice he said, “I 
am trying to recreate the music of 
Tlavia, Queen City of the High 
North before the Wandering. It is 
my life’s work. That is the only 
Tlavian instrument known. The 
others are lost somewhere in the 
caverns. If it shoudl be destroyed — ” 
“Consider yourself the guarantee 
of its safety,” Stark said. “If you do 
exactly as I tell you — ” He took his 
hands away. 
The old man was thinking. His 
thoughts were almost visible. “Very 
well,” he said. “For the sake of the 
instrument.” 
Stark gave him the mallet and 
chisel. “Here.” He laid his wrists 
on the antique table, which had a 
fine marble top and seemed sturdy. 
He regretted the sacrilege, but 
there was no other choice. “Get 
these things off me.” 
The old man was clumsy and the 
table was considerably damaged, 
but in the end the manacles came 
off. Stark rubbed his wrists. Hunger and thirst had become painful. 
He drank from the stone bottle. It 
was some sort of dusty-tasting 
wine; he wished it had been water, 
but it was better than nothing. The 
food he thrust into his pockets, to 
be eaten along the way. The old 
man waited patiently. His acquiescence had been too quick, too unemotional. Stark wondered what 
mischief lurked in his murky 
psyche. 
“Let us go,” he said, and picked 
up the instrument. 
THE QINQER STAR 
The old man took a lamp and led 
the way into the corridor. 
“Are there many like you?” 
Stark asked. “Solitary scholars?” 
“Many. Skaith-Mother encourages scholars. She gives us peace 
and plenty so that we may spend 
our whole lives at our work. There 
are not so many of us as there used 
to be. Once there were a thousand 
at the study of music alone, thousands more at history, the ancient 
books, art and laws. And of course, 
the cataloguing.” He sighed. “But 
it is a good life.” 
In a short time they were back in 
the inhabited areas. The old man 
did not have far to go to find his 
solitude. Stark took a firm hold on 
his worn harness with one hand, 
holding the instrument precariously 
in the other. 
“If anyone sees us, old man,” he 
said, “the music of Tlavia dies.” 
The old man led him cunningly 
enough, skirting the edges of the 
busy levels, the caverns of the lapidaries and goldsmiths, sculptors 
and stonemasons, the nurseries and 
schools for the young, the strange 
deep-buried farms where fungoid 
crops flourished in perpetual musty 
dampness. These lower levels. Stark 
noticed, were noticeably watmer. 
The old man explained that the 
thermal area extended beneath 
part of the Mother’s House, giving 
them many gifts, such as hot water 
for the baths. 
He also told Stark other things. 
T he nomad trail used by the Harsenyi ran between the pass of 
the Witchfires and the passes of the 
Bleak Mountains, the big range 
that Stark had seen. It was at the 
western side of the Plain of Worldheart; Stark remembered the little 
black dots of Gelmar’s party moving along it. The trail was safe for 
the Harsenyi as long as they did not 
wander from it, and they had a permanent village in the foothills, 
which was as close as any of them 
ever approached the Citadel. The 
plain was called Worldheart because the Citadel was built on it, or 
above it. The old man had never 
seen the Citadel. He had never seen 
a Northbound. He thought that 
they did not range too far from the 
Citadel unless they were attracted 
by an intruder. They were said to 
be telepaths. 
“They hunt as a pack,” the old 
man said. “The king-dog’s name is 
Flay. At least, it used to be— Perhaps it is always Flay. Or perhaps 
the Northhounds live forever.” 
Like the Lords Protector, Stark 
thought. 
They were in a broad passageway, not very well lighted, obviously not much frequented. Ahead he 
cotild see the opening of another 
passage to the right. 
The old man said innocently, 
“The northern gate is there, along 
that corridor. It’s seldom used now. 
The Wandsmen used to come here 
from the Citadel more often. Now 
they come jto the western gate, 
when they come at all.’’ He held out 
his hands for the instrument. 
Stark smiled. “Wait here, old 
man. No noise, not a word.’’ Still 
cslrrying the frail instrument, Stark 
went noiselessly to the branching 
corridor and looked along it. 
There was a great stone slab at 
the end of it. where it widened out 
into a guard chamber. And there 
was a guard there. Half a dozen of 
the Children, young, armed, patiently bored. Four of them were 
occupied with some game they werr 
playing on a stone table. The other 
two watched. 
The old man had begun to run. 
He did not even pause to see what 
became of his precious instrument. 
Stark set it down unharmed. 
He took the knife from his belt 
and went down the corridor, moving fast, shoulders forward, all his 
attention fixed on the slab of rock 
that stood between him and freedom. 
The Children probably had not 
had to fight in their own defense 
since the last of the Wandering. 
They were out of practice, babes 
comfortable and soft in the womb 
of the Mother. He was on top of 
them before they knew he was 
there. They sprang up to face him, 
eyes large with sudden fear, pawing 
for their weapons. They had not 
really believed he would come. 
They had not really believed that if 
he did come he would try to fight 
them. Surely their six against his 
one — 
They had not really understood 
what killing is. 
Stark slashed one of the players 
across the throat. He fell across the 
table, tangling his mates with his 
thrashing^, making dreadful noises. 
While they still sat in shock. Stark 
struck down another with his fist, 
caught up the light wiry body and 
threw it against the others. He 
bulled past them, reached the slab 
of stone, pushed against it. It 
moved. Two of them came at his 
back. He turned and fended them 
off, his knife-blade and heavy furs 
turning most of their sword cuts; 
their blades were like their bodies, 
made more for beauty than for 
killing. He kept pressing his shoulder against the slab and it kept 
turning and in a moment they were 
hitting stone and he was through 
the opening. He slammed the stone 
shut on their screaming faces, and 
began to run. 
They would spread the word 
through Kell a Marg’s great House 
but he did not think that anyone 
THE QINQER STAR 
would come after him — at least not 
very far. 
Not here on the Plain of Worldheart, where the Northhounds 
prowled. 
XIII 
Old Sun was below the peaks and 
the northern face of the Witchfires 
was gray and ugly, a sheer frowning 
wall at his back. The mountain 
shadow made a long darkness 
across the plain. The wind was a 
knife, a scream, a madness bewailing eternal winter. The flogged 
snow-devils danced in desperation 
to appease it. 
The region of boiling cloud that 
hid the Citadel was small and 
bright against the flank of the 
Bleak Mountains, catching the last 
of the westering light. 
The Citadel. 
He did not know exactly how 
long he had been wandering in the 
House of the Mother, and the old 
man had not been able to tell him 
in terms he could understand. They 
had their own view of time in those 
dark catacombs. But it was long 
enough for many things to have 
happened. 
There was no point in asking 
himself questions for which there 
could be no answers until he reached the Citadel. If he reached it. 
Stark fixed the bright patch of 
cloud as a mark in his mind’s eye, 
northeast across the plain. He set 
out toward it. 
The shadow of the Witchfires 
stretched longer and darker ahead 
of him. He would not outrun it. It 
would soon be night and the Children were staying safe, as he had 
thought they would, in their 
Mother’s House. Why venture their 
lives when the Northhounds would 
certainly deal with him? The Bleak 
Mountains burned with a bloody 
glow that dimmed quickly to ashen 
dullness. The first stars showed. 
Stark lost his view of the Citadel-clouds and took his bearing 
from a star. The whole landscape 
faded into that insubstantial 
bluish-gray that comes over snowlands at twilight, when everything 
slides away at the edges of sight. 
The sky turned darker, turned 
black. The Lamp of the North rose 
up in it, a huge green lantern, and 
the plain became white ^gain, a 
diminished, green-hued white, but 
one more clearly visible now that 
the glimmery grayness had gone. 
The first twitching of the aurora 
appeared overhead. 
Stark moved forward on as 
steady a course as he could, watching for the plumes of steam marking the thermal areas he had seen 
from the balcony. The wind tore at 
him, beating him with hammer 
blows. It sent the snow-devils 
against him and at these times he 
dropped face down on the ground 
until the blinding, buffeting whirl 
of snow-dust passed over him. At 
other times the wind picked up 
lower clouds of snow and mixed 
them cunningly with the thermal 
plumes so that all was a formless 
whiteness. Several times he stopped 
short, sensing a bareness and a 
tremor beneath his feet, to find a 
gaping blow-hole lying just ahead, 
ready to swallow him. 
The ravines, those ancient gashes 
of erosion he had seen, were less 
dangerous. The bedrock of the 
plain was hard and had not scoured 
out too deeply. Wind and snow had 
worn the edges down. Nevertheless, 
Stark went carefully when he had to 
cross one. A fall here in the darkness of Worldheart could mean 
cheating the Northhounds of their 
pleasure. 
He was happy in a strange sort of 
way. The end of his journey was in 
sight and he was free, unencumbered. His body and his skills were 
his to use to the limit, without regard for others. The battle against 
cold and wind and cruel terrain was 
a clean one, uncluttered by ideas, 
ideals, beliefs or human spite. For 
the moment he was less Eric John 
Stark than he was N’Chaka, wild 
thing in a wild place, perfectly at 
home. 
Perfectly at home, perfectly func
tional, wary and watchful. His gaze 
roved constantly, never straining 
against the night, never looking 
straight at an object but always 
past it, never trying to hold it 
steady, merely sensing its shape 
and whether or not it moved. 
Twice the wind brought him a 
hint of something other than the 
cold smells of snow and frozen 
ground. 
The banners of the aurora 
snapped and quivered. The heads 
of the snow-devils seemed to touch 
him. Colors shifted, green, white, 
rose-fire. Plumes of steam shot 
high out of the rock, now to his 
right, now to his left, glimmering, 
shredding, vanishing. 
Sometimes he thought that dim 
white shapes stalked him between 
snow and steam. For a long while 
he could not be sure. There came a 
time when there was no longer any 
doubt. 
H e had come delicately treading 
his way out of a cloud of mingled steam and snow when he looked 
up along the tilt of the plain and 
saw a great white beast-shape, 
motionless, watching. 
Stark stopped. The thing continued to gaze at him. A cold beast 
thought touched his mind: 
I am Flay, 
He was big. The ridge of his 
spine would have reached Stark’s 
THE QINGER STAR 
shoulder. His withers were high 
and powerful. The thick neck 
drooped with the weight of the massive head. Stark saw the eyes, large, 
unnaturally brilliant; the broad 
heavy muzzle, the fangs, sharp as 
knives. 
Flay stretched out a foreleg like a 
tree-trunk, unsheathed tiger-claws. 
He tore five furrows in the frozen 
ground, and smiled a beast-smile, 
lolling a red tongue. 
I am Flay, 
The eyes were bright, bright. 
Hell-hound eyes. 
Suddenly panic overcame Stark, 
loosened his muscles, weakened his 
joints, dropped him helpless on the 
ground, cold nausea in his belly 
and a silent scream in his brain. 
I am Flay, 
This is how they kill. Stark 
thought, with the fleeting remnants 
of his sanity. Fear, a bolt of fear as 
deadly as any missile. The size, the 
fangs, the claws are only camouflage. They do it with their minds. 
He could not draw his knife. 
Flay sauntered toward him as 
other shapes became visible on the 
rising plain. The pack; six, ten, a 
dozen, he couldn’t count them, 
bounding, leaping, running. 
Fear. 
Fear was a sickness. 
Fear was a dark wave rolling over 
hjm, taking sight and hearing, 
crushing mind and will. 
He would never reach the Citadel, never see Gerrith. Flay would 
give him to the pack and they 
would play with him until he died. 
I am Flay, said^ the cold beast 
mind while the red jaws laughed. 
Huge paws padded silently in the 
blowing snow. 
Far down beneath the dark mass 
of fear that destroyed all human 
courage, another mind spoke. Cold 
beast mind, not thinking or reasoning, a mind alive and desperate to 
live, a mind feeling self as bone and 
muscle, cold and pain, a hunger to 
be fed, a fear to be endured. Fear is 
life, fear is survival. The only end of 
fear is death. 
The beast mind said, I am 
NVhaka, 
The blood beats, hot with living, 
hot with ha,te. Hate is a fire in the 
blood, a taste in the mouth of bitter 
salt. 
/ am N'Chaka. 
/ do not die, 
I kill. 
Flay paused, one tentative forefoot lifted. He swung his head from 
side to side, puzzled. 
The human thing ought now to 
be inert and helpless. Instead it 
spoke to him, it groped and tottered and rose from the ground, rose 
to its hands and knees and faced 
him. 
I am N'Chaka, 
The pack halted their playful 
rush. They formed a semicircle behind Flay, growling. 
They sent fear, deadly killing 
fear. 
Cold beast mind let the fear slide 
over it. Cold beast eyes saw Flay, 
coarse-furred Flay looming bit in 
the night-gleaming. 
I have seen the great rock lizard 
open his jaws to take me, and he 
has not taken me. Why should I 
fear you? 
The pack growled, looking sidelong. Flay, Flay! This'is not a 
human! 
The N’Chaka thing got to its 
hind legs, crouching. It circled, 
making beast sounds. It sprang at 
Flay. 
Flay struck it sprawling with one 
sweep of his paw. 
The thing rolled over twice. 
Blood came out of rents in its fur. It 
bounded up and drew the knife 
from its belt. It came again at Flay. 
The pack could not understand. 
Human victims did not fight. They 
did not challenge the king-dog, 
only a member of the pack did that. 
This thing was not a member of the 
pack, but neither was it human. 
They did not know what it was. 
HEY sat down to watch, while 
N’Chaka fought the king-dog 
for his life. 
They would not send more fear. 
This was up to Flay. 
Flay had realized, not believing 
it, that fear was useless. He tried 
once more, but the N’Chaka thing 
came at him without pause, slashing at him, dodging, circling, darting in and out, wary now of the 
claws. It was fighting, there was 
nothing left in its mind but fight — 
fight and kill. 
It enjoyed the fighting. It meant 
to kill. 
Now Flay knew fear. 
In all his long life he had never 
failed to take his prey cleanly. No 
single victim had ever fought back. 
Now this N’Chaka thing defied 
him. And the pack was watching 
and he had no weapons but his 
claws and teeth. 
And those he was not used to 
using, except in play. None of the 
young dogs had yet dared to challenge him. 
Fear! he said to the pack. Send 
fear! 
They only watched, moving restlessly, the wind tearing at their fur. 
In a fury Flay struck at the 
N’Chaka thing with his terrible 
claws. 
The thing was ready this time. It 
leaped back and slashed with the 
knife. It slashed so that Flay howled and went on three legs. 
The pack smelled his blood and 
whined. 
A measure of humanity was 
creeping back into Stark’s mind 
THEQINQER STAR 
now that he had mastered the fear. 
Along with it came a savage sense 
of triumph. 
The Northhounds were not invincible. 
Perhaps the Citadel would not be 
invincible either. 
He knew now that he was going 
to reach it. 
He knew that he was going to kill 
Flay. 
Flay knew it too. 
"The wounded paw had slowed 
him. But he was still formidable. 
He bared his fangs and rushed. His 
jaws would crush a man’s thighbone like a dry stick. But they 
snapped on empty air. Stark circled 
him, making him turn against that 
bad foot, and twice he darted in 
and slashed at the face. His eyes 
held Flay’s eyes, the hell-hound 
eyes that were bred for terror, and 
he thought. How close the knife 
comes. Flay! How it flashes! 
Soon ... 
The heavy head dropped lower. 
The terrible eyes wanted to look 
away. The paw bled and the pack 
whined, red tongues hanging. 
Stark feinted, ceased to hold 
Flay’s eyes, the big head turned 
aside. Stark flung himself onto 
Flay’s high bony back. 
He was only there for a second or 
two before he was thrown off, but 
that was long enough for the knife 
to go in. Flay whirled, snapping at 
the hilt standing out behind his 
shoulder, then staggered and went 
down as blood gushed out of his 
mouth. 
Stark pulled the knife out, then 
let the pack have the body. He 
stood apart, waiting. Their shallow 
minds had already told him what 
they would do. 
He waited until they were 
finished. 
They gathered then, keeping 
their eyes carefully averted lest they 
should seem to challenge him. The 
largest of the young dogs came 
belly down and licked Stark’s hand. 
You will follow me? 
You killed Flay, We follow. 
But I am human. 
Not human. You are N'Chaka, 
You guard the Citadel, 
Against humans. 
And how many lost and hungry 
wayfarers have those jaws snapped 
up. Stark wondered. The Lords 
Protector defended their privacy 
too well. You defend against humans, but not against N*Chaka? 
We could not kill N'Chaka, 
Will you kill Wandsmen? 
No, 
They had neither love nor loyalty, but their breeding held them 
true. Fair enough. 
The other men — those who serve 
the Wandsmen? 
They are nothing to us. 
Good. 
He considered their well-fleshed 
bodies. There were certainly not 
enough human victims to keep the 
fat, and there was little game on tile 
Plain of Worldheart where they 
ranged. Someone must feed them. 
Where do you kennel? 
At the Citadel, 
Come then. 
With the pack at his heels Stark 
set off toward the mountains. 
T he boiling clouds turned copper 
with the rising of Old Sun. The 
Northhounds trotted unconcerned 
through a wilderness of humped 
rock and gaping blow-holes. Stark 
went with them while the ground 
boomed and shook and the steam 
spurted. 
He had not planned it this way. 
He had not thought that a direct attack on the Citadel would be 
possible. But this unexpected and 
highly^ uncertain weapon had been 
put into his hand and he had decided to use it. 
Now. 
As swiftly and brutally as possible. 
The thermal area seemed to go 
on forever, and then suddenly they 
had passed through it and the 
mountains were there, and the 
Citadel. 
Dark and strong and solid, clinging to the mountain flank, the compact shape of its walls and towers 
looking almost like an outcrop of 
the native rock. The fortress and 
fountainhead from which a handful 
of men ruled over a planet. 
He could understand why it had 
been built here, hidden behind its 
perpetual curtain. In the days of 
the Wandering, when everything 
was chaos, this place would have 
been isolated from the main streams 
of migration and therefore relatively 
safe. Tall crags protected the Citadel at back and side, the thermal 
pits guarded its front. With all 
that, and the Northhotinds, the 
Lords Protector need not have worried overmuch about bands of 
plunderers coming south over the 
passes. From the size of the Citadel, they had garrisoned fewer than 
a hundred men, and they would not 
have needed more. 
How many men would be there 
now after all these centuries of 
peace? He did not know. He looked 
at the Northhounds, hoped that 
they would be adequate. Otherwise 
any number would be too many 
against one man with a knife. 
There were sentries on the walls, 
bright-eyed men with blank faces. 
They saw Stark at the edge of the 
cloud with the pack behind him. 
Even over the roaring of the ventholes Stark could hear their sudden 
clamor. 
Hurry! he told the Northhounds. 
No hurry, said the young dog. 
THE GINGER STAR 
whose name was Gerd. 
The Northhounds trotted on toward the base of the Citadel, 
courses of stone laid in upon the 
rock. 
They will kill you. Stark told 
them, and ran, dodging this way 
and that. 
Arrows began to fly from the 
walls. In the roiling copper shadow 
they flew. None hit Stark, though 
he felt the wind of one. Some stuck 
in the ground. Two hit Northhounds. 
I sai(fthey would kill you. 
He was under the base of the 
Citadel now, where the arrows 
could not reach him. 
Why, N'Chaka? — a cry of puzzled anguish. The Northhounds began to run. 
They believe you have come to 
attack them. 
We have always been faithful. 
A third hound rolled over screaming, an arrow through his flanks. 
They doubt you now. 
And small wonder. For the first 
time since the first whelp of them 
was born, they had let in an intruder. They had brought in an intruder. 
The Northhounds bayed. 
There was a hole in the rock. 
They ran into it. The cave was large 
and dry, sheltered from the wind. It 
smelled of kennel and there were 
troughs where the hounds were fed. 
At the back was a door of thick iron 
bars with' heavy bolts on the inner 
side. 
Stark went to the door. He could 
sense the bewilderment and rage in 
their beast minds. 
They tried to kill you. Why did 
you not send fear to them? 
Gerd growled and whimpered. 
He was one of the first two hit. The 
arrow had gashed his rump painfully. We never sent fear to ^hose. 
We will now. 
Stark reached through to the 
bolts and began to draw them. 
Are there other humans in the 
Citadel? 
Gerd answered irritably. With 
Wandsmen. 
If they were with the Wandsmen, 
or the Lords Protector, it was no 
concern of Gerd’s. 
But there are humans? You can 
touch their minds? 
Human. One mind. Touch. 
One mind. One human. 
Gerrith? 
Halk? 
Ashton? 
Stark opened the door. Come 
and kill for N'Chaka. 
They came. 
There was a hall with storerooms 
on either side, and then a rough 
stair that went up into darkness. 
Stark climbed as fast as he dared, 
much faster than was wise, knife in 
hand. The men of the Citadel were 
surprised, shocked, off guard and 
he wanted to use that advantage. 
At the top was a massive iron door 
to be shut if anyone managed to 
pass through the Northbound kennel, and a windlass arrangement to 
drop a section of the stair. Beycmd 
was a chamber cluttered with the 
debris of long occupancy. A barred 
slit let in the amber daylight, only a 
little better than no light at all. 
A BROADER stair led up from this 
^room into a long, low hall 
lighted at intervals by lamps. There 
were no windows. Row upon row of 
wooden racks crammed the space, 
leaning and sagging under the 
weight of endless rolls of parchment. 
The records. Stark guessed, of 
generations of Wandsmen who had 
come to the Citadel to report and 
confer concerning their work in the 
world. 
They looked as though they 
would bum well. So did the enormous timbers that sustained the 
roof. 
There was a stair on the opposite 
side of the hall. He was halfvay to 
it when a body of men came plunging down. They might have been on 
their way to close that iron door. 
They stopped dead when they 
saw the Northhounds. The hounds 
never came inside the Citadel. They 
could not conceive of such a thing 
happening — ^yet it had happened. 
Their faces and their bright eyes 
remained expressionless even after 
the Northhounds had sent fear. 
Kill said Stark, and the pack 
killed. They were very angry, very 
swift. When they had finished he 
picked up a sword, lea^g belt and 
scabbard untouched. The sword 
would wipe clean. 
He started up the stair. 
Gerd spoke in his mind. 
N'Chaka, Wandsmen — 
He saw \vhite in his mind and 
knew that Gerd meant the Lords 
Protector. The hounds did not distinguish between Wandsmen. 
Wandsmen say kill you. 
He had expected this. The 
hounds were loyal to the Wandsmen. How strong was his own hold 
over them? If their hold were 
stronger he would finish here as the 
blank-faced men had finished. 
He turned to Gerd, looking 
straight into the hell-hound eyes. 
You cannot kill N*Chaka, 
Gerd stared at him steadily. The 
bristled lips pulled back to show 
the rows of fangs, lliey were still 
blo^y. The pack whined and 
whimpered, clawing the stones. 
Whom do you follow? Stark 
asked. 
We follow the strongest But Flay 
obeyed Wandsmen — 
, I am not Flay, I am N^Chaka, 
Shall ! kill you as I kUled Flay? 
He would have done it. The 
sword point was aimed straight for 
Gerd’s throat. Stark was almost as 
hungry for blood as they were and 
Gerd knew it. The fiery gaze slid 
aside. The head flung down. The 
pack became quiet. 
Send fear. Stark said. Drive 
away all but the Wandsmen and 
the human. Drive away the servants 
who kill you. Then we will talk to 
the Wandsmen, 
Not kill? 
Not the Wandsmen, not the 
human. Talk, 
But Stark’s hand gripped the 
sword. 
The Northhounds obeyed him. 
He felt the air vibrate with their 
sending. 
He led them up the stair. 
There were some men at the top. 
Terror was on them, an agony in 
the gut. The Northhounds tore 
them almost leisurely. Gerd picked 
up the leader and carried him in his 
jaws like a kitten. 
No one else stood against them. 
All the others had had strength 
enough to run. 
Stark came at length into another hall, higher than the one that 
held the records and not so long, 
with windows open onto the eternal 
mist. It was sparsely furnished, 
ascetic, a place for meditation. Kell 
a Marg, spiteful daughter of Skaith, 
had been wrong. There was no hint 
here of secret sin and luxury, either 
in the hall or in the faces of the 
seven white-robed men who stood 
there in attitudes of arrested motion, overwhelmed by the swiftness 
with which this thing had happened. 
There was an eighth man, one 
not wearing a white robe. 
Simon Ashton. 
Gerd dropped what he was carrying. Stark put his left hand on the 
hound’s great head and said, **Let 
the Earthman come to me.” 
Ashton came and stood at Stark’s 
right hand. He was thinner than 
Stark remembered and he showed 
the strain of long captivity. Otherwise he seemed unhurt. 
Stark said to the Lords Protector, 
“Where is Gerrith?” 
The foremost of them answered. 
Like the others, he was an old man. 
Not aged or infirm, but old in work 
and dedication as well as years. His 
thin hard jaw and fierce eyes reflected an uncompromising and inflexible toughness. 
“We questioned her and the 
wounded man, then sent them 
south with Gelmar. It was not believed that you could escape the 
Children in the House of the 
Mother.” 
He looked at the Northhounds. 
“This, too, would not have been believed.” 
“Nevertheless,” said Stark, “I 
am here. Believe it.” 
And now that he was here, he 
wondered what he was going to do 
with them. They were old men. Unyielding old men, devoted to their 
principles, ruling with the iron rod 
of righteousness, cruel only to be 
kind. He hated them. If they had 
killed Ashton he could Have killed 
them without compunction. But 
Ashton was alive and safe and he 
could not slaughter them in cold 
blood. 
Another factor: theNorthhounds. 
They felt his thoughts and growled. 
Gerd leaned his massive shoulder 
against Stark’s side to hold him. 
The man in white smiled briefly. 
“That instinct, at least, is too 
strong for you. They will not let you 
kill us.” 
“Go then,” said Stark. “Take 
your servants and go. Let the 
people of Skaith see the Lords Protector for what they are, not gods or 
immortals but only seven old men 
cast adrift in the world. 1 will pull 
down this Citadel.” 
“You may destroy it. You cannot 
destroy what it stands for. It will remain a symbol. You cannot destroy 
us, for the work we do is greater 
than our physical bodies. The prophecy is false, man from the stars. 
You will not prevail. We shall continue to serve our people.” 
He paused. “My name is Ferdias. 
Remember it.” 
Stark nodded. ‘Til remember. 
And prophecy or not, Ferdias, you 
have served too long.” 
“And what do you serve? The 
littleness of one man. For one man 
you set our world in turmoil.” He 
looked at Ashton. 
“He, too, is only a symbol,” said 
Stark softly. “The symbol of reality. 
That is what you’re fighting, not 
one man, or two. Go and fight it, 
Ferdias. Wait for the stars to crash 
in on you. Because they will.” 
They turned and left him. He 
stared after their proud and stubborn backs, and the Northhounds 
held him, whimpering. 
F ree at last to speak, Ashton 
said, shaking his head, “As 
Ferdias said, it does seem a lot for 
one man. But,” he added, “by the 
stars I’m glad you’re here!” 
“Well,” said Stark, “before 
we’re done, you may wish I’d left 
you with the Lords Protector. What 
made them decide against killing 
you?” 
“I convinced them I’d be more 
valuable to them alive. They’re very 
worried men, Eric. They know 
they’re threatened by something 
big but they don’t know how big, 
they don’t really understand. The 
whole concept of spaceflight and 
the Galactic Union is too new and 
strange. Shattering. They don’t 
know how to deal with it and they 
thought 1 might be of some help to 
them since I’m part of it. I pointed 
out that they could always kill me 
later on.” 
He looked at the Northhounds 
and shivered. “I won’t ask you how 
you did that. I’m afraid I know.” 
“Of all men you ought to,” said 
Stark, and smiled. Then he asked, 
“How long ago did Gelmar leave, 
with Gerrith?” 
“Yesterday.” 
“They won’t be far ahead of us, 
then. Not with Halk slowing them 
down. Simon, I know that the Min> 
istry cannot condone the vandalism 
1 am about to commit, but you 
won’t try to stop me, will you?” 
Again Ashton looked at the 
pack. “Not likely. Your friends 
might be annoyed.” 
Stark set about destroying the 
Citadel as well as he could, and it 
was well enough. The furnishings, 
the hall of records, the great timber 
beams burned hotly. Most of the 
outer walls would be left, but the 
interior would be gutted — and in 
any case the sacred isolation of the 
Citadel was ended for all time, and 
the superstitious awe that went with 
it. 
He had hoped that the destruction of the Lords Protector might 
be as complete, though he was 
glad, when he considered it, that he 
had not been able to kill them. 
They would have remained forever 
a potent and holy legend. The 
truth, when the people saw it, 
would kill them more certainly than 
any sword. 
The Northhounds did not attempt to interfere with his burning 
of the Citadel. Their guardianship 
seemed to have been associated 
only with the pleasurable aspects of 
keeping intruders away from it. 
Stark stood with Ashton on the 
road outside the Citadel, watching 
the flames lick at the windowplaces, and he said, 
“So far, so good. There is still 
Gerrith, and a long walk south. 
Then we’ll see. what we can do 
about Irnan and the freedom of the 
stars, not to speak of getting ourselves safely away from Skaith.” 
“It’s a large order,” said Ashton. 
“We have allies.” Stark turned 
to the Northhounds, to Gerd. What 
will you do now that there is 
nothing left for you to guard? 
We will follow the strongest said 
Gerd, and licked his hand. 
And so you will, thought Stark, 
until I fall sick or wounded, and 
then you will do to me as you did to 
Flay. Or try to. 
He bore them no ill-will for that. 
It was their nature. He laid his 
hand on Gerd’s head. 
Come, then. 
With Ashton at his side. Stark 
set his face southward to the passes 
of the Bleak Mountains. • 
BOOKS AND MAGAZINES 
FREE CATALOGS SF/ FANTASY— 1 GO’S of titles 
listed from Rarities to Reading Copies. MIDLAND BOOK SERVICE, 22 S. Fullerton Ave., 
Montclair, N. J. 07042. 
SELLING Comic Books, Pulps, (Shadow, Doc 
Savage, etc.) Magazines, Playboys, Premiums, 
Movie Merchandise, etc. 1900-1974. Catalogues 
75 cents. Rogofsky, Box GF1102, Flushing, New 
York 11354. 
LOGIC NEWSLETTER Logic Design and Construction. Sample copy $1.00. LOGIC NEWSLETTER, POB 252, Waldwick, New Jersey 07463. 
SPECIALISTS: Science Fiction, Fantasy, Weird 
Fiction Books— Pocketbooks, Lists issued. STEPHEN’S BOOK SERVICE, P. O. Box 321, Kings 
Park, L. I., N.Y. 11754. 
BOOK & MAGAZINE READERS! Send wants to: 
S & S Books, G-4, 80 North Wilder, St. Paul, 
Minn. 55104. 
Frankenstein Interview. “Monster” Tells All! 
$1.50. Nonis, Postbox 44337-M, Indianapolis 
46244. 
FREE sample copy. SIGNS Magazine, Box 1303, 
Longview, Washington 98632. 
OUT OF PRINT. Send Wants. Bookdeaier, Dept. 
FY 39, No. Browning Avenue, Tenafly, N. J. 
07607. 
Any Book reviewed in this magazine available 
from JANN BOOK & COIN, 2047 Walnut Street, 
Philadelphia, Pa. 19103. Add 25c each book for 
postage. 
FIRST NEW CALCULUS SINCE NEWTON. Send 
S.A.S.E., Mathpress, Rockport, Mass. 01966. 
"HEINLEIN IN DIMENSION”, by Alexei PanshIn, 
cloth $6.00, paper $2.45; “H. G. WELLS: CRITIC 
OF PROGRESS”, cloth $5.95; “ROBERT A. 
HEINLEIN: A BIBLIOGRAPHY”, paper $2.50. 
Postpaid from: T-K GRAPHICS, Dept. “G”, P. O. 
Box 1951, Baltimore, Md. 21203. Many Other 
Titles. Catalog Free. 
WANTED TO BUY— All issues of science fiction 
and fantasy magazines from 1926 to date. Harry 
Bennett, 6763 Hollywood Blvd., Los Angeles, 
Calif. 90028. 
THE SCIENCE FICTION SHOP-Just opened In 
N.Y.! Books, magazines, things— for the S/F 
aficinado. 56 Eighth Avenue. 212-741-0270. 
BARRY R. LEVIN, SCIENCE FICTION AND 
FANTASY LITERATURE. 1st editions, scarce 
titles. FREE CATALOGUES. 506 Santa Monica 
Blvd., Room 319, Santa Monica, California 
90401. 
FANZINE FANZINE, edited by Richard Canting, 
111 W. Hudson, 2-C, Columbus. 
MUSIC 
BLUES IS LIKE SF because you explore. Jules 
Small's LP record, “The Basic Blues,” gets you 
exploring blues faster than any known means of 
travel. For all winds, brass, lead guitar, etc. $4.25 
to Jules Small, 129 Perry St.. Apt. 1C, Dept. S, 
New York, N. Y. 10014. 
“MUSIC FROM ANOTHER PLANET’ Fantastic 
Long-Playing Record Album, Narrated and 
Played by, HOWARD MENGER, Noted Lecturer 
on UFO’s. $4.95. Gold-A Records, Box 706, 
Maplewood, N. J. 07040. 
MISCELLANEOUS 
WITCHCRAFT-PSYCHIC MEDITATION MUSIC 
RECORDS. Free Brochure! (Dealers Welcome). 
Wizards, Box 1363, Spring Valley. Calif. 92077. 
Join World Party, for world federation. Write 
Mark Terry (founder), P. O. Box 2786, Apt. 102, 
236 Kalmia. San Diego, Calif., 92112. 
Facts 
Beyond 
the Realm 
of Human 
Imagination! 
Discover them now in this astounding book, HAVE YOU 
LIVED BEFORE THIS LIFE? by L. Ron Hubbard. Explore 
the hidden frontiers of the human mind and discover 
facts stranger than fiction. 
Easy to get. Just send $4.00 to Bookstore IF, Church of 
Scientology, 1812 19th St. NW Washington, D.C. 20009. 
Your copy mailed within 24 hours. Money back guarantee. 
READ IT SLOWLY. 
You’ll vyanWo. It’s that good . it’s The Hugo 
Winnersi'^’speculative fiction stories that have 
won the science fiction equivalent of the Oscar 
— Arthur C. Clarke’s superb story, “The Star,” 
Jack Vance’s classic, “The Dragon Masters,” 
and Poul Anderson’s award-winner, “No Truce 
With Kings,” plus 20 more. 
an Alternate, or no book at all, just fill out the 
convenient form always provided, and return it 
to us by the date specified. We try to allow you 
at least ten days for making your decision. If 
you do not receive the form in time to respond 
within 10 days,’ and receive an unwanted selection, you may return it at our expense. 
As a member you heed take only 4 Selections 
or Alternates during the coming year. You may 
resign any time thereafter, or remain a member 
as long as you wish. Most books cost only $1.49 
plus shipping and handling. Occasionally, extravalue selections are slightly higher but always 
much less than Publishers’ Editions. Send no 
money. But do send the coupon today. 
This fabulous 864-page anthology of speculative 
fiction sells for $15.45 in the original publisher’s 
edition. It’s yours, if you wish, as one of 4 books 
for just 100 (plus shipping and handling) when you 
join The Science Fiction Book Club. 
Here’s how the Club works: 
When your application for membership is accepted, you’ll receive your introductory package 
of four books for just 100. You may examine 
them in your home, and if not completely 
satisfied, return them within ten days — 
membership will be cancelled and you'll 
owe nothing. 
About every 4 weeks (14 times a 
year), we’ll send you the 
Club’s bulletin. Things to 
Cqme, describing the 2 coming Selections and a variety of 
Alternate choices. If you want 
both Selections, you need do nothing: they’ll be shipped automaticaHy. 
If you don’t want a Selection, or prefer 
ANY 4 SCIENCE FICTION Ifl^ 
BEST SELLERS FOR JUST lU 
with membership 
Science Fiction Book Club 
Dept. EN-138, Garden City, New York 11530 
I have read your ad. Please accept me as a 
member in the Science Fiction Book Club. 
Send me, as a beginning, the 4 books whose 
numbers t have indicated b^low, and bill me 
just 100 (plus shipping and handling). I agree to 
take 4 additional books during the coming year 
and may resign anytime thereafter. 
1 r 
1 :i 
Mr. 
Mrs. 
Miss 
Please print 
Address 
City 
State 
Zip 
8532. The Hugo 
Winners, Vol. I & II. 
Giant 2'in-l volume of 
23 award-winning . 
stories. 1955 to 1970. 
Asimov introduces 
each. Pub. ed. $15.45 . 
6379. The Left Hand 
of Darkness, by 
Ursula K. Leguin. 
Jolting novel of alien 
society whose inhabitants are human — 
but ambisexual. Pub. 
ed. $4.95 
6221. The Foundation 
Trilogy by Isaac 
Asimov. The ends of 
the galaxy revert to 
barbarism. Pub. ed. 
$14.85 
2790. Science Fiction 
Hall of Fame. 26 
‘'winners." chosen by 
Sci-Fi Writers of 
America. Ed. Robert 
Silverberg. Pub. ed. 
$7.95 
61 14. An Alien Heat, 
by Michael Moorcock. 
Satiric novel of the 
future, when cities 
are jeweled, and timetravel common. Pub. 
ed. $5.95 
6379. The Left Hand 
of Darkness, by 
Ursula K. Leguin. 
Jolting novel of alien 
society whose inhabitants are human — 
but ambisexual. Pub. 
ed. $4.95 
8052. A Princess of 
Mars by Edgar Rice 
Burroughs. From 
Tarzan author, first 
novel of the Martian 
Series involves a 
princess held captive 
by depraved ruler. 
Spec. Ed. 
6130. A Time of 
Changes by Robert 
Silverberg. Brilliant 
novel of strange planet 
where human beings 
must despise 
themselves. 1971 
Nebula award winner. 
Spec. Ed. 
6023. The Gods 
Themselves by Isaac 
Asimov. The master’s 
first novel in 15 years 
...and worth the wait 
for a fabulous trip fo 
the year 3000. Pub. 
ed. $5.95 
1164. The 1973 
Annual WorM’s Best 
S.F., ed. Donald 
A. Wollheim. 10 
novellas, short 
stories; Anderson, 
Simak, others. 
Spec. Ed. 
1032. Rendezvous 
With Rama by Arthur 
C. Clarke. From 
Childhood's End 
adthor, dazzling, • 
Visionary novel of a 
self-contained .world in 
space. Pub. ed. $6.95 
8037. /^jain. Dangerous Visions, Harlan 
Ebison. ecf. Forty -5ix 
pieces, short stories 
& novels. Explicit 
scpnes and language 
may be offensive to' 
sOme. Pub; ed. $12.95 
2717. Nebula Award 
Stories Seven, Lloyd 
B^gle, Jr., Ed. Tbe 
latest novellas and 
'short stories— ^prizewinners picked by 
-'Sci-Fi Writers of 
America. Includes 
Anderson, Silverberg 
and others. Pub. 
ed. $6.95 
The Science Fiction Book- Club otters its own complete hardbound editions sometimes altered 
in size to fit special presses and save members even more. Members accepted in U.S.A. ancfCanada only. Canadian metnbers will be serviced from Toronto. Offer slightly different in Canada!